







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: HU/12917/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29th January 2017                      |On 5th February 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between


                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER SRI LANKA

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                  MRS PREMASIRI UPALINI ILLEPRUMA ACHCHIGE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Talachi instructed by Solidum Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N M Paul.

 2. The respondent, Mrs Premasiri Upalini Illepruma Achchige date of  birth
    2nd July 1941, is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances, I do not consider it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. The original application was made by the  respondent  on  29  September
    2015 for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  an  adult  dependent
    relative of a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom  under
    the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM, and under Article 8 of the ECHR. By
    decision of the 4th November 2015 refused the application.

 4. In refusing the appeal the ECO relied upon:-

     i) Paragraph FM E-ECDR 2.4 whereby the respondent had to prove that by
        reason either of age, illness or disability she required long  term
        personal care to perform everyday tasks.

    ii) Paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 whereby the respondent had to  prove  that  it
        was not possible even with practical and financial help  to  obtain
        the level of required care in the country in which she was  living,
        either because it was not available or there was no one  who  could
        reasonably provide it or it was not affordable.

   iii) As to the factual circumstances it was noted  that  the  respondent
        was living in the property she had occupied since her daughter  was
        4 or 5 years old;  that  the  respondent's  nephew,  his  wife  and
        children resided in the ground floor part of the property; and that
        they provided  the  respondent  with  meals  and  assisted  in  her
        personal care.

 5.  The judge allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 8  of  the  ECHR,
    family and private life. Prior to coming to that conclusion however the
    judge found at paragraph 25 that the  respondent  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules. In making that finding the judge  considered
    the medical condition of the respondent, finding that her condition was
    such that it had not been proved that the respondent was unable to care
    for herself.

 6. The judge in allowing the appeal of the appellant  made  the  following
    findings:-

     i) The evidence shows a lady with various medical conditions but  none
        of which point to an inability for her to care for herself.

    ii) It was unrealistic to expect a lady of the  respondent's  age  with
        apparently very limited English ability to integrate  into  society
        in the UK, ostensibly finding  that  the  appellant  could  not  be
        expected to speak English.

   iii) The respondent's family had sufficient resources and training to be
        able to provide for the respondent's everyday needs.

    iv)  The respondent's sister and daughter would be able  to  apply  the
        necessary support and care for her having regard to her medical and
        mental condition.

     v) The judge at that stage indicates that the proportionality exercise
        involved determining the extent to which the  very  obvious  mother
        and daughter tie  will  be  significantly  affected  by  continuing
        separation.

 7. The problem with regard to the approach made by the judge is that there
    is no assessment as to whether or not in the sense protected by Article
    8 there is a genuine family life and whether it is the decision of  the
    ECO that interferes with that family life. In that respect the criteria
    for establishing a family life is that set out in the case of  Kugathas
    2003 EWCA Civ 31.

 8. From the brief outline of the facts contained within the  documentation
    it appears that the respondent's sister has been in the United  Kingdom
    a significant period of  time  working  here  in  the  National  Health
    Service. Any concept of family life that existed between the sister and
    the respondent ceased long ago.

 9. Similarly there is reference in the documentation to  the  respondent's
    daughter being in the United Kingdom and to her  being  separated  from
    her husband. It appears again that the daughter has been in the  United
    Kingdom a significant period of time although it is unclear exactly how
    long. However whatever can be said it appears  that  the  daughter  has
    established her own family life with her husband in  the  past,  whilst
    the respondent has throughout lived in Sri Lanka.

10. Inevitably as children grow and marry they cease to part of the  family
    unit of their parents and form their own family  units.  That  is  even
    more so where children moved to live in another country  and  they  are
    separated from their  parents.  The  close  family  unit  protected  by
    Article 8 may cease between parent and child. A desire to look after  a
    parent is understandable but a careful assessment has  to  be  made  of
    whether the family unit protected by Article 8 continues  to  exist  or
    whether a child has formed her own family unit. As the parents  age  it
    will result in significant degree of anguish and concern on the part of
    the child for the parent.  However  there  is  nothing  exceptional  or
    unusual in that.

11. It was necessary for a careful examination of the criteria as  set  out
    in the case of Kugathas to be made in order to establish whether  there
    was a family life in the sense protected  under  article  8.  Also  the
    judge is obliged to follow the criteria set down in the case of  Razgar
    2003 UKHL 27. It is clear  that  the  judge  has  not  undertaken  that
    exercise rather the judge appears at paragraph 27 to make findings with
    regard to proportionality. The simple fact that  it  was  very  obvious
    that the mother and daughter tie will be significantly affected by  the
    continuing separation does not establish that family life in the  sense
    protected by Article 8 exists.  Similarly Article 8  is  not  merely  a
    dispensing power to ignore the Immigration Rules.

12. The rules in their current form clearly  make  provisions  under  which
    adult  dependent  relatives  can  enter  the  United   Kingdom.   Where
    provisions are made within the rules careful examination has to be made
    to identify factors which justify considering  article  8  outside  the
    rules. Merely saying in respect of criteria specifically  set  down  in
    statute that it is unrealistic to expect the appellant to comply, seems
    to ignore the very fact that it is a statutory provision.

13. Clearly the daughter and sister have some  commitments  in  the  United
    Kingdom but there was nothing to indicate either one or  the  other  of
    them could not go to Sri Lanka and could not live in Sri Lanka.  Indeed
    if they are so concerned about  the  respondent  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate why both of them not go to Sri Lanka. No reason  or  obstacles
    to family life continuing in Sri Lanka have been advanced.

14. In the first instance the approach taken by the judge fails  to  follow
    the guidance given in the case law of Razgar and Kugathas. There is  no
    proper assessment whether family life as protected by Article 8  exists
    as set out in the case law and whether or not it is the  decision  that
    significantly interferes with that. In a sense it is not  the  decision
    that is interfering with it but the desire of the sister  and  daughter
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

15. On the basis of the reasons set out there is a material error of law in
    the decision in that the judge has failed properly to  assess  criteria
    within Razgar and Kugathas and failed in the  circumstances  to  assess
    Article 8 properly.

16. I am satisfied in the circumstances that the appropriate  step  to  set
    the decision aside.

17. I have considered what the  appropriate  courses  with  regard  to  the
    appeal. Having considered all the circumstances I am satisfied that the
    appeal should be returned to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal  to
    be heard afresh.

18. I have considered whether any of the findings of fact made by the judge
    should be preserved. It appears to me that there is  no  reason  to  go
    behind the findings with regard to the Immigration Rules. The remit  is
    therefore limited to the extent the proper assessment of the Article  8
    rights outside the Immigration Rules of the respondent, her sister  and
    her daughter has to be made in accordance with the case law identified,
    although clearly the issues under the rules and statue will be relevant
    in assessing those rights.

    Notice of Decision

19. I allow the appeal of the Secretary of State for the Home Department to
    the extent that the appeal is remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the basis indicated.

20. I do not make an anonymity direction



Signed

Date 29th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



