
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12440/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 October 2018                   |On 6 November 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     A T
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Chris Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Michelle Harris, Counsel instructed by Turpin &
                    Miller LLP (Oxford)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  anonymity  order,  despite
Presidential Guidance given by the President of the FtTIAC in 2011 that  all
asylum appeals should be anonymised at case creation.  Pursuant to  Rule  14
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I make  an  anonymity
order  in  this  appeal.   The  claimant  will  be  referred  to  in   these
proceedings only as A T.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall identify the claimant, her husband or  her  children,  whether
directly or indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all  parties.
Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  his
    decision on 5 October 2017 to  deport  her  to  Albania  as  a  foreign
    criminal, pursuant to the automatic deportation provisions  of  section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Albania.

 3. The First-tier Judge found that the claimant was entitled to the  human
    rights exception provided in section 33 of the 2007 Act.

Background

 4. The claimant came to the United Kingdom from Albania as a student on 18
    April 2005, but her leave expired on  8  June  2013  and  she  did  not
    embark, remaining in the United Kingdom without  leave.   The  claimant
    was born Muslim, but has converted to Christianity.  She is  vulnerable
    to depression and copes poorly with stress.

 5. The claimant's husband, also an Albanian citizen, has indefinite  leave
    to remain but is not a British citizen. The couple have three children,
    two sons and a daughter, all  born  in  the  United  Kingdom,  who  are
    Albanian citizens.  The children are now 9, 6 and  3  years  old.   The
    elder two children were born out of  wedlock.  The  middle  child,  the
    claimant's only daughter, has autism.

 6. The youngest child, a son, has dual nationality: as well  as  being  an
    Albanian citizen he  is  a  British  citizen.   The  elder  boy  was  a
    qualifying child at the date of hearing; the autistic daughter had  not
    yet been in the United Kingdom for 7 years.  They are both said  to  be
    entitled to register for British citizenship but  the  claimant  cannot
    yet afford to pay the registration fee.

 7. On 26 September 2015, the claimant  committed  an  assault  and  on  14
    September 2016, she was convicted of wounding and grievous bodily  harm
    and sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.

 8. The Judge's sentencing remarks record that the claimant boiled a kettle
    of water and threw it over a neighbour with whom she was in dispute, in
    front of the victim's 8-year-old son, and then went back  to  her  flat
    without helping her neighbour with the serious burns which the  boiling
    water caused.  The offence was treated as being at the very  upper  end
    of Category 1 because serious injury was caused and a weapon  was  used
    (the kettle full of boiling  water).   The  claimant  has  no  previous
    convictions and the sentence was  reduced  because  she  was  suffering
    moderate to severe depression when sentenced.   Her  relationship  with
    her husband was said not to be good.

 9. While the  claimant  was  in  prison,  her  husband  looked  after  the
    children, albeit  with  difficulty,  because  of  what  their  autistic
    daughter needs, and also because the younger boy,  born  in  2015,  was
    still completely dependent on his mother when she was incarcerated.

10. The Secretary of State made a deportation order  on  29  January  2017.
    The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The First-tier Judge found the case very difficult and finely balanced.
     By agreement, she took into account that the  claimant's  husband  was
    about to be given indefinite leave to remain.   She had regard  to  the
    seriousness of the offence, and the indications in the OASys report, as
    well as the claimant's unlawful presence in the  United  Kingdom.   She
    gave weight to the claimant's attempts to regularise her situation  but
    focused on future risk as the Rules require her to do.

12. The First-tier Judge found that it was in the children's best interests
    to stay in the United Kingdom  with  both  parents,  and  proceeded  to
    consider whether it would be unduly harsh for them  to  go  to  Albania
    with their mother, or to remain in the United Kingdom without her.  The
    First-tier Judge found  that  the  claimant  would  receive  no  family
    support in Albania and that she would be unable to cope  with  them  in
    Albania on her own.

13. The First-tier Judge also found that the husband would have  difficulty
    coping with the three children alone: the  Judge  accepted  the  expert
    evidence of  Ms  Pearce,  an  independent  social  worker,  as  to  the
    difficulties involved, and the oral evidence of  the  husband  that  he
    would be unable to work if he had to look after  these  three  children
    and that doing so as a single parent would be impossible.  He had coped
    during the claimant's incarceration because he  and  the  children  had
    hope that the claimant would be returned to them.   The husband is  not
    prepared to go to Albania and as he has indefinite leave to  remain  he
    cannot be required to go there.

14. The claimant's autistic daughter, who was 5 years old when this  appeal
    was heard, had the social skills of a 2  year  old  and  spoke  only  a
    limited amount of English.  She speaks no Albanian and is dependent  on
    routine.  She has no sense of danger and needs to be watched the  whole
    time.  She is receiving speech and language therapy.    The  elder  boy
    was having difficulty at school and told the social worker that he  had
    to help his father as a carer for his brothers and sisters.

15. The key conclusions in the Judge's decision are at [91]-[92]:

         "91. In this case, there is a real likelihood that  the  challenges
         of bringing up three children alone would  be  too  much  for  [the
         husband].  He would not be able to work or contribute  financially,
         and would be dependent on benefits.  He is likely to cope poorly in
         the long term, and I accept that the outcome for  the  children  is
         likely to be poor.  In short,  deportation  would  in  my  view  be
         unduly harsh [both] on the children and on [the husband].  ...

         92.  I accept also that although [the autistic daughter] is  not  a
         qualifying child, that I must  take  account  of  her  needs  under
         section 55 and that she cannot be moved  to  Albania,  because  the
         nature of her problems will be exacerbated. She  has  communication
         difficulties, both in  understanding  situations  and  in  language
         development.  She will not learn a new language in  the  way  other
         children do. ... This family are  managing  on  a  fragile  pyramid
         which could collapse if undue stress is placed on one  parent.   It
         is an exceptionally challenging situation  and  a  case  where  two
         parents need to be working together to  look  after  the  children.
         The nature of [the autistic daughter's]  condition  is  challenging
         and means that deportation would be unduly harsh on  the  children.
         I find that this is not a case where the deportation  order  should
         remain and I therefore allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR."

Grounds of appeal

16. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal. The grounds  are
    lengthy and prolix, and  in  some  places  difficult  to  follow.   The
    Secretary of State asserts that:

          a)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  apply  MM  (Uganda)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
             617;

          b) It was not open to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider  the
             claimant's return to Albania without her husband,  if  he  was
             unwilling to do so;

          c) The First-tier Tribunal should have  made  a  finding  in  the
             alternative on the basis of the entire  family  relocating  to
             Albania;

          d) The First-tier Tribunal failed to give clear reasons for  what
             the unduly harsh consequences would be if the family relocated
             to Albania;

          e) It was speculative  to  find  that  the  consequences  to  the
             children of remaining would  be  unduly  harsh,  or  that  the
             husband would be unable  to  work  and  would  be  reliant  on
             benefits, and in any case,  that  merely  having  to  rely  on
             benefits did not amount to undue harshness;

          f) The First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard to the  decision
             of the Court of Appeal in WZ (China) v Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 795 that family separation
             is a consequence of serious criminality; and that

          g) If weight were to be given to the  assertion  that  separation
             results in worse outcomes, 'all  that  is  required  to  avoid
             deportation  would  be  to  have  a  genuine  and   subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying child'; and that the First-tier
             Judge had failed to give the required  weight  to  the  public
             interest, in particular at [81] in her decision.

17. The grounds conclude by asserting that  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  'by
    primarily focusing only on  the  positive  factors  on  behalf  of  the
    [claimant] has distorted the determination to being one dimensional  in
    effect, with no proper regard to the special  weight  attached  to  the
    public interest'.



Permission to appeal

18. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Judge  Saffer  on  the
    basis that the First-tier Judge arguably had  not  adequately  assessed
    the public interest in removal of a foreign  criminal  whose  mendacity
    and manipulation were aggravating features of her offence and reflected
    on her character.  Judge Saffer  ordered  that  all  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal could be argued.

Rule 24 Reply

19. The claimant filed a Rule 24 Reply, settled by Ms Harris of Counsel who
    appears today, and also represented her before the First-tier Tribunal.
     The claimant contends that the Secretary of State erred in  suggesting
    that MM and section 117C had been overlooked by the First-tier Judge in
    her decision; that  although  the  Judge  did  not  mention  paragraphs
    398/399 of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended),  and  applied
    paragraph 276ADE, that made no difference since the test in both  cases
    was whether there were very significant obstacles to  reintegration  on
    return.  Any error was immaterial.

20. The Judge had been entitled to make a finding of fact, having heard the
    husband give evidence, that he was not willing to return to Albania and
    the claimant would be returning as a lone mother, if she were  returned
    with her children.  The grounds of appeal were drafted by a Home Office
    Presenting Officer who had not been present at  the  hearing  and  were
    based on a misunderstanding of what had occurred.  Paragraphs  [4]-[13]
    of the grounds were affected by this issue.

21. The claimant's Counsel argued that this lengthy  and  careful  decision
    was sound and sustainable.  The Rule 24 Reply concluded:

         "... There is nothing wrong with this approach, rather the Judge is
         following her duties very carefully.  In contrast, it  is  hard  to
         relate the SSHD grounds to the appeal hearing or determination, and
         very little care appears to have been taken in ensuring  that  they
         are accurate."

22. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

23. I heard argument from Mr Avery, who relied on the grounds of appeal and
    asserted that the Judge had not  given  proper  weight  to  the  public
    interest nor assessed correctly the continuing risk which this claimant
    posed to the public if allowed to remain.  The decision, he  contended,
    was fundamentally flawed for that reason.

24. For the claimant, Ms Harris noted that at [6]-[7] in the decision,  the
    First-tier Tribunal analysed the index offence, pulling no punches  and
    recognising that the claimant was a manipulative and dishonest  witness
    in her criminal trial.  She set out the issues clearly and  had  regard
    to the sentencing remarks and the family difficulties.  The  sentencing
    Judge made no dangerousness assessment.   All of  the  expert  reports,
    and the oral and written evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  were
    carefully analysed and taken into account.

25. In contrast, the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  showed  little
    analysis of what the Judge had done in her decision.  The grounds  were
    in reality no more than a disagreement with  the  Judge's  findings  of
    fact, in particular her finding that if the claimant were removed,  one
    or other of the parents would  become  the  sole  carer  of  all  three
    children, as the husband was not prepared to go and  live  in  Albania.
    The OASys report assessed the claimant as presenting a low risk, except
    to known adults.  Ms harris asked, rhetorically, if the care  taken  in
    this long and cogently reasoned decision were insufficient to withstand
    an appeal, it was difficult to know what would constitute a sustainable
    decision.

26. The Judge had  acknowledged  that  this  was  a  difficult  and  finely
    balanced case, but had reached sustainable findings which were open  to
    her and the Secretary of State's appeal should be dismissed.

27. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

28. The Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  are  notable  for  failing
    entirely to mention the decisive factors in relation to the  children's
    best interests, in particular, the evidence that the parties'  autistic
    daughter would adapt very poorly  to  Albania  and  would  not  receive
    adequate support there, and that her father was only just  coping  with
    the three children on a short term basis, unable to work and reliant on
    benefits.

29. The daughter speaks no Albanian and is very dependent on routine.   She
    is 6 years old now but has a behavioural and social age of 2, and needs
    to be watched all the time as she has no sense of  danger.   The  older
    boy has nightmares and considers himself  his  brother's  and  sister's
    carer.  There was copious evidence on which the Judge was  entitled  to
    find that it would be unduly harsh  both  for  the  three  children  to
    accompany their mother to Albania, or to remain with  their  father  in
    the United Kingdom. She was also entitled  to  accept  and  to  make  a
    finding of fact, following the husband's evidence, that he would refuse
    to go to Albania.

30. The Judge had  proper  regard  to  all  necessary  facts  and  matters,
    including the seriousness of the offence and the poor  view  which  the
    sentencing Judge took  of  the  claimant's  credibility  overall.   The
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, although couched  in  terms  of
    error of law, are in essence a challenge to findings of fact which were
    unarguably open to the Judge on that evidence. It may be  that  another
    Judge might have taken a different view but nothing in the  grounds  of
    appeal or in the oral argument before me persuades me  that  the  Judge
    made an error of fact at the level of an error of law.

31. The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore dismissed.


DECISION

32. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         26 October 2018                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


