
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12971/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (Via Skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2021                  |On 2 March 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     DA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Walters & Palskitt Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission a decision of the  First-tier
        Tribunal promulgated on 24 September 2020 in which it dismissed the
        appellant's appeal on the basis of  his  family  and  private  life
        pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
        on a renewed application, the operative part of the grant being  in
        the following terms:


        I grant permission on one ground identified at paragraph 6 and 7 of
        the grounds of appeal. It  is  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not
        consider   the   position   of   the   children   when    assessing
        proportionality with s117B(6) in mind.


        In so far as the issues raised at paragraphs 1 - 5 of  the  grounds
        of appeal are concerned, they are disagreements with  the  findings
        and do not disclose an arguable error of law. At  paragraph  5  the
        Appellant criticises the judge for attaching  weight  to  a  social
        worker's report that he submitted in evidence. In  respect  of  the
        persistent offender issue I endorse the decision of Resident  Judge
        of the First-tier  Tribunal  Zucker  who  refuse  permission  on  4
        November 2020.


     3. In the response to directions issued by the Upper Tribunal a Senior
        Home Office Presenting Officer, following reference  to  Runa  (see
        below for full citation), wrote:


        c)  In  the  circumstances  the  respondent  does  not  oppose  the
        appellant's appeal on the limited grounds  identified  and  invites
        the Tribunal to remake  the  decision  based  on  the  DFTT  Judges
        findings that the appellant has contact with the children and  that
        it would not be reasonable for them to leave the United Kingdom.


        d) the respondent requests an  oral  hearing  to  re-determine  the
        appeal. The respondent has  no  objection  to  this  hearing  being
        conducted remotely.



Error of law


     4. In the Runa v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2020]
        EWCA Civ 514 when giving the lead judgment Lord Justice Singh wrote
        at [32] to [37]:
        32.  In this context, we heard  interesting  submissions  from  the
             parties as to whether there is scope for Article 8 to  play  a
             part in  cases  where  section  117B(6)  arises.  Mr  Anderson
             submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State that there is  a
             residual scope for Article 8 to  apply.  This  is  because  he
             submits that, although section  117B(6)  is  a  "freestanding"
             provision (see KO, at para. 17), that does not mean that it is
             exhaustive of the scope of Article 8. He submits that  section
             117B(6) is to be regarded as a benevolent provision, which can
             only operate in one way, potentially in favour of an appellant
             but never  adversely  to  an  appellant.  I  would  accept  Mr
             Anderson's submission in this regard. It seems to me  both  to
             be right in principle and  also  to  be  consistent  with  the
             analysis  of  section  117B(6)  given  by  Elias  LJ   in MA
             (Pakistan), at para. 17, where he said  that  that  subsection
             "must be read as a self-contained provision in the sense  that
             Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions  specified
             in the subsection are satisfied, the public interest will  not
             justify removal."
        33.  This is important because a conventional Article 8(2)  inquiry
             can take into account, as part of the overall  proportionality
             exercise, other public interest considerations, including  the
             conduct of the parent or parents. Under section 117B(6)  there
             is no room for such an inquiry to take account of the  conduct
             of the parents: that is the effect  of  the  decision  of  the
             Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), which  overruled  the  earlier
             decision of this Court in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for
             the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617; [2016] Imm AR 954 and
             in that respect approved what had been said by Elias LJ in MA
             (Pakistan) (as that  case  was  known  before  it  became KO
             (Nigeria) when it went to the Supreme Court),  at  para.  36.
             Under section 117B(6) the only question  is  focussed  on  the
             child: would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             UK? If the answer to that is No, there is no need to go on  to
             consider Article 8(2) more generally. However, as a matter  of
             principle, and as Mr Anderson rightly submitted, if the answer
             is Yes, there will still be a residual scope for Article  8(2)
             to be considered.
        34.  The next submission  made  by  Mr  Biggs  in  support  of  his
             "categorical" or "hypothetical" approach was that otherwise  a
             tribunal would be compelled  to  undertake  a  very  difficult
             factual analysis, which would be contrary  to  the  underlying
             purpose of section 117B. However, as Mr Anderson pointed  out,
             in Article 8(2) cases more generally, such difficult questions
             can arise and tribunals  do  have  to  face  up  to  them.  He
             reminded us in that context of what  was  said  by  Sedley  LJ
             in VW  (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of   State   for   the   Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ  5,  at  para.  42.  As  Baker  LJ
             observed during the course of the hearing before  us,  similar
             questions can arise in  family  proceedings  under  the  Hague
             Convention. Although  a  provision  such  as  section  117B(6)
             reduces  the  scope  for  judicial  evaluation  which  may  be
             necessary,  it  does  not  eradicate  it   completely.   Where
             necessary, and depending on the facts, judges can and  do  ask
             questions which may call  for  a  difficult  evaluation.  That
             could include asking the question what is going to  happen  to
             the family unit if one parent has the right to remain  in  the
             UK and the other does not.
        35.  Finally, in this context, Mr Biggs placed reliance on what was
             said by the Upper Tribunal in Patel (British citizen child  -
             deportation) [2020] UKUT 45 (IAC). I observe,  however,  that
             that was a decision on section 117C(5), a provision which  was
             said by the Upper Tribunal to call for a hypothetical question
             to be answered: see para. 32 of the judgment. In my respectful
             view, that does not assist the Court in determining the  issue
             which arises on the present appeal.
        36.  I would therefore reject Mr Biggs's primary submission  as  to
             the interpretation  of  section  117B(6).  I  would,  however,
             accept his alternative submission, that  the  provision  calls
             for a fact-finding exercise so that the full background  facts
             must be established against which the only statutory  question
             posed by  that  provision  can  then  be  addressed.  I  would
             emphasise again, as the Supreme Court did in KO (Nigeria) and
             this Court did in MA (Pakistan) and AB (Jamaica) that, once
             all the relevant facts have  been  found,  the  only  question
             which arises under section 117(6)(b)  is  whether  or  not  it
             would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. The
             focus has to be on the child.
        37.  I would also accept Mr Biggs's submission that the test  under
             section 117B(6)  is  not  whether  there  are  "insurmountable
             obstacles" to the maintenance of family life outside  the  UK.
             That would be so even in an ordinary Article 8 case: see GM at
             paras. 42-52, in particular paras. 43-44 (Green LJ).  That  is
             all the more so in a case which is not a conventional  Article
             8(2) one but arises under section 117B(6).
     5. The First-tier Tribunal at [110] of that decision wrote:


        "As noted above it would not be reasonable for the children  to  go
        with the appellant to Iraq. The issue being whether or not it would
        be reasonable for the children to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
        without the appellant."


     6. The First-tier Tribunal found the appellant unable to succeed under
        the Immigration Rules and thereafter went onto consider  Article  8
        ECHR.
     7. The finding in relation to the Article 8 assessment is set  out  at
        [116 -119] in the following terms:


        116.      For the reason set out I find that the appellant does not
             meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  have
             considered  whether  there  are  factors  outside  the   rules
             warranting a grant of leave on Article 8 grounds. I find there
             are no such factors.


        117.      On the basis of the matters set out I  find  there  is  a
             genuine parental and therefore family relationship between the
             appellant and his children and that the  decision  taken  will
             interfere with that  family  relationship.  I  find  that  the
             appellant has established a private life in the  UK  and  that
             the decision will interfere with such.


        118.      I find that the decision is in accordance  with  the  law
             and for the purposes of  maintaining  immigration  control  or
             prevention of crime and disorder. Finally I have to  determine
             whether or not taking account of  all  the  circumstances  the
             decision is proportionately justified. For the reasons set out
             I find that the decision is proportionately justified.


     8. In this statement the First-tier Tribunal erred as the question  of
        entitlement pursuant to section 117B(6) does  not  appear  to  have
        been considered.
     9. Section 11B(6) of the 2002 Act reads:


        (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
          the United Kingdom.


    10. It was specifically stated in the refusal letter that the appellant
        is not subject to a deportation order.
    11. The application refused was a human rights application for leave to
        remain in the UK on the basis of the appellants family and  private
        life. While the Immigration Rules are material to  a  human  rights
        appeal, the inability of a party to satisfy the requirements of the
        Rules is not determinative of the merits of an appeal in all cases.
        The First-tier Tribunal  was  required  to  assess  the  matter  by
        reference to article 8 ECHR and in doing so to incorporate as  part
        of the deliberations the provisions of section 117 of the 2002 Act.
    12. On the basis of the findings made and on the clear understanding of
        the law relating to section 117B(6), which reflects  the  Secretary
        of State's view as to the proportionality of a decision to remove a
        person from the United Kingdom if the requirements of that  section
        are met, which it is not disputed before me they are in  this  case
        on the basis of the finding would not be reasonable to  expect  the
        child to leave the UK, this appeal must be allowed.
    13. Although the appellant has succeeded at  this  stage  the  concerns
        expressed in the refusal and by the First-tier Tribunal in relation
        to his behaviour and violent acts is of concern.  He  needs  to  be
        aware  that  should  such  conduct  continue,  and  he  receive   a
        qualifying sentence of imprisonment,  he  might  find  himself  the
        subject of an order for his deportation from the United Kingdom  in
        which case the advantage  conferred  by  section  117B(6)  will  no
        longer be available to him.


Decision

    14. I allow the appeal.



   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 12 February 2021

