
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12833/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 April 2019                     |On 15 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 NAZISH [B]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 30 January 2019 it was found the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
        in law. In accordance with  directions  given  a  report  has  been
        commissioned from a Dr Raheel Karim a specialist in  General  Adult
        Psychiatry, dated 3 March 2019.



Discussion



     2. The substantive hearing listed for 2 April 2019  was  adjourned  in
        light of the report not having been seen by Mrs  Pettersen,  Senior
        Home Office Presenting Officer, until the morning  of  the  hearing
        and in light of the recommendation that  the  appellant  should  be
        assisted by an interpreter experienced in working with people  with
        learning disabilities.  The  hearing  was  therefore  adjourned  to
        enable Mrs Pettersen to consider the respondent's position and  for
        the  Upper  Tribunal  to  secure  the  services  of   the   correct
        interpreter to enable the appellant to receive a fair hearing.


     3. By letter dated 4  April  2019  Mrs  Pettersen  advised  the  Upper
        Tribunal that the Secretary of States position is that  the  appeal
        should be allowed, without a further  hearing,  on  the  basis  the
        content of the psychiatric report  establishes  the  appellant  has
        exceptional reasons for why she should not be required to meet  the
        English language requirement. As this was the only issue upon which
        the appellant's application was refused it is  appropriate  in  all
        the circumstances to allow the appeal.


Decision

     4. The appeal is allowed.

Anonymity.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11th April 2019


