
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Numbers: HU/12229/2015
                                                               HU/18135/2016
     HU/13015/2015
     HU/13017/2015
     HU/13028/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 17 October 2017                     |               On 24 November 2017   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                            EK (first appellant)
                            LO (second appellant)
                            EO (third appellant)
                            HO (Fourth appellant)
                            KO (fifth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Sarwar, instructed by Sanctuary Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Ghana.  The first appellant was born  in
    1971 and the second appellant in 1980.  The  third,  fourth  and  fifth
    appellants are the children of the first and second appellants who were
    born respectively in 2008, 2009 and 2015.  Because this decision of the
    Upper Tribunal will be  published  and  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
    appellants are children, it is appropriate to anonymise the decision.

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully in  July  2004.
    The second appellant joined the first appellant in September 2007.  The
    third, fourth and fifth appellants were all born in the United Kingdom.
     In August 2015, the appellants applied for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of their private and family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    applications were refused by a decision of the Secretary of State dated
    17 November 2016.  The appellants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE) which, in a decision promulgated on 23  January
    2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellants   now   appeal,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. There are several grounds of appeal.   In  granting  permission,  Judge
    Bennett, wrote as follows:

         Permission to appeal is granted because it  is  arguable  that  the
         judge erred in respect of the availability  of  family  and  church
         support in Ghana in the light of the evidence about the  first  and
         second appellants' families and this arguably vitiated the  judge's
         conclusion that it was reasonable to expect the  third  and  fourth
         appellants to be removed to Ghana.

 4. At [17], the judge commented that "all education in Ghana is taught  in
    the English language".  The appellants  challenge  this  on  the  basis
    that, whilst most schools  teach  in  English,  schooling  in  villages
    "tended to be in the local language".  I find that the  ground  has  no
    merit.  It is apparent from the evidence which was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that English is spoken very widely in Ghana.   It  is  an
    official language of the country.  The appellants have  not  shown  any
    evidence which would indicate that they could not receive education  in
    an English-speaking school.  In any event, the ground  of  appeal  does
    not sit well with the submission made at  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing
    that the appellants only speak Twi.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the appellants argued that they needed to be  able  to  access  schools
    which were English-speaking.  It was submitted to the judge  [17]  that
    English was only used in international schools.  It  was  open  to  the
    judge to find that that submission had no basis.  The  evidence  before
    the judge appeared to show that English was more widely spoken.

 5. Secondly, the appellants complain that the judge did  not  have  proper
    regard  to  the  fourth  appellant's  medical  condition.   The  fourth
    appellant has an eye problem.  I find that the ground of appeal has  no
    merit.  The judge dealt with the fourth appellant's eyesight  at  [18].
    She found that "on the evidence before me, this was not so serious that
    it is a life threatening condition or that the appellant would  be  not
    able to access appropriate care in  Ghana  and  so  I  find  that  this
    argument adds little weight to the appellants' position".  The  grounds
    of appeal simply seek to argue with that finding.  The  grounds  assert
    that medical care would not be obtainable in Ghana but I note  that  no
    evidence has been put before the First-tier Tribunal  to  suggest  that
    that was the case.  Furthermore, the mere  fact  that  the  problem  is
    being managed whilst the fourth appellant is in the United  Kingdom  is
    immaterial; there was no reason why the condition should not be managed
    in Ghana.

 6. Thirdly, the judge found [19-20] that "the appellants would be able  to
    avail themselves of [family members] living in Ghana".  The  appellants
    argued that they had no contact with their family members in Ghana.  It
    was, however, open to the judge that, given  that  the  appellants  had
    family members in Ghana, it was not unreasonable to expect them to  re-
    establish contact.  There was no evidence before the judge that it  was
    impossible for the appellants to contact their family members or  that,
    if they were contacted, they would refuse to assist.  The findings were
    available to the judge on the evidence.

 7. Fourthly, the grounds argue a point to which Judge Bennett specifically
    refers in his grant of permission.  The  judge  noted  that  the  first
    appellant is "a qualified man" and  would  be  able  to  find  suitable
    employment on return  to  Ghana.   The  judge  heard  evidence  from  a
    Reverend Fox  who  currently  provides  through  his  church  financial
    support for the family.  The judge recorded at [15] that "...  Reverend
    Fox hoped a more limited level  of  support  would  still  be  provided
    [after  the  appellants  have  returned  to  Ghana]  but  that  further
    discussions would need to take place within the church before such help
    could be confirmed".  Mr Sarwar submitted that there was  no  certainty
    that this financial support would be provided and, in  the  absence  of
    certainty, the basis for the judge's decision that it was reasonable to
    expect the family to return was removed.  I disagree.   The  judge  has
    conducted her analysis by reference to the correct standard  of  proof,
    namely the balance of probabilities.  Such a standard does not  require
    certainty.  The judge found that it was more likely than not that  some
    financial support, at least in the short term, would be available  from
    the church in the United Kingdom.  It was open to  her  to  reach  that
    finding.  Given that the judge also  found  that  the  first  appellant
    would find work and would then be able to support the  family,  it  was
    plainly open to the judge to find that the  family  would  be  able  to
    return and had the financial basis for doing  so  given  the  (probably
    short term) assistance from the church and also the  likely  assistance
    (in practical terms, if not financially) they might receive from family
    member in Ghana.

 8. At paragraph 50, the appellants assert that the best interests  of  the
    children were not taken into account.  The third and fourth  appellants
    have lived in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  seven  years.   The
    appellants assert that there should be "strong  reasons"  for  removing
    children in such circumstances and with such a length of residence (see
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705).   The  judge  has  approached  this
    aspect of the case through the application of the Immigration Rules, in
    particular paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv):

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK

 9. The judge relied on MA (Pakistan) at  [21]  for  the  proposition  that
    "although  the  best  interests  of  the  child  should  be  a  primary
    consideration it did not automatically equate with  that  child  having
    resided in the UK for over seven years ... remaining in the UK  ...  as
    the best interests of  the  child".   It  is  clear  from  the  judge's
    decision that she could identify no good reason at all why this  family
    should not return to the  country  of  their  nationality.   They  have
    family living in Ghana, the first appellant has the  qualifications  to
    obtain work there and they were likely (on  the  judge's  analysis)  to
    obtain financial support from the United Kingdom, at least in the short
    term.  The question is whether the  judge  was  required  to  look  for
    "strong reasons" to justify the removal of the family in the  light  of
    the fact that the third and fourth appellants had lived in  the  United
    Kingdom for  more  than  seven  years  and  are  children.   Mr  Sarwar
    submitted that the decision of the judge was perverse; in the light  of
    the long residence of the children, and in the absence of  any  "strong
    reasons" she had to allow the appeals of all  the  appellants.   Having
    read the decision of the judge very  carefully,  I  disagree.   In  the
    absence of any obvious obstacles  to  the  family  returning  to  their
    country of nationality, it was open to the  judge,  on  the  particular
    facts of this case, to conclude that the third  and  fourth  appellants
    could reasonably be expected to travel to Ghana with the rest of  their
    family unit.  It was not perverse of the judge to reach that  decision.
    Whilst there may have been no "strong reason" in favour of the family's
    removal there were equally, on the judge's analysis, no reasons for the
    family to remain in this country.  I accept that a different  Tribunal,
    faced with the same facts, may have  reached  a  different  conclusion;
    however, that is not the point.  The judge  has  reached  a  conclusion
    open to her on the evidence and has supported that conclusion by  clear
    and cogent reasoning.  She has not given exaggerated weight to  certain
    factors and nor has she given inadequate weight to any factor which may
    have favoured the family remaining in the United Kingdom.  There are no
    grounds  for the Upper Tribunal to interfere with her decision.

10. For the reasons I have given, these appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. These appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 18 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 18 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane












