
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12628/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 November 2020               |On 2 December 2020               |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE THOMAS


                                   Between

                                 Akash bajaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Canter, of counsel, instructed directly
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 20 August 2020, the Upper Tribunal issued a decision in this  appeal
    in which it was found that the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Hatton)  had
    erred in law in several respects in dismissing  the  appellant's  human
    rights appeal.  The decision of the FtT was set aside  and  the  appeal
    was retained in the Upper  Tribunal  for  the  decision  to  be  remade
    pursuant to s12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
    2007.  A copy of the  decision  of  20  August  2020  ("the  set  aside
    decision") is appended and should be read alongside this decision.

 2. The appeal was listed for a 'resumed' hearing before this  panel  on  9
    November 2020.  Mr Canter represented the appellant,  as  he  has  done
    throughout.  Mr Tufan, who has had no previous involvement in the case,
    represented the respondent.  At the start  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Tufan
    explained that he was in difficulty.  Although the set  aside  decision
    had been sent to both parties (and had been received by  the  appellant
    and Mr Canter), and although the notice of hearing stated quite clearly
    that this was to be a resumed hearing, Mr Tufan had not  been  provided
    with the set aside decision.  He had therefore proceeded, until he  had
    spoken to  Mr  Canter  moments  before  the  hearing  started,  on  the
    understand that the primary  purpose  of  the  hearing  was  to  decide
    whether the decision of the FtT was legally erroneous.

 3. This was not the only procedural complication which presented itself at
    the start of the hearing.  For the appellant,  Mr  Canter  stated  that
    there were additional documents  which  had  been  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Whilst these documents (which were updating statements  made
    by the appellant and his wife) had  reached  Mr  Tufan,  they  had  not
    reached the Tribunal's file.  We arranged for copies to be made so that
    we could consider the statements.

 4. The appellant and his  wife  were  present  to  give  evidence.   Other
    witnesses had also attended.  We asked Mr Tufan whether he  might  take
    some time to consider the set aside decision (a copy of which  we  were
    able to provide) and to prepare  for  a  contested  'resumed'  hearing.
    With his characteristic professionalism, Mr  Tufan  indicated  that  he
    thought he should be able to proceed and asked for twenty minutes.   We
    acceded to  that  request  and  retired  to  consider  the  appellant's
    additional evidence.

 5. Upon the hearing resuming, Mr Tufan confirmed  that  he  was  ready  to
    proceed.  He  stated  that  there  had  been  discussions  between  the
    advocates and that we might usefully hear submissions on those  matters
    before hearing any oral evidence.  We were content to do so.

Submissions

 6. Mr Canter submitted that the appeal fell to be  allowed  without  there
    being any need for oral  evidence.   He  asked  us  to  note  that  the
    respondent had set out only a single reason  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Five-Year  Route  in
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The application had been refused
    on a single suitability ground (S-LTR 4.2) and it had been accepted  in
    terms in the letter of refusal that the  appellant  met  the  remaining
    eligibility requirements, including the Relationship  Requirement,  the
    Immigration Status  Requirement,  the  Financial  Requirement  and  the
    English Language Requirement.  It having been held  in  the  set  aside
    decision that S-LTR 4.2 was of no application in this case, the  appeal
    fell to be allowed on human rights grounds because it  was  clear  that
    the appellant met the requirements for limited leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse: TZ (Pakistan) & Anor v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, at [34].

 7.  We  invited  Mr  Canter  to  address  us  on  the  Immigration  Status
    Requirement because, although the respondent had accepted that  it  was
    met in the refusal letter, we were concerned  that  the  appellant  had
    been an overstayer when he applied for  leave  to  remain.   Mr  Canter
    submitted as follows.  The appellant had been granted leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant until 17 June 2016.  Before the expiry of
    that leave to remain, he had applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain, on
    14 June 2016.  His leave was statutorily extended by section 3C of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 from  that  point.   Before  the  application  was
    decided, the appellant varied it to one for  ILR  on  grounds  of  Long
    Residence, following which the varied application continued  to  extend
    the original period of leave, under s3C(5) of the 1971 Act.

 8. Continuing with the relevant chronology, Mr Canter noted that  the  ILR
    application was refused on 20 January  2018  and  that  an  appeal  was
    subsequently dismissed by the FtT.  The protection of s3C continued, Mr
    Canter recalled, whilst any appeal  was  pending,  which  included  the
    exercise of  any  onward  rights  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal:
    s3C(2)(c) refers.  That period had not come to an end until  permission
    to appeal had been refused by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ McWilliam)  in  a
    decision which was sent to the parties on 29 January 2019.   Mr  Canter
    was able to produce a copy of UTJ McWilliam's decision,  which  bore  a
    date of 18 January 2019, but was not able to show us when the  decision
    was sent to the parties.  He was content to accept the  date  given  by
    the respondent, which was 29 January 2019.

 9. The next event, Mr Canter submitted, was that  the  appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain as an unmarried partner on  8  February
    2019.  Before that application was decided,  he  varied  it  to  be  an
    application for leave to remain as a spouse.  He did  so  on  16  March
    2019, and  the  respondent  therefore  voided  the  application  as  an
    unmarried partner.  We are  grateful  to  Mr  Tufan  for  checking  the
    respondent's Casework Information Database ("CID") and confirming  that
    the voiding of the unmarried partner application  was  because  it  had
    been varied and not because  the  first  application  was  in  any  way
    invalid.

10. Having taken us through the chronology, Mr Canter  submitted  that  the
    appellant had made his application for leave to remain as an  unmarried
    partner within 14 days of the exhaustion of  his  appeal  rights,  such
    that his period of overstaying was to be disregarded with reference  to
    paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules ("Exceptions for Overstayers").

11. Mr Tufan did not seek to argue that  the  appellant  was  incapable  of
    meeting the Immigration Status Requirement  or  the  other  substantive
    requirements of Appendix FM.  He invited us to consider two submissions
    regarding the Suitability provisions of  those  Rules.   He  submitted,
    firstly, that the appellant was caught by paragraph S-LTR  4.2  despite
    what had been held in the set aside  decision.   Although  he  accepted
    that the appellant had not sought to  deceive  the  respondent  in  his
    application for leave to remain and that his deceit  of  HMRC  was  not
    covered by the concluding words of S-LTR 4.2,  he  submitted  that  the
    appellant had failed to disclose a  material  fact  (his  deception  of
    HMRC) in his previous application for leave to remain.  That  sufficed,
    Mr Tufan submitted, to satisfy one of the conditions precedent required
    to invoke this discretionary ground of refusal.

12. Mr Tufan submitted, secondly, that the respondent should  have  refused
    the application under S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM.  Citing R v IAT &  Anor
    ex parte Kwok On Tong [1981] Imm AR 214 and CP (Dominica) [2006]  UKAIT
    40, Mr Tufan submitted that the appeal could only be allowed  on  a  TZ
    (Pakistan) basis if the Upper Tribunal was satisfied that  all  of  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were met, and that it  could  not
    be so satisfied when a mandatory ground of refusal plainly applied.  It
    was clear that it did apply, since the appellant had not only defrauded
    the Revenue of a significant sum; he had received a police caution  for
    doing so.

13. For the appellant, Mr Canter submitted that the submission made  by  Mr
    Tufan in relation to S-LTR 4.2 was misconceived,  since  the  appellant
    had plainly made reference to the findings made by FtT Judge  Boyes  in
    his application of 16 March 2019.  Mr Tufan was wrong, in any event, to
    submit that the appellant  had  received  a  police  caution  for  that
    conduct; his caution had arisen from events during his employment  with
    Travelex and the respondent had produced no  evidence  to  gainsay  his
    account of those events.  As for the application to rely on S-LTR  1.6,
    Mr Canter submitted that it was far too late for such an application to
    be made.  There was no written application to do so, and  the  lateness
    of Mr Tufan's  oral  application  was  to  be  seen  in  context.   The
    inapplicability of S-LTR  4.2  had  been  identified  in  the  original
    grounds of appeal to  the  FtT  and  at  all  subsequent  stages.   The
    respondent could have sought to invoke that paragraph  in  the  written
    submissions which preceded the set aside  decision  or  by  application
    thereafter.  It was not in the interests of justice, he submitted,  for
    the respondent to be permitted to raise such a  significant  matter  at
    this late stage.

Discussion

14. We retired to consider the submissions which had been put  to  us.   On
    the hearing resuming, we stated our conclusion that S-LTR 4.2 was of no
    application and that the respondent would not be permitted to raise  S-
    LTR 1.6 at this stage.  We accepted Mr  Canter's  submission  that  the
    requirements of the Five-Year Route were accordingly met and  that  the
    appeal fell to be allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds as a  result.   The
    reasons we reached that conclusion are as follows.

15. We need not set out paragraph S-LTR 4.2 of Appendix FM; it is  set  out
    in full at [17] of the set aside decision.  It is now  accepted  by  Mr
    Tufan that the appellant  did  not  make  false  representations  in  a
    previous application for leave to remain.  It is also accepted that the
    appellant did not make false representations to a third party in  order
    to obtain a document required to  support  such  an  application.   The
    appellant's deception, as found by FtT Judge Boyes in 2018, was  solely
    of HMRC and was to minimise his tax liability; it was not done in order
    to procure a document which was to be used to  support  an  application
    for leave to remain.  In fact, if the appellant had produced a document
    from HMRC which reflected the earnings declared in that forum, he would
    positively have undermined his application for leave to remain.

16. What Mr Tufan now submits is that the appellant failed to disclose  his
    deception of HMRC in an application for leave  to  remain.   Mr  Canter
    submitted that the appellant had in fact declared the finding which had
    been made against him by FtT Judge Boyes when he made his  most  recent
    application for leave to remain, and he directed  us  to  the  relevant
    section of the application  form  which  the  appellant  had  submitted
    online on 16 March 2019.  With respect  to  Mr  Canter,  however,  what
    matters is not the extent of the appellant's disclosure in the  instant
    application.  S-LTR 4.2 is expressly directed to conduct in a  previous
    application for leave to remain.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  made
    reference to the findings against him when  he  made  his  most  recent
    application is of no relevance here whatsoever.

17. The real answer to Mr Tufan's submission is that which was set  out  at
    [22] of the set aside decision.  The burden of proof in respect of such
    matters is on the respondent, to the civil standard.  In the event that
    she asserts that the appellant failed to disclose a material fact in  a
    previous application for leave to remain,  the  burden  is  on  her  to
    establish the relevant facts.   What  she  is  required  to  establish,
    therefore, is  that  a  relevant  question  was  asked  in  a  previous
    application for leave to remain, in response  to  which  the  appellant
    failed to disclose the fact that he had deceived HMRC in respect of his
    earnings in the period in question.  It was noted at [22]  of  the  set
    aside  decision  that  the  respondent  had  not  identified  any  such
    question.  Nor, in fact, has she even provided the application form (or
    forms) in which the appellant is said to have  failed  to  declare  the
    relevant information.  It cannot simply  be  assumed  that  a  relevant
    question was asked, nor can it simply be  assumed  that  the  appellant
    failed to disclose his conduct when he made  previous  applications  to
    the respondent.  In these circumstances, the respondent has  failed  to
    discharge the evidential burden upon her of showing that there was  any
    failure of disclosure in a previous application or applications.

18. As regards Mr Tufan's application to rely on  paragraph  S-LTR  1.6  of
    Appendix FM[1], we do not accept his submission that we  are  bound  to
    consider the point  regardless  of  its  absence  from  the  notice  of
    refusal, nor do we consider that it would be appropriate to permit  the
    variation of that notice at this late stage.  It is necessary  to  look
    at the chronology first.

19. The respondent's decision was issued on 8 July 2019.  It  was  said  at
    [19] of the grounds of appeal to the FtT that there was  no  basis  for
    refusing the application on the basis of S-LTR  4.2.   The  appellant's
    appeal to the FtT was dismissed by Judge Hatton,  who  did  not  accept
    that submission.   Thereafter,  however,  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal alleged squarely (at ground six) that  the
    judge had fallen into error in concluding that S-LTR  4.2  was  of  any
    application to the facts of this case.  There was no suggestion, in the
    Secretary of State's written response to the grounds, that  she  sought
    (or would seek, in the event of the FtT's decision being set aside)  to
    rely upon S-LTR 1.6.  Nor was any such notice given in the three months
    or so which elapsed between the Upper Tribunal's set aside decision and
    the resumed hearing before us.

20. It might legitimately be thought that the caseworker who  refused  this
    application on 8 July 2019 had considered whether to apply paragraph S-
    LTR 1.6 and had decided not to do so.  It is to be  recalled  that  FtT
    Judge Boyes had decided in October 2018 that paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules applied.  That paragraph is in  materially  identical
    terms to S-LTR 1.6, save for  the  fact  that  paragraph  322(5)  is  a
    discretionary provision.  It would naturally have been the  first  port
    of call, for a caseworker deciding this application only  eight  months
    later, to consider whether the  basis  upon  which  the  appellant  had
    failed in his first appeal continued to apply.  We think it likely that
    a conscious decision was made not to apply S-LTR 1.6 on the facts which
    were presented  to  the  respondent  in  the  March  2019  application.
    Whether that was because the appellant had 'come clean'  by  disclosing
    his previous transgressions, had paid  his  outstanding  tax,  and  the
    caution in 2011 was from some years ago, we do not know.  But we think
    it most  unlikely  that  the  caseworker  who  came  to  consider  this
    application in March 2019 simply failed to consider whether  S-LTR  1.6
    applied.

21. Whether the respondent failed to turn her mind to S-LTR 1.6 or  whether
    she considered that provision and  decided  not  to  apply  it  to  the
    appellant, Mr Tufan submitted that  we  were  in  any  event  bound  to
    consider its application. He cited the decision of Glidewell J in  Kwok
    on Tong  and  that  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  in  CP
    (Dominica) in support of his submission.  These are decisions  of  some
    antiquity in the sphere  of  immigration  law  and  we  note  that  the
    statutory regime - and the appellate jurisdiction under Part 5  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  in  particular  -  has
    changed markedly since those  decisions  were  issued.   The  essential
    point remains valid, however,  despite  those  changes.   Where  it  is
    submitted to a judge of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  that  an
    appeal falls to be allowed on human rights grounds because an appellant
    meets the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  the  judge  must  be
    satisfied that all of the requirements of the Rules are met.  He or she
    is  not  confined,  in  undertaking  that  assessment,  to  the  points
    specifically identified in  the  notice  of  refusal.   Under  the  old
    statutory regime, a judge (whether Immigration  Judge  or  Adjudicator)
    could not allow an appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  unless  those
    Rules were met.  Under the current statutory  regime,  a  judge  cannot
    allow an appeal on human rights grounds because the  Immigration  Rules
    are met unless those Rules are indeed satisfied.

22. In some circumstances, it will be apparent to a judge that an appellant
    is unable to meet the Rules for a reason not stated  expressly  in  the
    respondent's decision. In Kwok On Tong, for example, it was apparent to
    the IAT that the  appellant  was  not,  as  had  been  claimed  in  his
    application, a partner in his uncle's food shop; the  relationship  was
    one of disguised employment, contrary to the requirements of the Rules.
     The critical word in each of  the  preceding  sentences,  however,  is
    'apparent'.  It was apparent in Kwok On Tong that the relationship  was
    not one of equals but of master and servant.  It might become  apparent
    to a judge that an appeal cannot succeed on the basis  contemplated  at
    [34] of TZ (Pakistan) if, for example, an appellant is the subject of a
    deportation order[2].  Even where that point is not taken by a decision
    maker, it operates as  an  absolute  and  incontrovertible  bar  to  an
    appellant satisfying the Immigration Rules.

23. Paragraph S-LTR 1.6 is of a different character, however.  The decision
    to refuse an application under that paragraph (or  its  equivalents  in
    Part 9 of the Rules) requires a decision maker not simply  to  consider
    whether a precedent fact is established; an evaluative exercise is also
    required.  The decision maker must consider  whether  the  individual's
    proven behaviour calls into question their character or conduct to  the
    extent that it is considered undesirable to  allow  them  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom: Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673; [2019]  1
    WLR 4647, at [34]-[38] in particular. At [37](2) of the judgment of the
    Court of Appeal in Balajigari, Underhill LJ noted that it was very hard
    to see how the deliberate and dishonest submission  of  false  earnings
    figures, whether to HMRC or  the  Home  Office,  would  not  reach  the
    requisite level of seriousness.  Nevertheless, an  evaluative  exercise
    is still required on the part of the respondent - and then the Tribunal
    - in order to hold that this ground of refusal  applies  in  any  given
    case.

24. Mr Tufan is not able to submit, therefore, that it is apparent that the
    appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules because  paragraph
    S-LTR 1.6  necessarily  applies.   Notwithstanding  what  was  said  in
    Balajigari and the Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 starting  point  provided
    by FtT Judge Boyes' decision, the most that Mr Tufan can submit is that
    the respondent ought to have an opportunity  to  establish  (since  the
    burden is upon her) that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom
    is undesirable.  He does not seek permission to withdraw the  decision;
    what he seeks to do, more than a year after form IAFT-5 was lodged with
    the FtT, is to introduce a new ground  of  refusal  into  the  decision
    which is ultimately under appeal.  We do not permit the  respondent  to
    do so for the following reasons.

25. Firstly, as set out above, the  respondent  has  had  more  than  ample
    opportunity to amend or supplement the decision  under  appeal.   There
    must be some finality in litigation  especially  where,  as  here,  the
    conduct in question took place the better part of a decade ago.

26. Secondly, to have permitted the respondent to raise the new  ground  of
    refusal  would  necessarily  have  resulted  in  an  adjournment.   The
    appellant is entitled to notice of the way in which the respondent puts
    her case under S-LTR  1.6,  as  is  clear  from  Balijagari  and  other
    authorities which we need not mention.  It  does  not  suffice  for  Mr
    Tufan simply to refer to the historical conduct and to  the  conclusion
    reached by FtT Judge Boyes; the respondent would also  be  required  to
    take  into  account:  (i)  that  the  appellant  has  now  repaid   his
    outstanding tax to HMRC; (ii) that  she  previously  misunderstood  the
    position in relation to his caution from 2011;  and  (iii)  that  there
    have been no further transgressions.  In the event that the  respondent
    decided, despite seemingly reaching the contrary decision in July 2019,
    that she did  consider  the  appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  to  be
    undesirable, she would explain the reasoning on which she reached  that
    conclusion and the appellant would then be entitled  to  respond,  with
    evidence.  Where, as here, the appellant would be exercising a right of
    appeal, there would be no need for a separate 'minded to refuse' stage,
    since he would be able to consider his position in light of the refusal
    letter and marshal his evidence and arguments at  the  hearing:  Ashfaq
    [2020] UKUT 226 (IAC).  Procedural fairness  would  dictate,  in  other
    words, a reasoned decision on the  application  of  S-LTR  1.6  and  an
    opportunity to respond to it.

27. Thirdly, although it is the appellant's conduct which is at the root of
    all of this, we do not lose sight of the importance of the case to him,
    his wife and her  family.   The  appeals  have  been  privately  funded
    throughout and their statements make clear the strain being  caused  to
    their lives as a result of the ongoing uncertainty  arising  from  this
    litigation.

28. In  all  the  circumstances,  we  refused  Mr  Tufan's  application  to
    introduce a new ground of refusal.  It is not apparent to us  that  the
    appeal would necessarily be dismissed on that basis and the over-riding
    objective of dealing with cases fairly and justly militates against the
    proceedings being further delayed by the possible introduction of a new
    ground of appeal which might or might not prosper.  The  appellant  has
    overcome the ground of refusal under S-LTR 4.2.   It  was  accepted  in
    terms in the letter of refusal  that  the  remaining  requirements  for
    leave to remain as a spouse were met.  We conclude that  the  appellant
    has met the requirements of the Five-Year Route in Appendix FM (under D-
    LTRP 1.1), as a result of which we allow his appeal on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

Postcript

29. We wish to make clear that nothing which is said in  this  decision  is
    intended to represent criticism of  Mr  Tufan,  who  was  placed  in  a
    difficult position by the failure of his department to ensure  that  he
    received the set aside decision in good time for the hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT having been set aside, we  remake  the  decision  on
the appeal by allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             2 December 2020

ANNEX A - SET ASIDE DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12628/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 |                                 |
|                                 |.................................|
|                                 |......                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 AKASH BAJAJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is an Indian national who was born 6  October  1986.   He
    appeals, with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hatton
    ("the judge")  on  23  October  2019.   By  that  decision,  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  of
    his human rights claim.

Background

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom nearly thirteen years ago,  on
    24  September  2007.   He  held  entry  clearance  as  a  student.   He
    subsequently made a successful application for leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 Migrant and was granted further leave within that  tier  on  two
    subsequent occasions.  On 14 June 2016, he applied for Indefinite Leave
    to Remain as a Tier 1 Migrant.  Enquiries by  the  respondent  revealed
    significant discrepancies between the self-employment earnings  he  had
    relied upon in his applications for leave to remain and  those  he  had
    declared  to  Her  Majesty's  Revenue  and   Customs   ("HMRC").    The
    application for ILR (which had, in the meantime,  been  varied  to  one
    under paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules)  was  refused  under
    paragraph 322(5) of those Rules.

    The First Appeal - Judge Boyes

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision.  His appeal was heard  by
    Judge S L L Boyes, sitting at Hatton Cross on 20 September 2018.  In  a
    meticulously reasoned, reserved decision which was issued on 26 October
    2018, Judge Boyes concluded that  the  respondent  had  discharged  the
    burden upon her of demonstrating that the appellant had been  dishonest
    in his dealings with HMRC.  It was undesirable for him to remain in the
    UK and there was  nothing  which  weighed  in  favour  of  leave  being
    granted.  In the circumstances, Judge Boyes found paragraph  322(5)  to
    apply, and found that the appellant was unable to meet the requirements
    for ILR on grounds  of  Long  Residence.   Considering  the  matter  on
    outside the Immigration Rules with reference to Article 8  ECHR,  Judge
    Boyes noted that the appellant 'is in a  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen'  but  that  he  had  accepted  that  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the  Rules  in  reliance  on  that  relationship.   She
    concluded that the public interest outweighed the appellant's claim  to
    remain in the UK.

 4. Permission to appeal against Judge Boyes's decision was refused by  the
    FtT and the Upper Tribunal.  Shortly after he had exhausted his  rights
    of appeal, the appellant made an application for leave to remain as  an
    unmarried partner, under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    application was subsequently varied to one on the  basis  of  marriage,
    after the appellant had married his British partner, Shivani Phakkey.

    The Respondent's Decision

 5. The respondent refused the application on 8 July 2019.  She  noted  the
    appellant's previous deception.  She thought that he  had  been  issued
    with a police caution for it.  She concluded that the appellant  should
    be refused under paragraph S-LTR 4.2 of Appendix FM.  She  was  not  in
    any event satisfied that the appellant could show that he and his  wife
    could not live together in India, such that paragraph EX1  of  Appendix
    FM was not satisfied.  The respondent did not accept that the appellant
    satisfied paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules (very significant obstacles)
    or that there was any reason to grant  leave  outside  the  Rules  with
    reference to Article 8 ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the FtT and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  the
    judge, sitting in Birmingham,  on  11  October  2019.   He  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant,  his  wife  and  her  parents.   He  heard
    submissions  from  counsel  for  the  appellant,  Mr  Canter,  and  the
    respondent's  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Gazge,  before  reserving   his
    decision on the appeal.

 7. The judge set out the appellant's immigration history at [2]-[12].   He
    reminded himself of Devaseelan [2003] Imm  AR  1  in  relation  to  the
    previous decision of Judge Boyes: [13]-[15].  He considered the  issues
    arising at [16]-[21] and set out the burden and standard  of  proof  at
    [21]-[22].  He made reference to  the  oral  and  documentary  evidence
    which was before him at [24]-[25].  Then, under the sub-heading "Is the
    Appellant's application capable of  succeeding  under  the  Immigration
    Rules?", the judge considered whether the appellant fell to be  refused
    under paragraph S-LTR 4.2.  He noted that the  Presenting  Officer  had
    accepted that the refusal decision had been incorrect  to  assert  that
    the appellant had received a police caution for deception of HMRC;  the
    fraud in question was 'unrelated to  his  immigration  matters':  [26].
    The judge then recorded a submission made by Mr Canter and the decision
    he had made upon it, in the following paragraphs:

         "[27] By way of a preliminary observation, Mr Canter suggested  the
         appellant's application cannot fall for refusal  under  para  S-LTR
         4.2, because  that  section  of  the  immigration  rules  expressly
         requires that an applicant made false representations or failed  to
         disclose material facts in respect of an application for  leave  to
         remain. Although the appellant accepts the information provided  to
         the HMRC was incorrect the appellant asserts that  the  information
         he  disclosed  to  the  respondent  in  respect  of  his   previous
         applications for leave to remain was accurate.

         [28] I am unable to accept this contention. On the evidence  before
         me the fact that the appellant gave different  information  to  the
         respondent and the HMRC in respect of his declared earnings plainly
         and obviously constitutes a deficiency of disclosure. Further,  the
         appellant's income was clearly a material factor to the appellant's
         historical applications  for  leave  to  remain  in  this  country.
         Accordingly a discrepancy  between  the  self-employed  net  profit
         which the appellant  declared  to  the  HMRC  and  the  respondent,
         demonstrates a failure to disclose material facts in respect of  an
         application for leave to remain, within the meaning of paragraph S-
         LTR 4.2."

 8. The judge considered what had been said by Martin Spencer J in R (Khan)
    v SSHD [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC); [2019] Imm AR 329 at  [30].   He  saw  no
    reason to depart from Judge Boyes' findings of fact  and  he  concluded
    that the appellant's 'failure to disclose a discrepancy  in  excess  of
    twenty thousand pounds of earnings  falls  well  within  the  ratio  of
    Khan.'   He  had  'no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the  Respondent's
    discretionary power under this section of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    exercised in a reasonable and proportionate manner' and concluded  that
    the appeal fell to be dismissed under the Immigration Rules: [32]-[35].

 9. The judge  then  turned  to  the  second  issue:  "Is  the  appellant's
    application capable of succeeding outside of  the  Immigration  Rules".
    Like the respondent, he accepted that the appellant had a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his British wife and that Article  8  ECHR
    was accordingly engaged in its private and family life  aspects:  [36].
    Having reminded himself  of  his  findings  under  the  Rules  and  the
    decision of the Appellate Committee in Huang [2007] UKHL 11;  [2007]  2
    AC 167, the judge considered that significant weight should be accorded
    to the public interest in maintaining a fair and  effective  system  of
    immigration control.  He based that conclusion on the 'huge  disparity'
    between the appellant's earning, as declared to the respondent and HMRC
    in a previous application: [40].

10. At [41], the judge considered that the appellant had a 'propensity  for
    dishonesty' because he had failed to declare his earnings  to  HMRC  in
    more than one year and he had an  unrelated  caution  for  fraud.   The
    judge noted that Judge Boyes had been aware of his relationship with  a
    British citizen and had concluded  that  it  was  undesirable  for  the
    appellant to remain in the UK.  He was required, he said, 'to determine
    whether further events which have taken place in 12  months  since  FtT
    Judge  Boyes  decision  are  sufficient  to  tip  the  balance  in  the
    Appellant's favour'.  He noted that the relationship had developed at a
    time when the appellant's immigration  status  was  precarious  and  he
    attached little  additional  weight  to  the  marriage  in  March  2019
    'especially as the appellant's relationship with  his  British  partner
    was a material factor expressly taken into consideration in  FtT  Judge
    Boyes decision': [46]. S117B required the judge to attach weight to the
    public interest in immigration control and to attach little  weight  to
    the appellant's private life, which had been accrued at a time when his
    status in the UK was precarious: [47].

11. The judge considered at [49] that there was 'no discernible reason' why
    the appellant's wife could not relocate to India.  He would be able  to
    work there, as would she, the judge concluded.   The  appellant  had  a
    close relationship with his in-laws: [50].  The  judge  was  unable  to
    accept that the appellant's mother in law was signed off  work  due  to
    stress related to the appellant's  immigration  status:  [51].   Having
    considered Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39; [2009] 1  AC  115  and  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31; [2003] INLR 170, the judge stated that he  did  not
    accept that the relationship between the appellant and his wife and her
    parents amounted to a family life: [53]-[55].  The appellant's wife had
    said that she would not go to India but 'in spite of  her  misgivings',
    she would still have the opportunity to join the  appellant  in  India.
    Alternatively, he could make an application for entry clearance:  [57].
    The final two paragraphs are in the following terms:

         "[58] on the evidence before me, I consider there  is  insufficient
         basis for departing from the  original  findings  of  FTT  boys  in
         respect  of  the  appellants  previous  unsuccessful  human  rights
         appeal, just over one year ago.

         [59] I Additionally consider that the appellants Article 8 claim is
         in capable of falling within the exceptional cases  requirement  of
         Razgar and that the  respondents  proposed  interference  with  the
         appellants private  and  or  family  life  in  the  UK  is  thereby
         justified."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. Permission to appeal was sought and granted  on  no  fewer  than  seven
    grounds.  Rather than set out the grounds at this stage, I  propose  to
    consider each in turn, together with the submissions  which  were  made
    upon them.  Before I do so, I should explain the basis  upon  which  my
    decision on the appeal was reached without a hearing, under rule  34(1)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal). Rules 2008.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shimmin on 18 February  2020.
    Shortly thereafter, the global pandemic began in  earnest  and,  by  23
    March, the Upper Tribunal was closed to the public.   On  5  May  2020,
    therefore, the papers were placed before me to decide whether  progress
    might be made in the appeal notwithstanding the ongoing 'lockdown'.   I
    reached the provisional view that the Upper Tribunal might  fairly  and
    justly consider on the papers the questions of whether the decision  of
    the FtT contained an error of law and, if so, whether it fell to be set
    aside.  I invited the parties to make submissions on  that  provisional
    view and to make submissions on the merits of  the  appeal  in  case  I
    decided to proceed without an oral hearing.

14. On 8 June 2020, further submissions were filed and served by Mr Canter.
     On 24 June 2020, Mr Tan, a Senior Presenting Officer, filed and served
    submissions in reply.  Mr Canter's responded to those submissions on 29
    June 2020.  Mr Tan did not respond to the  suggestion  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal might proceed without a hearing.  For his  part,  however,  Mr
    Canter submitted in his initial submissions and those of 29  June  that
    an oral hearing was required.

15. I have considered whether the  appeal  can  be  determined  fairly  and
    justly without a hearing.  In doing so, I have taken into  account  the
    views expressed by the parties, as required by r34(2).  In  considering
    the application of the over-riding objective to this situation, I  have
    considered what was said by the Supreme Court in Osborn v Parole  Board
    [2014] 1 AC 1115.  There are no contested matters of  fact  before  me.
    The resolution of the issues does  not  require  me  to  consider  oral
    evidence or the credibility of a witness.  The parties have been  given
    an opportunity to make written submissions and have done  so,  at  some
    length.  Whilst I accept what is said about  the  persuasive  power  of
    oral argument in Mr Canter's written submissions, echoing  as  it  does
    what was said by Laws LJ in Sengupta v Holmes  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1104,
    there is no rule that any contentious matter must be resolved  by  oral
    argument.  All depends on the context.  I am satisfied, on the facts of
    this individual case, that the  competing  arguments  can  be  resolved
    fairly and justly without an oral hearing.

Analysis

16. I consider that some of the grounds of appeal are  made  out  and  that
    some are not.  I begin with those that do show errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the judge.

17. By ground six, it is submitted  that  the  judge  failed  'to  properly
    assess the relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules'.  With  respect
    to Mr Canter,  that  short  description  does  little  justice  to  the
    powerful complaint which follows.  The ground of appeal,  as  developed
    over the course of [25]-[26] of the initial grounds, is  actually  that
    the judge misdirected himself in law in concluding that paragraph S-LTR
    4.2 was of any application to the facts as found by Judge Boyes.   This
    ground of appeal is based on the terms  of  S-LTR  4.2,  which  are  as
    follows:

         S-LTR.4.2. The applicant has made false representations  or  failed
         to disclose any material fact in a previous application  for  entry
         clearance, leave to enter, leave to remain or a variation of leave,
         or in a previous human rights claim; or did so in order  to  obtain
         from the Secretary of State or a third party a document required to
         support  such  an  application  or  claim  (whether  or   not   the
         application or claim was successful).

18. Mr Canter submits, as he did before the judge, that this  discretionary
    ground of refusal only  applies  to  applicants  who  have  made  false
    representations or failed to disclose any material fact in  support  of
    an application for leave or in order to  obtain  a  document  from  the
    respondent or a third party in order to support such a claim.  It could
    not apply, he submits, when the deception practised by the appellant in
    this case had been of HMRC alone, and had not been practised  in  order
    to obtain a document to support an application for  leave.   Mr  Canter
    submits that the judge failed to come to grips with that submission  at
    [28] of his decision.  It was no answer to the point, he submits,  that
    there had been  a  'deficiency  of  disclosure'  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant.  The judge had compounded his error  by  relying  on  Martin
    Spencer J's decision in R (Khan) v SSHD.   That  decision  concerned  a
    different paragraph of the Rules.

19. In reply, Mr Tan submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in  this
    respect.  He had been entitled to rely  on  the  appellant's  deficient
    disclosure in his applications for leave to remain.

20. I consider that the judge clearly fell into error in concluding that S-
    LTR 4.2 applied to the deception practised  by  the  appellant.   Judge
    Boyes found that the appellant's false representations had been made to
    HMRC.  She accepted, in other words, that the sums he had  provided  to
    the respondent in respect of his self-employed earnings  were  accurate
    and that the �20,000 discrepancy between that sum and the sum  declared
    for tax purposes represented an attempt by the appellant to defraud the
    Revenue.  Judge Boyes found that such conduct was covered by  paragraph
    322(5) of the Immigration Rules, which provides as follows:

         (5) the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain
         in the United Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct  (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph  322(1C),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security;

21. Martin Spencer J reached the same conclusion in  respect  of  paragraph
    322(5) in R (Khan) v SSHD and his conclusion was endorsed by the  Court
    of Appeal at [35]-[37] of Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673; [2019] 1  WLR
    4647.  None of the reported decisions which I have been able to locate,
    however,  extend  the  application  of  the  very  differently   worded
    paragraph S-LTR 4.2 (or paragraph 322(2)) to the deception of  a  third
    party without an intention to secure an immigration advantage from that
    deception.  On its face, the paragraph only applies to deception  which
    has that advantage as its objective. There is no policy guidance before
    me but  I  would  be  surprised  if  it  was  not  made  clear  in  the
    respondent's guidance that it is the public policy rules (322(5), S-LTR
    1.6 etc) which should be used  when,  for  example,  an  applicant  has
    sought only to deceive a government  department  other  than  the  Home
    Office.  I accept, in summary, that the appellant has not made a  false
    representation which was properly capable of attracting a refusal under
    paragraph S-LTR 4.2, and that the judge erred  in  law  insofar  as  he
    concluded otherwise.

22. If I understand the judge's conclusions  at  [28]  correctly,  he  also
    reasoned that the appellant had failed to disclose a material  fact  in
    one or more applications for leave to remain.  Bearing in mind that the
    appellant has been found, at least since Judge Boyes' decision, to have
    told the truth about his earnings in  his  applications  for  leave  to
    remain, I am not sure what was thought by the  judge  to  amount  to  a
    'deficiency of disclosure'.   It  is  to  be  recalled  that  a  person
    applying  for  leave  to  remain  is  not  under  a  duty  of   candour
    approximating to uberrima fides: Khawaja v SSHD [1984] AC 74, at  [11].
    In the absence  of  a  specific  question  in  response  to  which  the
    appellant might properly have been expected  to  mention  that  he  had
    successfully defrauded the Revenue in  successive  years,  he  was  not
    required to disclose this fact in his application for leave to  remain.
    The judge cited no such question, nor have I been directed  to  one  by
    the respondent.   Insofar,  therefore,  as  the  judge  relied  on  the
    appellant's  'deficiency  of  disclosure'  to  the  respondent,  I   am
    satisfied that he fell into error in that regard also.

23. In the circumstances, I am persuaded that the judge's conclusions as to
    the applicability of S-LTR 4.2 to the facts of this case were wrong  in
    law and cannot stand.  Ground six is made out.

24. It is logical to consider ground seven immediately, since it also bears
    on the correctness of the judge's consideration of S-LTR 4.2.  By  this
    ground, Mr Canter submits  that  even  if  the  judge  was  correct  to
    conclude that S-LTR 4.2  was  capable  of  applying  to  the  deception
    practised by  the  appellant,  he  nevertheless  erred  in  failing  to
    consider for himself whether the discretion inherent in that  paragraph
    was to be exercised for or against the appellant.  It was and is common
    ground that S-LTR 4.2 is one of the suitability grounds under  which  a
    person should normally be refused  leave  to  remain;  refusal  is  not
    mandatory, as it is when certain other  paragraphs  apply.   Mr  Canter
    submits that it did not suffice for the judge to consider  whether  the
    respondent's discretionary power was exercised  in  a  'reasonable  and
    proportionate' manner; what he was required to do was to  consider  for
    himself the points militating for and against refusal under  S-LTR  4.2
    and to reach a reasoned conclusion.

25. Mr Tan submits on behalf of the respondent that the  judge's  treatment
    of this question  was  adequate.   I  cannot  accept  that  submission.
    Whether one looks at very old authority from the Asylum and Immigration
    Tribunal or very recent authority from the Court of Appeal, it is clear
    that a decision-maker (whether the respondent or a judge)  is  required
    to conduct a balancing exercise: Yaseen [2020] EWCA Civ 157;  [2020]  1
    WLR 1359.  It did not suffice for the judge  to  conduct  a  review  on
    public law principles as he did at [33].  Even if  the  judge  had  not
    erred  in  the  manner  contended  in  ground   six,   therefore,   his
    consideration of S-LTR 4.2 was deficient for the reason given in ground
    seven.

26. The judge's conclusion that the appellant could not succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules was based on his decision to uphold  the  Suitability
    ground of refusal.  That decision was erroneous for the two  reasons  I
    have given above and it will be set aside.  Given the importance[3], in
    an appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds, of a finding  that  an  individual
    cannot  meet  the  Immigration  Rules,  I  conclude  that  the  judge's
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR as a whole cannot stand  and  that  the
    decision will have to be remade for the reasons  above.   It  would  be
    wrong, however, not to express my conclusions on the remaining  grounds
    of appeal, although I do  so  rather  more  briefly  in  light  of  the
    conclusion already reached.

27. By ground five, Mr Canter submits that the judge  failed  'properly  to
    consider' the reasons given by the appellant's  spouse  for  not  being
    able to continue her family life with the appellant in India.  As  with
    ground six, the summary of the ground belies  its  strength.   What  is
    actually contended is that the judge failed altogether to  engage  with
    what the appellant said in his witness statement about the reasons that
    his wife could not relocate.  It is fair to say that a number of  those
    reasons (that the appellant's wife was born in  the  UK,  for  example)
    could not, without more, meet the  demanding  threshold  posed  by  the
    Immigration Rules or the Strasbourg authorities.  It was also asserted,
    however, that the appellant and his wife were  responsible  for  caring
    for her elderly mother whilst her father  was  away  during  the  week.
    Although the judge made a finding that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant's wife and her parents was not one which  engaged  Article  8
    ECHR in its family life, at [54]-[55], and although he  concluded  that
    the  appellant's  mother-in-law's  stress  did  not   relate   to   the
    appellant's immigration status, at [51], he failed to consider  whether
    the appellant and his wife care for her, or to assess the  consequences
    of any such care  being  removed.   In  the  circumstances,  the  judge
    demonstrably failed to engage with the most important basis upon  which
    it was said that family life could not continue in India.

28. By ground four, it is contended that the judge failed to  consider  the
    appellant's explanation for the police  caution  he  had  received  for
    fraud.  He had explained the circumstances in which he came to  receive
    that caution at [27] of his witness statement and the judge had  failed
    to consider what was said before concluding that the  appellant  had  a
    'propensity for dishonesty'.  Mr Tan responds that the  judge  was  not
    required to set out every aspect of the evidence and that his  findings
    were sustainable.  I accept the premise of that submission but not  the
    conclusion.

29. The appellant presented before the judge as a man who had been found to
    have intentionally submitted a seriously erroneous tax return  to  HMRC
    so that he might escape his tax liabilities. That was a  serious  stain
    on his character.  The extent of the stain was considered by the  judge
    to have increased appreciably, however, as a result of the caution  for
    an unrelated matter.  In reaching that finding, which  was  clearly  an
    important aspect of the public interest weighing against the appellant,
    the judge failed to take into account what had been said in the witness
    statement.   The  contents  of  that  statement  did  not  dispute  the
    existence of the caution but shed light on the circumstances  in  which
    it came to be accepted by the appellant and his  culpability  for  that
    offence.  It was certainly relevant to the judge's conclusion  that  he
    has a propensity for dishonesty and the judge was  required  to  engage
    with it before he made such a significant finding.

30. Ground one is also made out.  By that ground, Mr  Canter  submits  that
    the judge erred in his application of the Devaseelan [2003]  Imm  AR  1
    principles.  Obviously, the factual findings which  had  been  made  by
    Judge Boyes in relation to the appellant's tax affairs represented  the
    starting point for the judge.  It is fair to  say  that  there  was  no
    evidence which would have justified the judge taking a  different  view
    on this issue.  Indeed, at [28] of his statement before the judge,  the
    appellant expressly accepted that the point had been concluded  against
    him.

31. Where it is said by Mr Canter that the judge fell  into  error  in  his
    application of Devaseelan, however, was in concluding that it was  also
    of  application   in   relation   to   Judge   Boyes'   assessment   of
    proportionality.   She  was  considering  an  appeal  on  private  life
    grounds, and had  concluded  that  the  appellant's  private  life  was
    outweighed by the public interest.  When this appeal  came  before  the
    judge, however, a different factual matric was relied upon.  This was a
    family life case in which different considerations  applied[4]  and  it
    was  wrong  for  the  judge  to  take  Judge   Boyes'   assessment   of
    proportionality as his starting point and to conclude,  at  [58],  that
    there was 'insufficient basis for departing from the original  findings
    of FtT Boyes'.

32. It seems that the judge based his approach in this regard on  something
    he said at [46], which was that the 'appellant's relationship with  his
    British  partner  was  a   material   factor   expressly   taken   into
    consideration in Ftt Judge  Boyes'  decision'.   With  respect  to  the
    judge, it was not possible to describe Judge Boyes's decision  in  that
    way.  To do so tended to suggest that she had  undertaken  a  balancing
    exercise which was fully informed by the appellant's relationship  with
    his (then) partner and her circumstances.  But  all  that  judge  Boyes
    said about the appellant's wife was "He is in  a  relationship  with  a
    British citizen but it was accepted before me that he does not meet the
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM'.   This  was  no  evaluation   of   the
    appellant's family life with the  sponsor;  nor  could  it  have  been,
    because Judge Boyes was simply not presented with  the  facts,  or  the
    detailed evidence which the judge had  before  him.   Contrary  to  the
    submissions made by Mr Tan,  therefore,  Judge  Boyes's  evaluation  of
    proportionality (as compared  to  her  evaluation  of  the  appellant's
    dishonesty) represented little, if any, starting point for the  judge's
    own assessment.  He erred in law in approaching the matter differently.



33. Grounds two and three are not made  out.   Ground  two  criticises  the
    judge for directing himself, at [38], that the appellant 'must  satisfy
    me that the combined strength of his private and  family  life  ...  is
    sufficiently compelling to outweigh  the  Respondent's  interests'.   I
    accept that this was infelicitous, given that it  is  well  established
    that it is for the respondent to establish  the  proportionality  of  a
    decision to interfere with a protected right, but it  was  demonstrably
    no more than that.  The judge gave himself a proper  self-direction  at
    [22] and I am satisfied, having read the decision as a whole,  that  he
    followed that direction.

34. By ground three, it is contended that the judge failed to consider what
    was said by Lord Reed at [51] of Agyarko [2018] UKSC 11; [2016]  1  WLR
    390.  I need not, with respect, set out what Lord  Reed  said  in  that
    paragraph about the public interest in an individual's removal possibly
    being reduced where he was  'otherwise  certain  to  be  granted  entry
    clearance'.  Whilst it is correct that the judge failed to engage  with
    this submission, it was plainly not one which could prosper.   Even  if
    the appellant  demonstrably  met  the  Relationship  Requirements,  the
    Financial Requirements and the English Language Requirements for  entry
    clearance under Appendix FM, it could not possibly  be  held  that  the
    appellant would be 'certain'  to  be  granted  entry  clearance  if  he
    applied as a spouse.  An ECO would have Judge  Boyes'  decision  before
    him and would know that the appellant was a man who  had  attempted  to
    defraud the Revenue of  more  than  �20,000.   Even  if  the  remaining
    requirements were met, an ECO would have available to them a  mandatory
    ground of refusal under S-EC 1.5.  Where such a ground of  refusal  was
    available, it could not possibly be said that this was a case to  which
    Lord Reed's dictum applied.

35. In summary, therefore, ground one and grounds four to  seven  are  made
    out.  Since I will be setting aside the decision for the reasons above,
    I make one further observation.  I have  reproduced  the  judge's  [58]
    above, although it is not the subject of any grounds of appeal.  I  did
    so because I wished to note that it was erroneous for the judge to make
    any reference to there being an 'exceptional  cases  requirement'.   As
    Lord Bingham explained in Huang [2007] UKHL 11; [2007] 2 AC 167, and as
    Green LJ more recently said in GM (Sri Lanka), there is no 'incremental
    requirement over and above that arising out of the  application  of  an
    Article 8 proportionality test'.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT  was  erroneous  in  law  and  is  set  aside.   The
decision on the appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                              20 August 2020
                                                     -----------------------
[1] S-LTR 1.6 requires the refusal of limited leave  to  remain  where  "The
presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the  public  good
because their conduct  (including  convictions  which  do  not  fall  within
paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character, associations, or  other  reasons,
make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."
[2] This appears as a mandatory ground of refusal throughout the
Immigration Rules: paragraphs 320(2)(a), 322(1B), S-EC 1.3 and S-LTR 1.2
[3] GM (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 and TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ
1109 refer.
[4] As illustrated, for example, by what was said by Green LJ (with whom
Simler LJ agreed) at [39]-[41] of GM (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1630.

