
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal Number: HU/12307/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |On 01st September 2020               |
|26th August 2020                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           HIREN RAKESHKUMAR DARJI
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

          1. FtT Judge Samimi allowed,  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  Mr
             Darji's appeal against the refusal of his human  rights  claim
             which was based upon his family and private life  in  the  UK.
             Her decision was promulgated on 29th November 2019. Permission
             to appeal was granted to the SSHD by FtT judge Foudy  on  13th
             April 2020. Directions for the further conduct of  the  appeal
             were  sent  on  12th  May  2020  and,  in  the   circumstances
             surrounding COVID 19, provision was made for the  question  of
             whether there was an error  of  law  and  if  so  whether  the
             decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be determined
             on the papers.

          2. The Secretary of State informed the Upper  Tribunal  that  she
             was content to rely  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  upon  which
             permission to appeal had been  granted  and  agreed  that  the
             appeal was  suitable  to  be  heard  on  the  papers  with  no
             requirement  for  an  oral   hearing.   Mr   Darji,   who   is
             unrepresented, emailed the Tribunal requesting a copy  of  any
             rule 24 notice that had been submitted  by  the  Secretary  of
             State. No rule 24 response was submitted because the appellant
             in this case is the Secretary of State and not  Mr  Darji.  Mr
             Darji has not made any submissions in response  to  directions
             served. No request for an extension of time was  made  and  no
             comment was made on whether or not he  agreed  to  a  decision
             being taken on the papers.

          3. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the SSHD
             together with the papers before me[1] are sufficient to enable
             me to be able to take a decision on whether there is an  error
             of law in the decision of  the  FtT  and  if  so  whether  the
             decision should be  set  aside,  on  the  papers  and  without
             hearing oral submissions.

    FtT Decision

          4. For reasons set out in a decision dated the 8 July  2019,  the
             Secretary of State refused Mr Darji's human  rights  claim  on
             grounds of suitability. The basis of the Secretary  of  States
             conclusion that Mr Darji did not meet the suitability test was
             that he had submitted a fraudulently  obtained  a  certificate
             and had willingly participated in  an  organised  and  serious
             attempt to defraud the Secretary of State and others. Mr Darji
             appealed on the grounds that he had not obtained a  fraudulent
             certificate and had been resident in the UK since the  7th  of
             July 2009. The FTT judge stated that she had had  full  regard
             to the totality of the documentary evidence before  her  which
             she said included the documentary  evidence  submitted  by  Mr
             Darji and that the Secretary of State had provided  an  appeal
             bundle which included the notice of refusal letter; the notice
             of appeal was also before her. The judge recorded Mr.  Darji's
             answers in cross-examination of what had occurred on  the  day
             of the TOEIC test. The judge referred to SM and Qadir  v  SSHD
             (ETS -burden of proof) [2016] UKUT (IAC) and  stated  she  had
             also had regard to the case  of  SSHD  v  Shazad  and  another
             [2016] EWCH 615.

          5. The judge's findings are recorded as follows:

                  "14. In the particular circumstances  of  the  appellant's
                      case, his solicitors have not made any endeavours  to
                      obtain the recording  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
                      respondent to show that the appellant  had  allegedly
                      used  a  proxy   to   undertake   the   TOEIC   test.
                      Nevertheless, I do not find that the  respondent  has
                      satisfied  the  burden  of  proof   on   balance   of
                      probabilities to show that  the  appellants  specific
                      test results were obtained through deception  in  the
                      manner that has been  suggested  by  the  respondent.
                      There is no voice recording evidence.

                  15.  The respondent has also found that on the date of the
                      appellant's test namely 29.1.2009 taken at New London
                      College, 37% of the test results  were  found  to  be
                      questionable. I do not find that this  is  sufficient
                      to satisfy the  legal  burden  to  establish  to  the
                      balance of probabilities that the appellant has  used
                      deception in relation to a previous  application  for
                      leave  to  remain.  It  has  been  submitted  on  the
                      appellant's behalf that he has spent substantial sums
                      on legal proceedings in order to clear his name.  The
                      appellant gave evidence in  English  which  he  spoke
                      fluently. Both representatives have agreed  that  the
                      sole issue before me relates  to  the  issue  of  the
                      respondent's refusal on grounds  of  the  appellant's
                      alleged use  of  deception  in  obtaining  his  TOIEC
                      results. I do not find that there is  before  me  any
                      explanation or specific and cogent evidence  relating
                      to the appellant's TOEIC individual test results that
                      would satisfy the  burden  of  proof  on  balance  of
                      probabilities that the appellant has used a proxy  in
                      order to achieve the results  set  out  in  the  test
                      results  that  the  respondent  has  submitted.   The
                      documents  submitted  by  the  ETS  do  not   provide
                      evidence to show that the  appellant's  results  were
                      obtained   through   fraudulent   participation   and
                      misrepresentation of the English Test certificate  by
                      the use of a proxy, which is said to have  been  made
                      on the appellants behalf."

    Error of law

          6. The Secretary of State submitted that:

                   "...  the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  because  he/she  has
                  disregarded our comprehensive ETS bundle which was  served
                  on 17 October 2019  on  the  Court  and  Reps  and  easily
                  discharged the evidential burden of proof as  per  SM  and
                  Qadir. The judge ought to have gone  on  to  consider  A's
                  innocent explanation - as the judge has not done that  the
                  determination of the ETS  deception  point  and  remainder
                  issues is unsafe."

          7. Although the FtT judge does not refer  in  terms  to  the  ETS
             bundle submitted on behalf of the Secretary of  State  on  the
             17th of October 2019  it  is  apparent  from  the  first  tier
             Tribunal judge's decision that she had regard to that  because
             she quotes in her judgement the ETS source data for  Mr  Darji
             at the New London College. In particular  she  refers  to  the
             number of questionable results. She does not however refer  to
             the number of invalid results namely  63%.  The  Secretary  of
             State refused the application not on the basis that his result
             was questionable but that  he  had  obtained  his  certificate
             fraudulently  and  that  there  was  significant  evidence  to
             conclude that his certificate was fraudulently obtained by the
             use of a proxy  test  taker.  Although  the  judge  reproduces
             extracts from SM and Qadir she has  not  set  out  sufficient,
             adequate or indeed any reasoning to explain on what basis  she
             considered that the respondent had  failed  to  discharge  the
             evidential burden given the very large number of  questionable
             and  invalid  test  results.  The  Tribunal  was  required  to
             consider the explanation provided by Mr Darji as to taking the
             test. The first tier  Tribunal  judge  has  erred  in  law  in
             failing  to  apply  the  relevant  caselaw,  restricting   her
             analysis to whether the appellant's  result  was  questionable
             rather than invalid and has failed to proceed to  the  further
             step of considering the explanation provided.

    Findings

          8. The first tier Tribunal judge erred in law and I set aside the
             decision to be remade, no findings preserved. Given the extent
             of the findings  that  are  required  to  be  made,  the  oral
             evidence to be heard and the underlying  credibility  findings
             to be made, this case is to  be  remitted  to  the  first-tier
             tribunal in accordance with the relevant guidance.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal for hearing afresh before
    the first-tier tribunal.

    Consequential Directions

    This appeal is remitted to the first-tier tribunal to be  heard  afresh
    with no findings preserved; not before Judge Samimi.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    No reason has been given why the anonymity order  was  imposed  by  the
    first-tier judge or why it should continue. There does not appear to be
    anything in the papers which indicates there  should  be  an  anonymity
    order and I discharge the order.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
    [1] (a)the SSHD's bundle; (b) the SSHD's ETS bundle; (c) the bundle
    filed on behalf of HR and the Report of the APPG on TOEIC; (d)decision
    of FtT judge Samimi; (e) The application for permission to appeal;
    and (f) the grant of permission to appeal.

