
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12420/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 18 November 2019                  |On 27 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sood
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By decision promulgated on 2 August 2019, I found that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons for reaching that conclusion were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the appellant as  the  'respondent'  and  the
         respondent as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before
         the First-tier Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant was born on 1 August 1972 and is as male citizen
         of Gambia. He entered the United Kingdom as a spouse  on  28  March
         2003. On 14 May 2009, he was convicted of two counts of  possessing
         a controlled drug of Class A with intent to supply and possessing a
         class B controlled drug. On 24 July 2009, he  was  sentenced  to  4
         years  imprisonment.  By  a  decision  dated  12  April  2018,  the
         Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim,
         having made an  order  to  deport  the  appellant  to  Gambia.  The
         appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal
         of his human rights claim. The First-tier Tribunal, in  a  decision
         promulgated on 15 September 2018, allowed the appeal. The Secretary
         of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         3.   The Secretary of State asserts that the judge failed to follow
         starred decision of Secretary of State for the Home Department v  D
         (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702 *. As the judge  pointed  out  [2],  the
         appellant has a lengthy immigration history. In particular,  on  25
         February 2014, a previous decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  had
         been set aside and the decision remade dismissing the appeal in the
         Upper Tribunal (Judge Hanson). At [36], the judge acknowledged this
         earlier decision:

             "The Upper Tribunal has to be my  starting  point.  However  I
             have to consider the circumstances as  at  the  date  of  this
             hearing. This hearing takes place nearly 5 years and and there
             are now four children aged eight and under. The appellant  has
             been living with his family since his release from  prison  in
             2011 apart from  some  periods  of  immigration  detention.  I
             accept that I have to carry  out  a  full  assessment  of  the
             current circumstances."

         4.   The Secretary of State asserts there was not necessary for the
         judge to carry out such a 'full  assessment.'  Rather,  she  should
         have sought to distinguish those  circumstances  which  had  arisen
         following the previous decision and to make findings in respect  of
         them but otherwise to take Judge Hanson's analysis  as  a  starting
         point for her own. Inter alia, Judge  Hanson  had  found  that  the
         appellant and his partner had been reckless to have a further child
         when his immigration status had been so uncertain. The  judge  made
         contradictory  statements  about  that  finding  and  also   placed
         significant weight on the fact that, by the date of the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing, the couple had four children. Moreover, at  [45],
         the judge  found  that  the  appellant's  partner's  mental  health
         problems had not deteriorated significantly since the date  of  the
         previous decision. However,  at  [66],  the  judge  identified  the
         mother's mental  health  problems  as  one  of  a  number  of  very
         compelling  circumstance  justifying  allowing   the   appeal.   In
         addition, Judge Hanson had found that social services would  assist
         the family in the absence of the  appellant,  a  factor  which  the
         judge appears to have discounted. Judge Hanson also found that  the
         report of Christine Brown had lacked objectivity,  another  element
         in the analysis which the judge does not appear to have taken  into
         account.

         5.   I find that the ground of appeal is made out. The judge  fails
         to explain exactly why  having  more  children  will  qualitatively
         affect the inability of either those children  or  the  partner  to
         cope with the deportation of the appellant.  Indeed  at  [58],  the
         judge is critical of the appellant for enlarging his family at time
         when he was fully aware of the precariousness  of  his  immigration
         status. She did not, however, attach less weight to the size of the
         appellant's family on account of that recklessness. By  failing  to
         do so, the judge adopted a significantly  different  approach  from
         that previously taken by Judge Hanson.  Positive  factors  for  the
         appellant identified by the judge included what she  considered  to
         be the appellant's recent rehabilitation, a  factor  to  which  the
         judge should have attached little weight.

         6.   I am reminded that, given the length of the appellant's prison
         sentence, he must show that there are very compelling circumstances
         over and above those matters described in Exceptions  1  and  2  of
         section 117C of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It
         is difficult to see  from  the  judge's  analysis  that  such  very
         compelling circumstances have  been  established.  The  appellant's
         responsibility for enlarging  his  family  has  not  been  properly
         considered, whilst the partner's mental health  problems,  although
         not found to have deteriorated, are given significant weight. Judge
         also appears to have given weight to the simple lapse of time since
         the last decision of the  Upper  Tribunal.  She  fails  to  explain
         exactly what has changed during that lapse  of  time  although  she
         considered it necessary to carry out a completely fresh  assessment
         of all the evidence, including that  previously  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal, a course of action which finds no support in  D  (Tamil).
         Considered as a  totality,  I  find  the  judge's  analysis  to  be
         unsatisfactory and, in  places,  contradictory.  I  set  aside  her
         decision. The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal  at  or
         following a resumed hearing in Birmingham on a date  to  be  fixed.
         Both  parties  may  adduce  fresh  evidence  provided  a  copy   of
         documentary evidence is sent to the other party and  filed  at  the
         Upper Tribunal at least 10 days prior to the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None  of  the
         findings of fact shall stand. The decision will be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane)  at  Birmingham  at  or
         following a resumed hearing."

    The Oral Evidence

 2. At the resumed hearing,  the  appeal  proceeded  upon  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds only. The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.  I
    heard evidence from the appellant and  also  his  partner,  SJ.  It  is
    agreed by the parties that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with SJ and also with their four children, A (born  2009),
    K (born 2013), B (born 2014) and Y (born 2016).

 3. The appellant adopted his witness statements as his evidence in  chief.
    He explained that the older children, who are of mixed race,  attend  a
    predominantly white school. A, in particular, had been the  subject  of
    racist bullying at school following which the  appellant  had  consoled
    him and sought to bolster his confidence.  The  appellant  also  stated
    that he was taking positive steps to introduce the  children  to  their
    Gambian  cultural  heritage.  In   cross-examination,   the   appellant
    explained that he had 'to  do  everything'  at  home  because  of  SJ's
    depressive illness. He became upset when he explained  that  he  'never
    had a break. I never stop. If I'm not there, then there is nobody to do
    it.' He explained that SJ had seen mental  health  consultants  in  the
    past but she was not now being treated by doctors other than her GP nor
    is she receiving counselling. The only medical contact at  the  present
    time is with the GP, Dr Olding.

 4. SJ gave oral  evidence  and  adopted  her  written  statements  as  her
    evidence in chief. She stated that she last attended her GP in  October
    this year. Her anti-depressive  medication  had  been  increased  as  a
    result of that visit. She was having  difficulty  sleeping  at  present
    time. She became upset when she explained that there were mornings when
    she awoke and did not 'want to face life.'

    The Law

 5. On account of  his  criminal  offending,  the  appellant  falls  to  be
    considered under the provisions of section 117C(6) of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

         '(6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.'

 6. Exceptions 1 and 2 provide:

         '(4) Exception 1 applies where -

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.'

 7. The appellant's partner and the  children  are  British  citizens.  The
    children are, therefore, 'qualifying children.'

 8. A helpful summary of the jurisprudence concerning section  117C(6)  was
    provided by the Court of Appeal in the recent  judgement  JG  (Jamaica)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 982 at [13-16]:

         "In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2016] EWCA Civ 662, [2017] 1 WLR 207,  this  Court  addressed  the
         meaning  of  the  phrase  in  section  117C  (6)  "very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2". Paras. 29 and 30 of the judgment of the Court, given by Jackson
         LJ, reads (so far as material):

             "29. .... The phrase used in section 117C (6), in para. 398 of
             the 2014 ... does not mean  that  a  foreign  criminal  facing
             deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking to rely  on
             matters  falling  within  the  scope  of   the   circumstances
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to  contend  that
             'there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. ... [A] foreign criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

             30.  In the case of a serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe that as  a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2',  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8."

         Mr Pilgerstorfer, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  agreed  that  in
         practice in most cases which satisfied the requirements of  section
         117C (6) the matters relied on would be of a character  which  fell
         within one or other of the two Exceptions.

         In Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]
         EWCA  Civ  803,  [2016]  1  WLR  4203,  this  Court  examined   the
         interaction between section 117A (2) and sections  117B  and  117C.
         Rhuppiah was itself a case under section 117B, but it was  followed
         in NE-A (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2017] EWCA Civ 239, which concerned section 117C.  The  effect  of
         both decisions is that Part 5A formally changes the position as  it
         was prior to its enactment in that it requires tribunals to adopt a
         structured approach, applying  the  statutory  steps,  rather  than
         simply treating the Secretary of  State's  policy  as  regards  the
         public interest as a relevant consideration. In NE-A (Nigeria)  Sir
         Stephen Richards (with whom McFarlane and Flaux LJJ  agreed)  said,
         at para. 14 of his judgment:

             "Part 5A of the 2002 Act ... is primary  legislation  directed
             to tribunals and governing their decision-making  in  relation
             to Article 8 claims  in  the  context  of  appeals  under  the
             Immigration Acts. I see no reason to  doubt  what  was  common
             ground in Rhuppiah and was  drawn  from  NA  (Pakistan),  that
             sections 117A-117D, taken together, are  intended  to  provide
             for a structured approach to  the  application  of  Article  8
             which produces in all cases a final result which is compatible
             with Article 8. In  particular,  if  in  working  through  the
             structured approach one gets to section  117C(6),  the  proper
             application  of  that  provision  produces  a   final   result
             compatible with Article 8 in all cases to  which  it  applies.
             The provision contains more than  a  statement  of  policy  to
             which  regard  must  be  had  as  a  relevant   consideration.
             Parliament's assessment that  'the  public  interest  requires
             deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
             over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'  is  one
             to which the tribunal is bound by law to give effect."

         He continued, at para. 15:

             "None of this is problematic for  the  proper  application  of
             Article  8.   That   a   requirement   of   'very   compelling
             circumstances' in order to outweigh the public interest in the
             deportation of foreign criminals sentenced to  at  least  four
             years' imprisonment is compatible with Article 8 was  accepted
             in MF (Nigeria) and in  Hesham  Ali  itself.  Of  course,  the
             provision to that  effect  in  section  117C(6)  must  not  be
             applied as if it contained some  abstract  statutory  formula.
             The context is that of the balancing exercise under Article 8,
             and  the  'very   compelling   circumstances'   required   are
             circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the   strong   public
             interest  in  the  deportation  of   the   foreign   criminals
             concerned. Provided that a tribunal has that context in  mind,
             however, a finding that 'very compelling circumstances' do not
             exist in a case to which section 117C(6) applies will  produce
             a final result, compatible with Article  8,  that  the  public
             interest requires  deportation.  There  is  no  room  for  any
             additional element in the proportionality  balancing  exercise
             under Article 8."

         In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
         UKSC 53, [2018] 1 WLR 5273, the Supreme Court considered the nature
         of the exercise required by section 117C (5). Lord  Carnwath,  with
         whom the other members of the Court agreed, said, at  para.  23  of
         his judgment (pp. 5286-7):

             "... [T]he expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly intended to
             introduce a higher hurdle than that  of  reasonableness  under
             section 117B (6), taking account of the public interest in the
             deportation of foreign criminals. Further  the  word  'unduly'
             implies an element of comparison. It assumes that there  is  a
             'due' level of 'harshness', that  is  a  level  which  may  be
             acceptable or justifiable in the  relevant  context.  'Unduly'
             implies  something  going  beyond  that  level.  The  relevant
             context is that set by section 117C (1), that  is  the  public
             interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.  One  is
             looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
             necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child  faced   with   the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor ... can it be equated with a requirement to show
             'very  compelling  reasons'.  That  would  be  in  effect   to
             replicate the additional test applied by section 117C (6) with
             respect to sentences of four years or more."

         The upshot of those decisions, so far as concerns the present case,
         is that in so far as the Respondent sought to rely on the effect of
         his deportation on his son (who, being a  British  citizen,  was  a
         qualifying child) it would not be enough to show that  that  effect
         would be "unduly harsh", in the sense explained in KO.  That  would
         satisfy Exception 1, but because his case fell within section  117C
         (6) he needed to show something over and above  that,  which  meant
         showing that the circumstances in his case were,  in  Jackson  LJ's
         phrase in NA, "especially compelling". In short,  at  the  risk  of
         sounding flippant, he needed to show that the impact on his son was
         "extra unduly harsh"."

 9. It is with the statutory provisions and the guidance  provided  by  the
    Court of Appeal in mind that I have sought to conduct  my  analysis  in
    this appeal.

    Analysis

10. At the outset, I wish to stress that I have no difficulty in  accepting
    the sincerity with which the  appellant  and  SJ  gave  their  evidence
    before the Tribunal. I find that what they told  me  was  accurate  and
    true and that the distress which both witnesses exhibited whilst giving
    evidence was entirely genuine. I have no doubt as to  the  genuine  and
    subsisting nature of the relationship of the appellant and SJ and their
    love and concern for the children of that relationship.

11. It is for the appellant to establish the existence of  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the test of undue harshness set out in the
    exceptions contained in section 117C.

12. The written evidence is substantially the same as that before the First-
    tier Tribunal with the addition of  diary  entries,  letters  from  the
    children and updating school reports.  There  is  an  updating  medical
    report from Dr Olding, SJ's GP, which is  dated  29  October  2019.  Dr
    Olding writes:

         "I have had regular contact with SJ since I started in the practice
         in July 2017. I recently saw her with an  increase  in  her  mental
         health symptoms. She was  suffering  increased  anxiety  with  poor
         sleep and  panic  attacks  as  well  as  low  mood  and  difficulty
         sleeping. Her score on the PHQ9 Depression Screening  Questionnaire
         was 25 which indicates severe symptoms of depression and her  score
         on the GAD7 Anxiety Scale was 19 indicating severe anxiety."

    The doctor considered that SJ's symptoms were  'significantly  affected
    by prevailing events relating to [the appellant's] application to  stay
    in the  United  Kingdom'  and  he  expected  her  symptoms  to  'worsen
    significantly were [the  appellant]  be  obliged  to  leave.'  He  also
    observed that the relationship between the children and  the  appellant
    seems a close  one.  He  noted  the  suggestion  in  previous  Tribunal
    decisions that SJ can obtain help from social services if the appellant
    were to be removed from the family. He acknowledged that 'this  may  be
    the case but I think it would be fair to observe that in most instances
    social service support is not in any way able to replicate  or  replace
    the role of an effective and caring parent.' He concluded by  observing
    that the 'current position of the family as a whole  will  be  severely
    adversely affected should the appellant leave the country.'

13. I find that SJ is, as Dr Olding states, suffering from an  increase  in
    her anxiety and with problems sleeping. I accept that she is at present
    suffering severe symptoms  of  depression.  She  is,  however,  not  at
    present receiving medical care above the level  of  a  GP  nor  is  she
    receiving counselling. I accept that the appellant does  virtually  all
    the work at home in caring for the children and that SJ has problems in
    particular with assisting with their care in the mornings  following  a
    poor night's sleep. I find also that SJ's family in the United  Kingdom
    have largely abandoned her as a result of her mixed race  relationship.
    However, I find that social services and other  agencies  would  assist
    this family in the appellant's absence, as Dr Olding  agrees  would  be
    the case. Significantly, when considering the  substitution  of  social
    services for the presence in the family's life  of  the  appellant,  Dr
    Olding, whilst stating that the whole family would be severely affected
    by the deportation, refers to the  impossibility  of  support  agencies
    'replicating or replacing the role of an effective and caring  parent.'
    That observation must be true for almost every family where one  parent
    is removed for whatever reason and  third  parties  are  called  in  to
    assist. The doctor, therefore, is describing a commonplace  consequence
    of deportation for a family; neither he nor any of the other  witnesses
    have identified likely consequences of the  deportation  affecting  any
    member of the family which would go beyond what  may  be  described  as
    'duly harsh' (see KO (Nigeria) 2018 UKSC 53).

14. I stress that I am not seeking  to  understate  the  severity  of  SJ's
    depression and anxiety but there is no evidence to  show  that  she  is
    likely to self-harm  in  the  event  of  the  appellant's  deportation.
    Moreover, as the doctor observed, the children have  been  well  raised
    and cared for by the appellant and SJ with the result that they are not
    suffering from mental  or  physical  health  problems  which  might  be
    exacerbated by separation from the appellant.

15. A  matter  raised  by  previous  judges  has  been  the  'recklessness'
    exhibited by the appellant and SJ in choosing to have several  children
    at  a  time  when  the  appellant's  immigration  status  has  been  so
    precarious. I do not seek to criticise the judges who drew attention to
    this but I do not consider that  it  is  significant  in  applying  the
    relevant test under section 117C(6). In my view, whilst the application
    of the test should take place within the context of  a  proportionality
    assessment, it cannot be right that when very compelling  circumstances
    may adversely affect the welfare of children, such circumstances should
    be diluted or outweighed because the children  had  been  born  in  the
    first instance.

16. I find that the effect of the deportation of the appellant upon SJ  and
    the children will be harsh. The close relationship between the children
    and the appellant will be  irrevocably  altered,  notwithstanding  that
    they may remain in contact over the internet or by  telephone.  I  find
    that  the  children  will  be  deprived  of  the  appellant's  guidance
    regarding their Gambian culture although I find that SJ  is  likely  to
    take steps to educate the children in respect of all aspects  of  their
    cultural heritage. I find  that  SJ  is  likely  to  suffer  a  further
    deterioration in her anxiety and depression  levels  but  there  is  no
    evidence to show that she will self-harm.  I  find  that  SJ  will,  on
    account of her illness, need the support of agencies, including  social
    services, but that such  support  will  be  forthcoming.  I  accept  Dr
    Olding's view that such services cannot replicate the appellant's  role
    as an effective and caring parent but that is not,  in  my  opinion,  a
    very compelling circumstance which carries the effects  of  deportation
    beyond the 'duly harsh.' All the children are in good health and appear
    to be developing emotionally and intellectually.  Again,  there  is  no
    evidence that their education  or  emotional  development  will  be  so
    derailed  as  a  consequence  of  the  appellant's  deportation  as  to
    constitute a very compelling circumstance over  and  above  the  unduly
    harsh.  In  conclusion,  whilst  I  accept  that  the  consequences  of
    deportation for the family may  be  harsh  and  may  even  be  properly
    described as unduly harsh, this is not a case where the evidence  shows
    that the higher threshold of very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above unduly harsh will be  crossed.  The  proper  application  of  the
    statutory test and adherence to the guidance of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    lead me to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    human rights claim.



Notice of Decision

I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of
the Secretary of State dated 12 April 2018 is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 20 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.












