
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/12577/2015
                                                               HU/12711/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2018                           |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                          SIVAGANANTHY MUTHUTHAMBY
                            KANEESHAN MUTHUTHAMBY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And


                      Entry Clearance Officer - Chennai
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Balroop, of Counsel, instructed by Genga & Co
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is the Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M R Oliver ("the judge") promulgated on 4 May 2017
    dismissing their appeals against a decision of the Entry Clearance
    Officer (ECO) refusing their applications for entry clearance to enter
    the United Kingdom under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules ("the
    Rules").

2.    The Appellants (mother and son) are nationals of Sri Lanka born on  20
    July 1974 and 4 September 1999 respectively.  They  applied  for  entry
    clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as the partner and  child  of
    the sponsor, Mr Vairaiya Muthuthamby (the First Appellant's partner and
    the Second Appellant's father). The sponsor was present in  the  United
    Kingdom with limited  leave  to  remain  until  24  January  2018.  The
    Appellants application  was  refused,  and  they  appealed.  The  judge
    dismissed the appeal. The judge observed that the Appellants could  not
    succeed under the Rules as the sponsor was not settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom. As for Article 8 of the ECHR, the judge noted that it was  the
    sponsor's decision to come to the United  Kingdom  that  separated  the
    family. The judge further noted that "the way in which  they  chose  to
    live their family life apart is not interfered with by the  refusal  to
    allow them to reunite now. They will be able to  continue  to  live  as
    they have chosen to do by meeting  during  holiday  periods  together."
    Accordingly, the judge dismissed the appeal.

3.    The Appellants applied for permission to  appeal  against  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision asserting that the judge failed to engage with
    the "considerable wealth of evidence contained in the Appellant's (sic)
    bundle". The grounds further assert that the  judge  erred  in  finding
    that it was the decision of the sponsor to leave the Appellants in  Sri
    Lanka as he fled in fear of persecution and so could not return  there.
    Thus, it was said that the judge failed to assess whether  family  life
    could resume in Sri Lanka and that he wrongly found  that  intermittent
    contact with the Appellants in India constituted family life.

4.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Osbourne on 4 December 2017.

Discussion and Conclusions

5.    The Appellants applied for entry clearance to join the sponsor in  the
    United Kingdom under Appendix FM of the Rules. There is no dispute that
    the Appellants cannot meet the requirements of the Rules as the sponsor
    is not settled in the United Kingdom. The application under  the  Rules
    therefore was doomed to fail. The issue before the  judge  was  whether
    refusal of entry  clearance  infringed  the  Appellants'  human  rights
    contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR. The factual matrix  concerning  that
    issue is not complex or lengthy and can be summarised as follows.

6.    The sponsor is a Sri Lankan national who entered  the  United  Kingdom
    in 2003 and claimed asylum. The application was  refused.  Nonetheless,
    due to his ongoing fears he has not since returned to  Sri  Lanka.  The
    sponsor was granted limited leave to remain on private life grounds  in
    2011 and his current leave on that basis expired on  24  January  2018.
    He is working in the United Kingdom. He visited the Appellants in India
    in 2016 and 2017 respectively.



7.    The grounds (not drafted by Mr Balroop)  consist  of  six  paragraphs.
      Paragraph two contends that the judge's decision lacks  reasoning  and
      the findings made failed to engage with the  "considerable  wealth  of
      evidence" filed by the Appellants. There is no merit in  this  ground.
      As I observed at the hearing the Appellants' bundle could not properly
      be described as containing a "considerable  wealth  of  evidence"  (it
      comprises of 37 pages) most of which deals with the sponsor's personal
      and financial circumstances. This challenge fails to identify what, if
      any, of that evidence the judge failed to consider, and  nor  do  they
      explain how any of that evidence would have made a material difference
      to the outcome. Mr Balroop,  sensibly,  did  not  pursue  this  ground
      before me.

8.    Paragraphs three to five of the  grounds  take  issue  with  paragraph
      seven of the judge's decision, which I have quoted in full above.  The
      grounds assert that the judge's decision is founded on  a  mistake  of
      fact in finding that the sponsor left Sri Lanka by choice rather  than
      in consequence of a well-founded fear of persecution. Mr Balroop  thus
      submitted that paragraph seven of the judge's decision did not go  far
      enough as he should have assessed whether family life  could  continue
      in Sri Lanka. This ground I consider is misconceived.

9.    It is noteworthy that the claim the sponsor feared  returning  to  Sri
      Lanka is a matter that is referred to in the First Appellant's witness
      statement and not that of the sponsor's. Nevertheless, the  judge  was
      clearly aware of the sponsor's background as he set this out at [4] to
      [5]. While I acknowledge that the judge makes no specific reference to
      this background in his assessment at [7], I am not persuaded  that  he
      committed a material error by that failure.

10.   I agree with the submission of Mr Wilding that the grounds  place  the
      narrative too high as the sponsor's asylum claim was refused.  It  was
      not therefore accepted that the  sponsor  had  a  subjective  fear  of
      returning to Sri Lanka; a claim which he did not directly make in  his
      witness statement before  the  judge.  Even  if  the  judge  had  made
      specific reference to this background at [7], there was no  protection
      claim before him and at its  highest  the  evidence  showed  that  the
      sponsor's asylum claim had been refused. In light of that fact  it  is
      unlikely to have led the judge  to  a  different  conclusion.  In  the
      circumstances, I consider that the judge was entitled to  factor  into
      his assessment that it was the sponsor's decision to  leave  his  wife
      and child to come to the United Kingdom. I find that was a  conclusion
      that is supported by the evidence and was plainly open to  him.  There
      is no material error of law in this regard.

11.    Finally,  Mr  Balroop  complained  that  the  judge's  decision   was
      insufficiently reasoned and that the Appellants were unable to discern
      why they had lost. That complaint I consider is unjustified. In Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC),  the
      tribunal stated thus: 'Although there is a legal duty to give a  brief
      explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal
      is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision  as
      a whole makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the
      judge'.

12.   The accepted material was that the sponsor  was  not  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom. He had chosen to spend his  family  life  living  apart
    from his family until he first visited them  in  2016.  In  effect  the
    judge found that preserving that status quo was  not  disproportionate.
    While the decision is very concise and could  have  been  expressed  in
    better terms and at greater length, I consider that the judge expressed
    himself in shorthand and reached key conclusions on the  evidence  that
    was relevant to the assessment of proportionality. In my judgement  the
    reasons why, the judge dismissed the appeal is clear  and  sufficiently
    reasoned.

13.   At the hearing I asked Mr Balroop to identify the  compelling  factors
    in this case that would have justified a different conclusion. In  that
    regard he was only able to  refer  to  paragraph  eight  of  the  First
    Appellant's witness statement in which she expresses her wish that  the
    family be reunited. While that is understandable, the circumstances  in
    this case do not identify factors that reach the threshold required  to
    compel the balance to be tipped in the Appellants favour to  warrant  a
    grant of leave outside of the Rules.

14.   In summary, I conclude that the judge cut through verbiage  to  arrive
    at the heart of the matter which  was  whether  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance  was  disproportionate.  Brevity  and  concision   does   not
    necessarily indicate  an  error  of  law.  In  this  instance  the  key
    conclusions reached  by  the  judge  support  the  findings  made.  His
    conclusion is not surprising given the evidence that was before him and
    the facts in my view only compelled the judge to reach that  conclusion
    which was entirely open to him on  the  evidence  and  is  sufficiently
    reasoned. I therefore dismiss the Appellants' appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Appellants is dismissed, and the decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                       Dated 27 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


