

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/12372/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 7th February 2018                   |       On 16th February 2018        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MUSTAPHA ALI SAID
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. N Ahmed, instructed by Burton & Burton
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Swinnerton promulgated on 8th December 2017  in  which
       he allowed the appeal against the decision served by the Secretary of
       State on 9th February 2017, to refuse a human rights  claim  made  by
       Mr. Said.


    2. The appellant in the appeal before us is the Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department and the respondent to this  appeal  is  Mr  Said.
       However, for ease of reference, in the course  of  this  decision  we
       shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.   We  shall
       in this decision,  refer  to  Mr  Said  as  the  appellant,  and  the
       Secretary of State as the respondent.


    3. At the conclusion of the hearing before us, we announced that in our
       judgement, the decision of the FtT is infected by a  material  error
       of law and the decision of the FtT Judge is set aside.  We  directed
       that the matter is to be remitted to the FtT  for  hearing  de  novo
       with no findings preserved.  We said that we would give the  reasons
       for our decision in writing.  This we now do.


    4. The appellant is a national of Tanzania and his immigration  history
       is set out at paragraph [2] of the decision of  the  FtT.   He  last
       entered the UK in March 2006 as a  spouse  with  leave  valid  until
       March 2008.  He was  subsequently  granted  discretionary  leave  to
       remain in the UK until  January  2017.   The  appellant's  offending
       history is set out  at  paragraph  [3]  of  the  decision.   On  1st
       February 2017, the appellant was convicted  of  interfering  with  a
       motor vehicle endangering other road users and received  a  12-month
       sentence of imprisonment.


    5. The respondent seeks to  deport  the  appellant  and  to  that  end,
       applying paragraph  A  362  and  paragraphs  A398  to  399D  of  the
       immigration rules, concluded that the appellant is  unable  to  meet
       the  family  and  private  life  exception  to   deportation.    The
       respondent concluded that  there  are  no  compelling  circumstances
       which outweigh the public interest in seeing the appellant deported,
       on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


    6. The appellant relies upon the family life that he has with his  wife
       and children.  The appellant  met  his  wife  Mrs  A  K,  a  British
       citizen, in 1997 when the appellant had previously been in  the  UK.
       They married in 2005 after the appellant had  returned  to  Tanzania
       after a lengthy period of unlawful presence in the  UK.   There  are
       two children of the marriage, aged 10 and 7 respectively at the time
       of the hearing before the FtT.


    7. The Judge found, at [16], that the appellant  continues  to  have  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife.  He  also  found,
       at  [17],  that  the  appellant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship with his children, and  that  the  appellant  plays  an
       active part in the upbringing of his children. The Judge found  that
       the appellant, his wife, and their two children live together  as  a
       family unit.


    8. At paragraph [20] of the decision, the Judge states:


             "..The children, aged 7 and 10, are at an important  stage  in
             their development and the deportation of  their  father  would
             have a very substantial impact on the lives of  the  children,
             particularly as the Appellant's wife did not see how she could
             move with her  children  to  Tanzania  as  the  lives  of  the
             children have always been in  the  UK  and  they  are  British
             citizens."


    9. At paragraph [21], the Judge states:


             "...'. Deportation of the Appellant would lead to  a  break-up
             of the family unit given that the Appellant's wife and the two
             children involved are all British citizens and the Appellant's
             wife  does  not  intend  to  return  to  Tanzania  with  their
             children.  That  said,  the  Appellant  committed  a  criminal
             offence for which he was convicted and imprisoned recently and
             very considerable weight must  be  attributed  to  the  public
             interest in deportation cases such as this. I  have  therefore
             been alive to and have attributed such weight  to  the  public
             interest in this case. I have noted also that the  deleterious
             effect upon the Appellant's children  of  his  deportation  is
             evident."


 The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


   10. The respondent contends that the Judge has failed  to  particularise
       the factors that  establish  that  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
       deportation on his wife or children would be unduly harsh, so as  to
       outweigh the public interest in deportation of  the  appellant.  The
       Judge refers to the best interests of the children and the impact of
       deportation  upon  them  but  does  not  give  reasons  as  to  what
       differentiates this appellant's circumstances from those  of  others
       facing deportation. Disruption  and  upset  necessarily  flows  from
       deportation.  There was no  evidence  of  any  specific  medical  or
       educational requirements that requires the appellant's  presence  in
       the UK, or that the children would not be adequately cared  for,  if
       the appellant is deported.  In  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the
       deportation of the appellant would  be  unduly  harsh,  particularly
       upon the two children of the appellant, the Judge failed to identify
       anything that is exceptional that would outweigh the public interest
       in the appellant's deportation.


   11. Permission to appeal was granted on 19th December 2017 by First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Parker.  The matter  comes  before  us  to  determine
       whether the decision of the FtT contains a material error of law.


 Error of Law


   12. Before us, Mr. Ahmed candidly accepts,  rightly  in  our  judgement,
       that the decision of the FtT Judge could have been  more  structured
       and clearer.  He submits that the Judge has found that the appellant
       plays an active role in the lives  of  his  children  and  that  the
       children, aged 7  and  10,  are  at  an  important  stage  in  their
       development.  The Judge appears to have accepted the evidence of the
       appellant's wife that she could not see how she could move with  her
       children to Tanzania.    Mr Ahmed submits that  at  paragraph  [21],
       the Judge has considered all relevant factors and that it  was  open
       to the Judge to conclude that the deportation of the appellant would
       be unduly harsh, particularly upon the appellant's two children.


    13. The Tribunal was faced with  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
        rules and public interest considerations enshrined in  statute  that
        the deportation of the appellant is in the public  interest.   There
        is now a series of binding decisions relating  to  the  construction
        and  impact  of  the  primary  legislation  provisions,  and   their
        interplay with the Rules;  Hesham Ali (Iraq) v  Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 and R (Agyarko)  v  Secretary
        of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.


    14. The Judge does not refer in his decision to the relevant  provisions
        of the immigration rules. That is, paragraphs A 362, A 398, 398, 399
        and 399A of the rules.   The  rules  are  relevant  when  a  foreign
        criminal liable to deportation claims that his deportation would  be
        contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8.   The  immigration
        rules  are  an  expression  of  the  respondent's  policy  to  which
        substantial weight must be attributed.


    15.  Since  the  appellant  had  received   a   12-month   sentence   of
        imprisonment, paragraph 398(b) of the rules applies.  That  is,  the
        deportation of the appellant from the UK is conducive to the  public
        good and in the public interest because he has been convicted of  an
        offence for which he has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
        of less than 4 years, but at least 12 months.  Paragraph 398 goes on
        to provide that the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will
        consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does  not,
        the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by  other
        factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and above
        those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


    16. The Judge of the FtT failed to consider whether  paragraphs  399  or
        399A apply, and if they do  not,  whether  the  public  interest  in
        deporting the appellant is outweighed by "other factors where  there
        are very compelling circumstances over and above those described  in
        paragraphs 399 and 399A".


    17. In our judgement, the  Judge  of  the  FtT  failed  to  address  the
        relevant  public  interest  considerations  by  reference   to   the
        requirements of the immigration rules and Part 5 of  the  2002  Act.
        We are not satisfied that a Tribunal properly  directing  itself  to
        the relevant legal framework, and taking into account  the  relevant
        public interest considerations, would reach the same conclusion  and
        the error of law is therefore material to the outcome of the appeal.




    18. Having carefully read the decision of the FtT Judge we are satisfied
        that the decision of the FtT discloses a material error of  law  and
        should be set aside.


    19. As to disposal, we have decided that it is appropriate to remit this
        appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh, having taken into account
        paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement  of  25th
        September 2012.  In light of the nature of the  error  of  law,  the
        extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The
        parties will be advised of  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing in due course.


 Notice of Decision


    20. The appeal  is  allowed.   The  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Swinnerton
        promulgated on 8th December 2017 is set  aside,  and  we  remit  the
        matter for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


    21. No anonymity direction was made by the FtT and no application for an
        anonymity order was made before us.

Signed                              Date




Lord Boyd of  Duncansby                              Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


There was no fee award by the FtT since no fee had been paid or is  payable.


Signed                              Date


Lord Boyd of  Duncansby                       Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Mandalia
