
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12710/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                 BRAHEEM [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge M A Khan  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his application for leave to enter as  the
    dependent child of his mother who is settled in the United Kingdom. The
    application was made and considered under the terms of paragraph 297 of
    the Immigration Rules and the appeal is  on  human  rights  grounds  by
    virtue of section 82(1)(b) and 84(2) of the Nationality Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  15  April  2018.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge  M  A  Khan  on  25  April  2019  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  His application was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hollingworth on 13 June 2019 in the following terms

         "It is arguable that an insufficiently precise distinction has been
         drawn between  the  extent  of  available  evidence  otherwise  not
         produced and evidence not available at all.  It  is  arguable  that
         insufficient clarification was obtained of this distinction. It  is
         arguable that the judge has attached to much weight to the issue of
         day-to-day care in the context of assessing sole responsibility. It
         is further arguable that  analysis  was  required  of  the  factors
         bearing upon the question of the existence or otherwise of  serious
         and compelling circumstances it is arguable  that  the  credibility
         analysis has been affected. It is arguable  that  the  outcome  has
         been affected."




Background

 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica born on 25 August  2000.  He  applied  to  join  his
    mother in the United Kingdom as her dependent under  paragraph  297  of
    the Immigration Rules. The Respondent refused the application not being
    satisfied that the Appellant's mother had sole responsibility for him.

 4. In dismissing his appeal  and  after  hearing  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant's mother (the Sponsor) the Judge found that the  Sponsor  had
    not had sole responsibility for the Appellant and that his  grandmother
    has been responsible for the Appellant's  day-to-day  needs,  education
    and day-to-day care and decision making process.




Submissions

 5. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Balroop  appeared  for  the  Appellant.
    Adopting the grounds of appeal, he highlighted three issues. Firstly he
    said there was a mistake of fact in the distinction  between  what  was
    and was not available. At paragraph  31  the  Judge  records  that  the
    Sponsor said that she had not seen school reports for 7or 8 years. This
    conflicts with Mr Balroop's note of the  evidence  which  records  that
    when asked about the school reports the Sponsor said, 'no one asked  me
    to bring them'. The fact that the Judge was mistaken  is  supported  by
    paragraph 18 where the Judge records that the Sponsor said that she did
    not know she needed to produce the reports. At paragraph 30  the  Judge
    records that she did know the name of the Appellant's  primary  school.
    She was not asked name of school and in  any  event  the  reference  to
    primary school is indicative of the Judge's mistaken recollection since
    the appellant was 17 years old at the time.

 6. Secondly  the  Judge  fails  to  properly  assess  the  test  for  sole
    responsibility. In finding that the grandmother  meets  the  day-to-day
    care needs and decisions of the Appellant the Judge  fails  to  make  a
    finding whether the parent has continuing control and direction of  the
    child's upbringing. The focus on day-to-day care is  wrong.  The  issue
    was whether the Sponsor had continuing control and direction.

 7. Mr Balroop referred briefly to the third issue being whether there  was
    serious and compelling circumstances and pointed out the letter from Dr
    Ford which confirms that  the  grandmother  is  no  longer  capable  of
    providing care and protection. The Judge fails to make any  finding  on
    this at all.

 8. For the Respondent Mr Walker referred to paragraph 29 of  the  decision
    in which the Judge said that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  to
    support the Sponsor's assertion of daily contact with  her  mother  and
    son. In fact there were two letters before  the  Judge,  one  from  the
    grandmother and one from the Appellant. Mr Walker said  that  he  could
    not argue against the grounds and there were indeed material errors  of
    fact. Both representatives agreed that I should remake the decision  on
    the evidence that was before the first-tier tribunal.

 9. I gave an extempore decision allowing the appeal and setting aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I re-made the decision by allowing
    the appeal. My reasons are given below.



Decision

10. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Jamaica  who,  at  the  time  of  the
    application, was 17 years  old  and  living  with  his  grandmother  in
    Jamaica. The application was made on the basis that his mother, settled
    in the United Kingdom, had sole responsibility for him.  In  dismissing
    the appeal the Judge noted that the Sponsor did not know  the  name  of
    her son's primary school, that  she  had  not  seen  her  son's  school
    reports for seven or eight years and  that  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence to support her assertion that she was in almost daily  contact
    with  the  Appellant  and  his  grandmother.  The  Judge  took  adverse
    inference from all these matters finding that these suggested that  the
    Sponsor did not have sole responsibility for the  Appellant.  He  found
    that the grandmother has been responsible for the Appellant's  "day-to-
    day needs, education and day-to-day care and decision-making process".

11. It is accepted by Mr Walker  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the
    decision is flawed in that  the  Judge  has  incorrectly  recorded  the
    evidence that was before him. In fact contrary to the  Judge's  finding
    that there was no documentary evidence in support of the assertion that
    the Sponsor was in  day-to-day  contact  with  the  Appellant  and  his
    grandmother there were two letters, one from the  grandmother  and  one
    from the Appellant attesting to this fact. The Judge makes reference to
    the Sponsor not knowing the name of her son's  primary  school  finding
    that if she was in contact with the primary school she would have known
    its name. Mr Balroop  was  the  representative  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and said that such a question was not asked and indeed I would
    find it very strange if the Judge asked the  name  of  the  Appellant's
    primary school when, as a 17-year-old, he would have left  that  school
    any years ago. The Judge goes on to say that Sponsor gave evidence that
    she had not seen her son's school reports for seven or eight years.  In
    fact the record held by Mr Balroop suggests that she said she  had  his
    school reports for the last seven or eight years but  had  not  brought
    them with her.  This  appears  to  fit  in  with  the  Judge  recording
    elsewhere in the decision that the Sponsor did not know that she needed
    to bring documents with  her.  These  are  all  errors  of  fact  which
    material to the issue of sole responsibility. In assessing whether  the
    Sponsor had sole responsibility the  Judge  should  have  focused  upon
    whether the Sponsor had  continuing  control  and  direction  over  the
    child's upbringing including all the important decisions in the child's
    life. The Judge finds that the grandmother "has  been  responsible  for
    the appellants day-to-day needs,  education  and  day-to-day  care  and
    decision-making process". In fact, in a sole responsibility case it  is
    always going to be the person in the home country  who  is  responsible
    for the subjects day-to-day needs and day-to-day care so  this  is  not
    relevant to the decision-making process. All the above are examples  or
    errors of facts amounting to error of law and of material misdirection.
    On this basis the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

12. In remaking the decision, I consider firstly paragraph  297  (i)(e)  of
    the Immigration Rules which states:

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:


              (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
              parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:


                  ...


                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                  settlement and has had sole responsibility for the child's
                  upbringing; ..."


13. In determining whether the Sponsor had sole responsibility the  leading
    case which needs to be considered is  still  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):
    "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049. Paragraph 52 holds: -

         "Questions of "sole responsibility"  under  the  immigration  rules
         should be approached as follows:


      i. Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and whether  that
         responsibility is "sole" is a factual matter to be decided upon all
         the evidence.


     ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should not to be
         understood as a theoretical or legal obligation  but  rather  as  a
         practical one which,  in  each  case,  looks  to  who  in  fact  is
         exercising responsibility for the child.   That responsibility  may
         have been for a short duration in that the present arrangements may
         have begun quite recently.


    iii. "Responsibility" for a child's  upbringing  may  be  undertaken  by
         individuals other than a child's parents and may be shared  between
         different individuals: which may particularly arise where the child
         remains in its own country whilst the only parent involved  in  its
         life travels to and lives in the UK.


     iv. Wherever the parents are, if  both  parents  are  involved  in  the
         upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional that  one  of  them
         will have sole responsibility.


      v. If it is said that both are not involved in the child's upbringing,
         one of the indicators for that will be that the other has abandoned
         or abdicated his responsibility.  In such cases,  it  may  well  be
         justified to find that that parent no longer has responsibility for
         the child.


     vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility  is  not  just  a  matter
         between the parents.  So even if there is only one parent  involved
         in  the  child's  upbringing,  that  parent  may  not   have   sole
         responsibility.


    vii.  In the circumstances likely to  arise,  day-to-day  responsibility
         (or decision-making) for the child's  welfare  may  necessarily  be
         shared with others (such as relatives or friends)  because  of  the
         geographical separation between the parent and child.


   viii.  That,  however,  does  not  prevent   the   parent   having   sole
         responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.


     ix. The test is, not whether anyone else has day-to-day responsibility,
         but whether the parent has continuing control and direction of  the
         child's upbringing including making all the important decisions  in
         the child's life.  If not, responsibility  is  shared  and  so  not
         "sole"."


14. The facts pertinent to the issue of sole responsibility can be found in
    the statement and oral evidence of the Sponsor supported by the letters
    from the Appellant and his  grandmother.  The  Sponsor  is  in  regular
    contact with the Appellant, the grandmother and the Appellant's school.
    The Sponsor received the Appellant's school reports. The Sponsor  makes
    the  important  decisions  concerning   the   Appellant's   life.   The
    grandmother has exercised day to day care and has been responsible  for
    the Appellant's day to day needs. The grandmother, as evidenced by  the
    letter from Dr Ford,  is  no  longer  capable  of  providing  care  and
    protection due to her infirmity.

15. Taking all these matters into account it is clear that the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules are met and, that being the case, and  on  the
    basis  that  family  life  exists  between  mother  and   son   it   is
    disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control to refuse
    to grant entry clearance. On this basis I allow the Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance.



Summary of decision

16. Appeal allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

17. I remake the decision  and  I  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    refusal of entry clearance.



Signed                                  Date: 1 August 2019


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
