

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12052/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 5 September and 12 October 2016        |on 20 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 S OLAYINKA
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms A Darvishzadeh of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre,
Edinburgh
For the Respondent:    on 5 September Mrs M O'Brien and on 12 October Mr A
                    Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appeals against a determination by
    Designated Judge Macdonald, promulgated on 12 February 2016, dismissing
    his  appeal  against  a  deportation  order.   He  has  not  asked  for
    anonymity.

 2. The appellant was previously subject to a deportation order,  based  on
    the same offending, made  on  3  November  2010.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    allowed his appeal against that order on 4 August 2011 on  family  life
    grounds, following  which  the  respondent  granted  him  discretionary
    leave, valid from 22 August 2011 until 22 August 2014.   The  appellant
    applied  for  further  leave  on  or  around  27  August   2014.    The
    circumstances  of  his  family  and  private  life   were   essentially
    unchanged, and he had not re-offended.  The respondent made the further
    deportation order against which these proceedings were  brought,  dated
    14 and served on 17 September 2015.

 3. The appellant's grounds are in summary (1) error  in  categorising  the
    appellant's immigration status, rooted in  his  relationship  with  his
    partner, as "precarious"; (2) misinterpretation of sections 117B and  C
    of the 2002 Act as "mandatory" rather than as a point of reference; (3)
    error in leaving out of account the decision of the Upper Tribunal when
    assessing "undue harshness" and "very  compelling  circumstances";  (4)
    error in taking "very compelling  circumstances"  at  face  value,  and
    failing  to  conduct  the  proportionality  analysis  upon  which   the
    compatibility of the rules with Article 8 rests; (5) in effect treating
    the Razgar approach as erroneous; and (6) failing to  apply  Devaseelan
    so as to treat the UT decision as determinative.

 4. In course of submissions on 5 September I observed  that  it  would  be
    useful to know whether the respondent has any policy regarding  further
    leave based on family and  private  life  where  such  leave  has  been
    previously  granted  following  a  successful  appeal  to  a  tribunal.
    Representatives advised me that they were not aware of such policy, but
    neither was able to say that their research had been comprehensive.

 5. I decided to adjourn the proceedings and gave oral  directions,  to  be
    supplemented in writing, for both parties to advise prior to  the  next
    hearing whether there is any relevant policy.

 6. While preparing the directions in writing I observed that  paragraph  7
    of the respondent's decision refers to Chapter 13  of  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions (IDI's) Article 8 Guidance section 7.4,  which
    provides that further leave of this nature will be granted only  if  an
    applicant  "qualifies  under  the  Article  8  provisions  set  out  in
    paragraphs 398 to 399A."

 7. The directions as issued in writing said  that  there  might  be  other
    relevant materials on how the  respondent  generally  applies  tribunal
    outcomes in favour of appellants, and on  how  successive  applications
    based on such leave are to be approached.  Parties were to advise  each
    other and the UT, not less than  2  working  days  prior  to  the  next
    hearing, of any other relevant policy  or  guidance  which  they  could
    identify.

 8. A letter dated 7 October from the appellant's  representatives  advised
    that research had unearthed no further relevant policy.  The  appellant
    referred to Saribal [2002]  EWHC  1542  as  authority  that  where  the
    respondent did not appeal a tribunal decision, it could  be  set  aside
    only upon fresh evidence of fraud.

 9. In a letter dated 10 October  the  respondent  advised  that  the  only
    policy governing this case is as identified above.   A  further  letter
    from the respondent dated 11 October submits under reference  to  NA  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at paragraphs 39 and 40 that this  case  falls
    within the statutory requirement that Article 8 assessments relating to
    foreign criminals must recognise that deportation is conducive  to  the
    public good and is in the public interest.  It also argues that Saribal
    is irrelevant, there being no suggestion that this  appellant  obtained
    leave by fraud.

10. Ms Darvishzadeh submitted along the following lines.  Saribal was based
    on a different set of facts, but was relevant to show that the previous
    decision in favour of the  appellant  should  continue  to  hold.   The
    respondent's statement of compatibility of the "new rules" and  Article
    8, dated 13 June 2012, showed that those  rules  were  intended  to  be
    consistent with the prior case law  and  did  "not  dispense  with  the
    courts' role in deciding the proportionality of the  rules  themselves,
    or their application in individual cases.  That would not  be  possible
    without primary  legislation  and  is  subject  to  the  UK's  existing
    applicable international obligations" (paragraph 24).   Article  8  had
    not changed.  The UT  had  decided  the  case  under  Article  8.   Its
    decision remained sound and  should  be  followed  in  accordance  with
    Devaseelan.  The appellant's circumstances had  not  been  weakened  in
    respect of family and private life, rather strengthened by the  passage
    of several years and the positive use  of  the  leave  which  had  been
    granted.   The  intention  of  Parliament  could  not  have  been  that
    previously decided Article  8  cases  were  to  be  re-litigated  where
    nothing significant had changed.  The appellant was being penalised for
    a conscientious attempt to comply with the rules.  The decision of  the
    FtT should be reversed on  the  basis  of  legitimate  expectation,  or
    alternatively on the basis of very compelling circumstances.

11. Mr Mullen submitted that Saribal was not in point in any respect.  This
    was not re-litigation.  The appellant was  granted  3  years  leave  in
    accordance with policy.  He could not expect any  more.   It  was  well
    established that all an applicant can lawfully expect is that his  case
    will be decided according to the rules in force at  date  of  decision.
    In deciding his most recent application, the respondent was bound to do
    so under the "new rules."  These have been established to be  compliant
    with Article 8.  The  imperative  public  interest  in  deportation  of
    foreign criminals is now also well recognised.  The judge was aware  of
    the previous favourable decision, and did not  find  it  to  constitute
    "very compelling circumstances."

12. I reserved my decision.

13. The "freestanding" Article 8 decision (i.e. unencumbered  by  the  "new
    rules" and related recent case law) is one which  (as  Ms  Darvishzadeh
    acknowledged in course of submissions) might have been  thought  finely
    balanced, and might have gone either way on the facts as they stood  in
    2010-2011.  However, it is a case, as matters stood before the  FtT  in
    2015, in which the appellant had the benefit of the UT's decision  that
    notwithstanding the terms of the  Immigration  Rules,  the  family  and
    private life interests of  parties  affected  (the  appellant  and  his
    partner) were such that he had a right to remain in the UK.

14. There can realistically be no quarrel  with  the  FtT's  decision  that
    there are no circumstances within paragraphs 399 and 399A  to  outweigh
    the public  interest  in  deportation.   Apart  from  the  previous  UT
    determination, it would not be possible to find in terms of rule 398(c)
    any "very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A."

15. The "new rules" were not intended to undermine Article 8  rights  which
    would otherwise exist.  I consider  that  they  were  not  intended  to
    change a proportionality balance which had already been  struck,  where
    the relevant facts, if they had changed at all, had moved  only  in  an
    appellant's favour.  The appellant was  lawfully  entitled  only  to  a
    decision under the "new rules", but that decision could not be made  as
    if there had been no previous determination in his favour.

16. The judge fell into error which is encapsulated in my view  by  grounds
    (3) and (6).  He  failed  to  consider  that  the  previous  favourable
    decision of the UT in  terms  of  Article  8  was  a  circumstance  not
    contemplated by paragraphs 399 and 399A.  That requires the decision to
    be revisited.

17. A human rights finding followed by 3 years leave, with no new  negative
    factors, and positive factors reinforced, must go a  long  way  in  the
    appellant's favour.

18. If family and private life had changed so as to lessen  the  impact  of
    removal on parties affected, there might have been nothing to  outweigh
    the public interest in deportation; but the appellant's position having
    only strengthened in the meantime, there  was  not  only  a  compelling
    circumstance, but a very compelling one.

19. The decision of the FtT  is  set  aside.   The  appeal,  as  originally
    brought to the FtT, is allowed, within the  terms  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.




            [pic]


            Date: 12 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




