
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12785/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 and 24 October 2019            |On 9 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          OLUSEGUN ADEDEJI ALAKIJA
                             AKA: Leonard Ogilvy
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Fletcher, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is the re-making  of  Mr  Alakija's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 12 June 2018 which refused his claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (Article  8).  The
    respondent's decision of 12 June 2018 was made  in  the  context  of  a
    deportation order issued on the same day.

 2. The appeal must be re-made as in a decision issued on  16  August  2019
    the Upper Tribunal found an error of law and  set  aside  the  decision
    dated 3 December 2018 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio  which  allowed
    Mr Alakija's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 3. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Alakija  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant's history is much disputed. The parties disagree  on  the
    appellant's identity and nationality.

 5. The background to this matter was set out in some detail in  the  Upper
    Tribunal error  of  law  decision  dated  16  August  2019  and  it  is
    convenient to include that summary here:

         "The Respondent's case before the First-tier Tribunal

          4. The respondent  provided  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
             following history, relying on it to support  the  respondent's
             view that the appellant was not stateless but was  a  Nigerian
             national who used various aliases and who had been removed  to
             Nigeria in the past.

          5. The respondent maintained that the appellant first came to the
             UK on a Nigerian passport (in the  name  of  Olusegun  Adedeji
             Alakija, born on 10 August 1965) and was granted  leave  as  a
             visitor until 10 November 1987. The landing card relied on  by
             the respondent  is  at  tab  4  page  7  of  the  respondent's
             consolidated  bundle.  When  referring  to  documents  in  the
             remainder of this decision, all references are to the tab  and
             page numbers from the respondent's bundle.

          6. On 6 November 1987, the appellant applied for further leave to
             remain as a student (see tab 4 page 10)  but  his  application
             was refused as it was not supported with sufficient  evidence;
             see tab 4 page 11.  His leave was extended until 12  September
             1988 to enable him to lodge an appeal or make arrangements  to
             leave the UK. The decision to refuse leave as  a  student  was
             reviewed on 17 November 1988 the refusal was maintained and he
             was required to leave the UK; see tab 4 page 15.

          7. Nothing further was heard from the appellant  until  8  August
             1989 when he was arrested as an overstayer and issued  with  a
             decision to make a deportation order; see tab 4  page  19.  At
             that time he maintained that his name was Aderemi Odunsi, born
             in Manchester  or  London.  He  later  accepted  that  he  was
             Olusegun Adedeji Alakija, born on 10 August 1965. On 13 August
             1989 he was removed to Nigeria.

          8. It is not known when the appellant re-entered the UK but on 26
             June 1990 he was arrested for theft and he gave his name  (for
             the first time)  as  Leonard  Ogilvy.  On  11  July  1990,  he
             received a two month prison sentence for theft by an  employee
             but was released before any enquiries were made with regard to
             his identity and immigration status.

          9. The appellant next came to notice on 30 October 1991  when  he
             was again arrested by police after  trying  to  pay  a  stolen
             cheque for �32,420 into his  bank  account.  He  continued  to
             maintain that his name was Leonard Ogilvy and he alleged  that
             he came to the UK from Portugal in 1981 and had  been  adopted
             by a Scottish family.

         10. On 30 October 1992, at Middlesex Guildhall  Crown  Court,  the
             appellant was convicted for theft and using a false instrument
             for which he received  a  2  year  and  a  12  month  sentence
             respectively, to run concurrently, with a  recommendation  for
             deportation; see tab 4 page 23.

         11. The appellant appealed against his conviction and sentence and
             also  against  the  recommendation  for  deportation.  On   25
             February  1993  the  Court  of  Appeal   (Criminal   Division)
             dismissed  his   appeal   against   the   recommendation   for
             deportation; see tab 4 pages 25-38.   On  23  July  1993,  his
             appeal against his conviction and sentence  was  refused;  see
             tab 4 pages 39-43.

         12. On 30 July 1993 a  deportation  order  was  made  against  the
             appellant in the three names then known to the respondent; see
             tab 4 page 44. An appeal to Adjudicator Fugard against removal
             directions was refused on 25 November 1993; see tab 4 pages 45-
             46. Permission to appeal  that  decision  was  refused  on  23
             December 1993 by Mr  Maddison,  Chairman  of  the  Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal; see tab 4 page 47. Those proceedings referred
             to the appellant's aliases and stated that he appeared to be a
             Nigerian national.

         13. On 16 August 1995  the  appellant  lodged  a  judicial  review
             challenging the respondent's failure to progress his case. His
             claim was dismissed on 18 October 1995, see tab 4 pages 48-53.
             An application for an extension of time to renew  was  refused
             on 17 October 1996; see tab 4 pages 54-61.

         14. The  respondent  then  entered  into  communication  with  the
             Nigerian High Commission, seeking to deport the appellant  but
             the process was not successful. In July  1999  the  respondent
             informed the appellant that it had been decided not to  pursue
             deportation. The deportation  order  was  revoked  and  on  12
             August 1999 the appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
             remain (ILR); see tab 4 pages 63-65. That decision stated that
             he was a Nigerian national with a date of birth of  10  August
             1965.

         15. The appellant lodged a judicial review of the decision  of  12
             August 1999 on the basis  that  he  should  be  recognised  as
             stateless and had a date of birth of  1  March  1968,  not  10
             August 1965. On 9 September 1999, his application for judicial
             review was dismissed.

         16. On 15 September 1999, the appellant wrote  to  the  respondent
             again, requesting that the letter granting him ILR was amended
             to show that he was stateless and  also  requesting  that  his
             date of birth was changed from 10 August 1965 to 1 March 1968;
             see tab 4 pages 67-73. On 17 September  1999,  the  respondent
             refused to amend the document; see tab 4 page 75.

         17. On 10 July 2003, the appellant was convicted of  3  counts  of
             unlawfully providing immigration advice and was  sentenced  to
             150 hours community punishment.

         18. On 20 September 2004,  the  appellant  applied  for  a  travel
             document, maintaining again that this document should  reflect
             his status as a stateless person and his claimed date of birth
             of 1 March 1968; see tab 4 pages 77-79. On  4  November  2004,
             the respondent refused to amend  the  details  in  the  travel
             document see tab 4 pages 81-83.

         19. On 4 May 2005, the appellant was named in an  application  for
             leave   as   the   Portuguese   sponsor    of    Anne    Marie
             Pencille/Rickets, a Jamaican national, whose  application  was
             refused.

         20. On 22 January 2006, the appellant went to St Lucia.  While  in
             St Lucia he was made subject to deportation action by  the  St
             Lucian Government  and  disbarred  from  giving  legal  advice
             there. His  appeal  against  deportation  from  St  Lucia  was
             refused on 8 March 2007; see tab 4 pages 85-105.

         21. On 19 March 2007, the appellant was deported from St Lucia  to
             the UK.  He was arrested at Gatwick South Terminal on  arrival
             in connection with various allegations of deception and arson.
             He was  released  the  following  day  although  his  ILR  was
             suspended and his  passport  was  retained.  No  charges  were
             subsequently brought.  A judicial review of the suspension of
             leave was dismissed; see tab 4 pages 133-141.

         22. On 9  July  2014  the  appellant  applied  for  a  new  travel
             document. This  application  was  granted.  The  document  was
             endorsed with code "XXX". The  document  stated,  incorrectly,
             that this was an indication that the appellant was  stateless.
             The proper meaning of code "XXX" was that the appellant was of
             unspecified nationality.

         23. On 30 March 2015  at  South  London  Magistrates'  Court,  the
             appellant was convicted of 3 counts of wilfully pretending  to
             be a barrister and  fraud.  He  was  sentenced  to  a  6  week
             suspended sentence, 200 hours' unpaid work and to  pay  �2,000
             compensation.

         24. On 3 July 2017 the appellant was convicted at Southwark  Crown
             Court on 3 counts of wilfully pretending to be a barrister and
             3 counts of fraud. On 5 July 2017 he was sentenced to 2 years'
             imprisonment; see tab 4  pages  149-157.  His  appeal  against
             conviction was refused on 24 January 2018.

         25.  Following   that   conviction,   the   respondent   commenced
             deportation proceedings on 1 August 2017.  On  12  June  2018,
             the respondent made a deportation order against the appellant,
             setting out his various aliases; see tab 4 page 199.

         26. The respondent provided reasons for refusing  the  appellant's
             human rights claim in a letter dated 12 June 2018 which  again
             referred to the respondent's view that he had used a number of
             aliases; see tab 4 pages 207-227. That  letter  also  included
             the history set out above.

         27. The appellant appealed against the refusal of his human rights
             claim. On 3 December  2018  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio
             allowed the appellant's appeal  against  deportation,  finding
             him to be stateless and that, as a result,  a  breach  of  his
             Article 8 rights would arise if he were deported  to  Nigeria;
             see tab 2 pages 6-10.

         The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal

         28. The appellant disputes a great deal of the  respondent's  view
             of his history. His version of events is probably best set out
             in a witness statement dated 11 June 2018. This document is at
             pages 30 to 38 of tab 3 of the respondent's bundle.

         29. The appellant maintains that his history is as follows. He was
             born on 1 March 1968. He came to the UK in 1981 at the age  of
             13. He was raised by Scottish parents who  "adopted"  him  and
             looked after him until he was 17 years old  when  he  went  to
             London.

         30. After  coming  to  London,  he  attended  City  and  Islington
             College; see tab 3 pages 57-58 of the respondent's bundle.  He
             studied law at Thames Valley University from 1995 to 1998  and
             obtained his degree; see tab 3 pages 54-56. He studied  for  a
             post-graduate qualification in law (see tab 3 page 53) but was
             unable to gain  admission  to  the  Bar  as  he  had  previous
             convictions. The convictions are not detailed in  the  witness
             statement  but  at  tab  3  page  68  there  is  reference  to
             convictions in 1990 and 1992.

         31. The appellant also set out in his witness  statement  that  he
             worked for the Free Representation Unit between 1995 and 1997.
             He worked in the Legal Department of  the  London  Borough  of
             Ealing  as  a  litigation  assistant  and  then  as  Principal
             Litigation Officer. He was a school governor from 1995 to 2000
             and sat on Educational Appeal Panels for Southwark Council. He
             was a lay visitor to Southwark Police  Station  from  1994  to
             1999. In 2010 he married [CO], a British citizen.

         32. The appellant does not appear to dispute that he spent time in
             St Lucia, his return to the  UK  on  19  March  2007  and  the
             material events thereafter as set out in  the  history  relied
             upon by the respondent. He does maintain, however, that he was
             wrongly convicted in 2015 of pretending to be a barrister (see
             tab 3 pages 71-75)."

 6. Paragraph 10 of the error of law decision requires  correction  as  the
    sentence that was handed down in 1992 was given on 10  March  1992  and
    not 10 October 1992; see tab 4 page 23.

 7. Bringing matters up to date, the respondent applied for  permission  to
    appeal against the decision dated 3 December 2018 of Judge Adio and was
    granted permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Boyes  in  a  decision
    dated 17 January 2019. The appeal  came  before  Lord  Uist  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt on 26 March 2019. The hearing was adjourned because
    the paperwork was not in order and directions issued  for  this  to  be
    remedied.

 8. The appeal was re-listed for 30 July 2019 before Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Pitt and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A Black. On  16  August  2019  the
    Upper Tribunal issued a decision finding error of  law,  setting  aside
    the First-tier Tribunal decision and directing that the decision  would
    be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

 9. The appeal was then listed for hearing on 23 and 24 October 2019.

The Law

10. The appellant seeks to rely on the exception in section 33(2)(a) of the
    UK Borders Act 2007, maintaining that his deportation would breach  his
    Article 8 rights. Where, in the context of  deportation,  the  Tribunal
    must determine whether the respondent's decision  breaches  a  person's
    rights under Article 8, Part 5A (sections 117A-D)  of  the  Nationality
    and Immigration Act  2002  (NIA  2002)  applies.  Section  117C  is  of
    particular  application  to  cases  concerning  foreign  criminals  and
    provides:

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.


11. The provisions of the Immigration Rules in paragraphs 398-399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules have been amended so as to harmonise with Part 5A  of
    the 2002 Act. The relevant provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules,  as
    amended with effect from 20 July 2014, are as follows:

         362. Where Article 8 is raised in the conduct of deportation under
         Part 13 of these rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 20 July 2014 are met,
         regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.


         ...


         398 Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and


         ...


         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;




         ...


         the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) ... applies if
         -


         ...


         (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and


             (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and


             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported, because of
             compelling circumstances over and above those described in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


             (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in
             the UK without the person who is to be deported.


         399A This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -


         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life and


         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK, and


         (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.


12. The Supreme Court provided guidance in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]  UKSC
    53 on the correct approach to  the  "unduly  harsh"  test  set  out  in
    Exception 2 of s.117C and  paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    stating in [23]:

         "... the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly  intended  to
         introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"  under
         Section 117B(6), taking account  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of  foreign  criminals.   Further,  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is the level which may be acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         Section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child facing  the
         deportation of a parent."

13. In paragraph 27 of KO (Nigeria) the Supreme  Court  also  approved  the
    guidance provided by the former President of the Upper Tribunal  in  MK
    (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) on the meaning  of  "unduly
    harsh":

           "...  unduly  harsh   does   not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
         inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses  a
         considerably more elevated threshold.   "Harsh"  in  this  context,
         denotes something severe,  or  bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of
         pleasant  or  comfortable.   Furthermore,  the  additional   adverb
         "unduly" raises an already elevated standard still higher."

14. The Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 held at
    [25]-[27] that there was an obvious drafting error in section  117C(3).
    The consequence of that decision is that section 117C(3) is to be  read
    in conjunction with section 117(6), as follows:  "the  public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 and  2  applies  or  unless
    there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2". In order to assess the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim, I must therefore consider the Exceptions 1 and  2  and,  if  the
    appellant does not come within them, go on to assess whether there  are
    very compelling circumstances that  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

15. The Court of Appeal also provided guidance  in  NA  (Pakistan)  on  the
    correct approach to  the  "very  compelling  circumstances"  assessment
    where the appellant is a "medium offender", as is the case here:

         "29. In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to  those  provisions.  The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". As we have indicated  above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         ...

         32.      Similarly, in the case of a medium  offender,  if  all  he
             could advance in support of his Article 8 claim  was  a  "near
             miss" case in which he fell short of bringing  himself  within
             either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be possible to
             say that  he  had  shown  that  there  were  "very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". He would need to have a far stronger case than that by
             reference to the interests protected by  Article  8  to  bring
             himself within  that  fall  back  protection.  But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it the
             Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters
             relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether  they
             are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public
             interest in deportation.

         33.      Although there  is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

         ...

         36.      In relation to a medium offender,  first  see  whether  he
             falls within Exception 1 or Exception 2. If he does, then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". If there are, then the Article 8  claim  succeeds.  If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim fails. As was the case
             under the 2012 rules (as explained in MF (Nigeria)), there  is
             no room for a general Article 8 evaluation  outside  the  2014
             rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act."

16. The appellant also maintains that he is stateless.  Article  1  of  the
    1954 Convention relating to the status of Stateless Persons provides:

         Article 1


         Definition of the term "stateless person"


         1. For the purpose of this Convention, the term "stateless  person"
         means a person who is not considered as a  national  by  any  State
         under the operation of its law.

17.  A "stateless person" is defined in paragraph 401 of the Immigration
    Rules:

         401. For the purposes of this Part a stateless person is  a  person
         who:


         a. satisfies the requirements of Article 1(1) of  the  1954  United
         Nations Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons,  as
         a person who is not considered as a national by any State under the
         operation of its law;


         b. is in the United Kingdom; and


         c. is not excluded from recognition as  a  Stateless  person  under
         paragraph 402.

18.  Paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules provides:

         403. The requirements for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
         a stateless person are that the applicant:


         a. has made a valid application  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
         limited leave to remain as a stateless person;


         b. is recognised as a stateless person by the Secretary of State in
         accordance with paragraph 401;


         c. has taken reasonable steps  to  facilitate  admission  to  their
         country of former habitual residence or any other country  but  has
         been unable to secure the right of admission; and


         d. has obtained and submitted all reasonably available evidence  to
         enable the  Secretary  of  State  to  determine  whether  they  are
         stateless or whether they are admissible to another  country  under
         the meaning of paragraph 403(c);


         e.  has  sought  and  failed  to  obtain  or   re-establish   their
         nationality  with  the  appropriate  authorities  of  the  relevant
         country; and


         f. if, in the case of a child born in the UK, has provided evidence
         that they have attempted to register their birth with the  relevant
         authorities but have been refused.

19. In AS (Guinea) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 2234, the Court of Appeal
    confirmed that persons alleging that they were stateless had to prove
    their case on the balance of probabilities.  The Court of Appeal also
    stated at paragraph 57 of AS (Guinea):

          "... A person claiming to be stateless must  take  all  reasonably
         practicable steps to gather together and submit all  documents  and
         other materials which evidence his or her identity and residence in
         the state or states in issue, and which otherwise bear upon his  or
         her nationality. The applicant ought also to apply for  nationality
         of the state or states  with  which  he  or  she  has  the  closest
         connection ..."


The Hearing

20. I heard evidence from the appellant and Ms [CO]. As the  appellant  was
    representing himself, Ms [O] left the hearing room while the  appellant
    gave evidence on their relationship.  The  appellant  remained  in  the
    hearing room while Ms [O] gave her  evidence  so  that  he  could  make
    submissions on it if he wished. The appellant  and  Ms  [O]  were  both
    cross-examined by Mr Fletcher. Mr Fletcher and the appellant made  oral
    submissions. I reserved  my  decision.  At  the  hearing,  the  parties
    referred to the documents as set out in the respondent's bundle  and  I
    also refer to the relevant tab  numbers  and  page  numbers  from  that
    bundle in this decision.

My Findings on Identity and Nationality

21. The question of the appellant's identity and his claim to be  stateless
    are closely interlinked and are fundamental to his Article 8  claim.  I
    therefore turn to these issues first.

22. The appellant continues to maintain that he is Leonard Ogilvy (Ogilvy),
    born on 1 March 1968. He maintains that he  has  never  had  any  other
    identity. The appellant also maintains that he is  stateless,  with  no
    previous connections to Nigeria.

23. The respondent considers the appellant to be Olusegun  Adedeji  Alakija
    (Alakija), a Nigerian national, born on 10 August 1965. The  respondent
    maintains that in addition to using the name Ogilvy, the appellant  has
    also used other aliases, including Alakija Olusegun Adedeji and Aderemi
    Odunsi.

24. Having considered all of  the  materials  before  me,  it  is  my  firm
    conclusion that the evidence shows to a high standard  of  proof,  well
    beyond the balance of probabilities, that  the  appellant  is  Olusegun
    Adedeji Alakija, a Nigerian national born on 10  August  1965  who  has
    also used the other aliases recorded by the respondent.

25. There are numerous reasons for this conclusion which I set out now.  In
    order to give my reasons it is necessary to  go  into  the  appellant's
    history, including the  extensive  litigation  in  which  he  has  been
    involved, in some detail. I have attempted, as far as possible, to deal
    with the evidence in chronological order.

    Criminal Conviction in 1992

26. The appellant does not dispute that  on  5  March  1992,  at  Middlesex
    Guildhall Crown Court, he was convicted for theft  and  using  a  false
    instrument for which he received a 2 year sentence; see tab 4 page  23.
    He was convicted in the name of Ogilvy. The details of the offence were
    that he took a cheque from his  employer,  endorsed  it  in  favour  of
    Alakija for the amount of �32,420 and paid it into a  bank  account  in
    the name of Alakija.

27. The appellant maintained in the trial that he was Ogilvy, not  Alakija.
    He argued that the only reason he ever came to be associated  with  the
    name Alakija was because when he was arrested  documents  belonging  to
    another man of that name were found in the house where he  was  living.
    He stated the same thing  in  his  evidence  before  me.  The  criminal
    proceedings in 1992 show that this account  was  rejected,  however,  a
    finding that the appellant was Alakija and that he was using the  alias
    of Ogilvy being a key part of the case against the appellant which  led
    to his conviction.

28. The identification evidence from the criminal trial  that  led  to  the
    appellant being found to be Alakija is at tab 5 page 3-4. This  is  the
    witness statement dated 11 February 1992 of Mr Mellor,  an  Immigration
    Officer.  He states that on 14 November 1991 he was called to court  to
    interview the appellant as  he  was  claiming  to  be  Ogilvy  but  was
    suspected by police of being Alakija, the person who  had  been  issued
    with a deportation order in August 1989 and returned to Nigeria shortly
    thereafter.

29. Mr Mellor's statement records that the appellant told him  in  November
    1991 that he was not Alakija but maintained  that  he  was  Ogilvy.  He
    claimed to be Portuguese and maintained that he had shown a  Portuguese
    identity document to an Immigration Officer in 1990  when  detained  in
    relation to an earlier conviction for theft. Mr Mellor could not find a
    record of a  meeting  in  which  a  Portuguese  identity  document  was
    provided. The appellant also told Mr Mellor in November  1991  that  he
    had been born in Porto and orphaned at the age of 7, coming to  the  UK
    at the age of 13. He had  attended  Porto  High  School.  He  was  then
    adopted by a British family and lived in Scotland with them but did not
    go to school. He spoke no Portuguese despite living there until the age
    of 13; see tab 5 page 4.

30. The witness statement goes on  to  indicate  that  Mr  Mellor  retained
    doubts about the appellant's claim to be Ogilvy. He therefore  obtained
    from Home Office records a photograph of Alakija, the Nigerian national
    with a date of birth of 10 August 1965  who  had  been  served  with  a
    notice of intention to deport and  returned  to  Nigeria  in  1989.  Mr
    Mellor exhibited the photograph of Alakija to his witness statement and
    stated that the person in the photograph was identical  to  the  person
    claiming to be Ogilvy whom he had interviewed in 1991; see tab  5  page
    4.

31. As well as providing a witness statement, Mr Mellor gave oral  evidence
    in the criminal trial. The transcript of his evidence is at tab 5  page
    5-13. The transcript shows that his evidence was  consistent  with  the
    contents of the witness  statement.  He  provided  the  court  with  an
    enlarged copy of the photograph taken of Alakija in 1989 and  this  was
    shown to the jury; see C to G on tab 5 page  9.  Mr  Mellor's  evidence
    was, therefore, that the photograph showed that Alakija and Ogilvy were
    the same person.

32. The witness statement of Mr Mellor and transcript of his oral  evidence
    from the trial in 1992 provides strong  evidence  indicating  that  the
    appellant is Alakija, a Nigerian national who has been calling  himself
    Ogilvy for many years. The fact that the  appellant  was  convicted  in
    1992 shows that Mr Mellor's evidence was  accepted  and  it  was  found
    beyond reasonable doubt that Alakija and Ogilvy were  the  same  person
    and that the appellant, using both identities, had  forged  the  cheque
    which was paid into the bank account in the name of Alakija.

    Appeal Against Conviction to the Court of Appeal in 1993

33. Further support for the conclusion that the appellant is Alakija  comes
    from his appeal to the Court of Appeal against his 1992 conviction.  On
    23 July 1993, his appeal was refused by the Court of Appeal; see tab  4
    pages 39-43. In the decision upholding the  conviction,  the  Court  of
    Appeal said this, starting at D on tab 5 page 40:

         "The applicant renews his application for leave to  appeal  against
         conviction. The basic facts can be shortly stated. The  cheque  was
         paid into an account at Barclays Bank in the name of Alakija.

         It was the case for the Crown that this applicant and Alakija  were
         one and the same person.  The  person  presenting  the  cheque  was
         photographed on  a  security  camera  and  was,  according  to  the
         evidence, identified as this applicant.

         Evidence was given by an official from  the  Home  Office  that  in
         August 1989 he had arrested a man by the name of Alakija, who  gave
         an address of [~] Street. This man Alakija was photographed  during
         the investigation by the Home Office and admitted to be a  Nigerian
         overstayer.  He  was  deported  on  18th  August   1989.   He   was
         photographed and that photograph was of this applicant."

     and at C on tab 5 page 41:

         "With regard to the second count on the indictment, the main thrust
         of his submissions is that the directions  on  identification  were
         inadequate and the evidence of identification insubstantial.

         Each member of the Court has carefully considered  the  submissions
         of the appellant, including a 10 page, undated  memorial  outlining
         alleged prejudice on the part of the police; and a document  headed
         "further grounds of appeal" dated 25th June 1992 consisting of some
         20 pages, which assert in particular  that  the  applicant  is  not
         Olusuja (sic) Alakija.

         In our judgment, there are no reasonably arguable grounds of appeal
         against conviction. In our judgement, the summing up of the learned
         Assistant Recorder cannot be faulted."

34. The Court of Appeal specifically rejected the appellant's challenge  to
    the  identification  evidence  and  the  judicial  direction  given  on
    identification which led to him being found to be Alakija. The comments
    of the Court of Appeal  also  show  that  there  was  further  evidence
    against the appellant showing him to be Ogilvy and Alakija by way of  a
    security camera showing him paying in the forged  cheque  to  the  bank
    account of Alakija. This is further strong evidence that the  appellant
    is Alakija and that he has been using an alias of Ogilvy. The  evidence
    from the criminal trial, the conviction and upholding of the conviction
    by the Court of Appeal show that the appellant's  claim  that  he  only
    came to be confused with Alakija because another man's  documents  were
    found in his home is not credible.

    Appeals to the Immigration Tribunal and Immigration Appeal Tribunal  in
    1993

35. On 30 July 1993 a deportation order  was  made  against  the  appellant
    referring to him  as  Olusegun  Adedeji  Alakija,  Leonard  Ogilvy  and
    Aderemi Odunsi; see tab 4 page 44.

36. The appellant appealed that decision to the Immigration Tribunal  (IT).
    Adjudicator Fugard refused his appeal on 25 November 1993;  see  tab  4
    pages 45-46. In his decision, Adjudicator  Fugard  set  out  the  three
    names used by the appellant. He stated that the appellant  "appears  to
    be a citizen of Nigeria" with a date of birth of either 1 March 1968 or
    10 August 1965. Adjudicator Fugard found that  the  appellant  had  not
    shown that he could not be removed to Nigeria.

37. I found that this decision was a further  strong  indication  that  the
    appellant is Alakija and that he  is  Nigerian.  Reading  the  decision
    fairly, nothing turns on the use  of  the  wording  "appears  to  be  a
    citizen of Nigeria", as highlighted by the appellant, where there was a
    clear finding that the appellant could be  returned  to  Nigeria.   The
    fact that the Adjudicator was not certain as to the date of birth,  the
    appellant as Ogilvy asserting a date of birth of 1 March 1968,  is  not
    sufficient to prevent this decision supporting the conclusion that  the
    appellant is Alakija, born on 1 August 1965.

38. Further, the decision of Adjudicator Fugard was upheld on  23  December
    1993 by Mr Maddison, Chairman of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT);
    see tab 4 page 47. Those proceedings again referred to the three  names
    used by the appellant and stated that he  appeared  to  be  a  Nigerian
    national. The decision  shows  that  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    upheld the decision to deport to Nigeria in the face of the appellant's
    claims to be Portuguese. This is further evidence that the appellant is
    Alakija even though he persisted in presenting  himself  as  Ogilvy  in
    those proceedings.




    Appeals to the Social Security  Tribunal  and  Social  Security  Appeal
    Tribunal in 1994

39. The appellant had a  Social  Security  Appeal  Tribunal  (SSAT)  appeal
    hearing on 4 May 1994; see tab  5  page  28-31.  In  that  appeal,  the
    appellant maintained that he was Ogilvy and that he came to the  UK  in
    1981 with his foster parents from Portugal. He  went  to  Scotland  and
    then to London. He relied on documents from a number  of  sources,  for
    example, a GP,  McDonald's,  the  Local  Authority  and  the  Probation
    Service referring to him as Ogilvy. He maintained that  he  had  always
    been known as Leonard Ogilvy and that when he was arrested in 1992  the
    police found documents concerning a Mr Alakija in the  house  and  that
    this led to the police asserting that he was Alakija  in  the  criminal
    trial. I have already indicated in paragraphs 29 and 36 above why  this
    assertion lacks credibility in light  of  the  criminal  conviction  in
    1992. The SSAT, in May 1994, however,  found  that  the  appellant  was
    Ogilvy, that he had come to the UK in 1981 and was entitled  to  Income
    Support.

40. The appellant has continued to rely on the findings  of  the  May  1994
    SSAT that he is  Ogilvy  ever  since.  That  reliance  is  misconceived
    because the findings made by the in that decision  were  set  aside  by
    another SSAT panel and the appellant found to be Alakija  in  decisions
    dated 20 December 1994; see tab 5 page 43-45A and tab 5, page 42A.

41. The decision at tab 5 page 42A sets aside the decision of 4  May  1994.
    The decision at  tab  5  page  43-45A  said  this  on  the  appellant's
    identity:

         "1.  The claimant was listed on the case papers as "L  Ogilvy"  and
             his  presentation,  which  was   unstructured,   appeared   to
             concentrate upon an attempt to persuade the Tribunal  that  he
             was "L Ogilvy". The record of earlier  hearings  on  the  same
             subject matter also contain  a  firm  contention  that  he  is
             correctly described.

         2.   He is known as "O A Alakija" but is hardly likely to admit  to
             that, as Alakija is an illegal entrant.

         3.   He is not without intelligence or education, but has  utilised
             the Social Security Appeal  Tribunal  procedure  in  order  to
             reassure others that he is  not  "Alakija".  There  have  been
             earlier Hearings, one set aside  and  two  adjourned,  all  of
             which concentrate at some length on  the  issue  of  identity.
             With respect to the memory of the famous naturalist, Grey  Owl
             if you continue calling yourself "GREY OWL"  for  long  enough
             and parade your Canadian Indian ancestry for long enough,  you
             will be addressed as "Grey Owl" by the world at large and  not
             in your real persona as a native of Hastings, Sussex."

42. The December 1994 SSAT decision also records in paragraph 6 that:

         "6.  He provided the Tribunal with an account of his  childhood  in
             Brazil, Portugal, Scotland and  England.  Our  conclusion  was
             that, at best, this was inherently improbable, at worst it was
             so indefinite that it could not be independently  checked.  We
             found the suggestion that his two foster siblings  went  to  a
             place of schooling whilst he studied  alone  or  went  fishing
             quite unusual and, in view of his admitted intelligence, found
             it very difficult to  believe  he  would  not  have  used  the
             Portugal (EU) connection had there been such."

43. The SSAT allowed the Income Support appeal but also made the  following
    findings:

         "10.     ... Our decision is to allow the appeal but  not  for  the
             reasons that Mr Alakija would prefer. Or  possibly  we  should
             describe him as Mr Alakija/Ogilvy. He  seems  to  be  able  to
             present identity with some  ease  but  no  substance,  and  we
             sympathise the patience of  the  Adjudication  Authorities  in
             their attempt to deal reasonably with him.

         11.  ...  The  Adjudication  Officer  had  accepted  the  case  for
             decision from  the  Secretary  of  State  under  Commissioners
             Decision R(SB) 29/83, and had asked for evidence of  identity.
             It is our conclusion that this claimant had no  such  evidence
             (Commissioners Decision RI 2/51) either because he  had  never
             possessed such evidence, or in the alternative, because  there
             was such evidence which he felt was self-incriminating.

         12.  He is also a person from abroad and was in Pentonville Prison,
             being released on 24/12/1993. He was also  a  person  who  was
             capable of identification because  notwithstanding  his  stout
             denial, we believe that on the balance of probabilities he was
             served with a Deportation Order ..."

44. The SSAT in December 1994, like the criminal court in 1992,  the  Court
    of Appeal in upholding the criminal conviction,  the  IT  and  the  IAT
    found the appellant to be Alakija, a Nigerian national who entered  the
    UK illegally. This adds further  weight  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant is Alakija.

45. The December 1994 SSAT decision also shows that some 25 years ago,  the
    SSAT identified, entirely accurately, in my view, using the "Grey  Owl"
    example, the appellant's modus operandi after he  returned  to  the  UK
    illegally in 1990 of asserting so persistently and vociferously that he
    is Ogilvy that this has, at times, been accepted, for  example  in  the
    SSAT decision.

46. Further, the concern expressed in paragraph 11  of  the  December  1994
    SSAT  decision  that  the  appellant  had  withheld  self-incriminating
    evidence is the first of a number of judicial comments on  this  aspect
    of the appellant's conduct over many years that further undermines  his
    credibility. A significant example arises  shortly  after  the  appeals
    before the SSAT. The materials before me  include  a  letter  from  the
    Nigerian High Commission (NHC) dated 12 September 1997; see tab 5  page
    81-83. This letter shows on page 82 that that the  appellant  continued
    his "vehement contention" that he was Ogilvy and provided the NHC  with
    the SSAT decision from 4 May 1994 not the decisions  from  20  December
    1994. He can only but have known that the May 1994  SSAT  decision  had
    been overturned by  the  December  1994  decision  finding  him  to  be
    Alakija, a Nigerian national and a highly unreliable  witness.  In  the
    context of all of the evidence before me, I am satisfied that this  was
    a deliberate withholding of  material  evidence  from  the  NHC  in  an
    attempt by the appellant  to  mislead  and  frustrate  the  immigration
    system, further examples of which are noted below.

47. Further, the appellant was highly successful in  gaining  an  advantage
    from withholding the December 1994 Social Security decision and relying
    on the May 1994 decision. When the NHC continued to  refuse  to  accept
    the appellant  as  a  Nigerian  citizen,  the  respondent,  eventually,
    decided that  the  appellant  could  not  be  deported,  cancelled  the
    deportation order and granted ILR on 12 August 1999.

48. The appellant has also repeatedly sought to rely on the NHC refusing to
    accept that he was Nigerian in his dealings  with  the  respondent  and
    litigation ever since, discussed in more  detail  below.  However,  the
    position of the NHC up until 1997 that the appellant was  not  accepted
    as Nigerian cannot carry weight now where the  evidence  in  this  case
    shows that the decision was  made  on  the  basis  of  the  wrong  SSAT
    decision and, it would appear, in ignorance of  the  material  evidence
    from the 1992 criminal proceedings, the decision of the Court of Appeal
    maintaining the 1992 conviction and the findings of the  IT   the  IAT,
    all showing the appellant to be Alakija, a Nigerian national.

    R (Ogilvy) v SSHD CO/2625/95

49. The appellant, meanwhile, continued to  litigate  concerning  the  1992
    criminal conviction. In 1995 he challenged the delay of the  respondent
    in making a decision to refer  his  application  for  leave  to  appeal
    against conviction to  the  Court  of  Appeal  Criminal  Division.  The
    judgment dated 18 October 1995 of Mr Justice Ognall is at tab  4  pages
    48 to 53. This shows that by the time of the hearing on 18 October 1995
    the respondent had made the decision sought by the appellant  but  that
    he went on to use the hearing "to ventilate a quite different  matter".
    Having heard the appellant's amended grounds, Mr Justice Ognall stated:

         "I am entirely satisfied that the long and tortuous history of this
         matter demonstrates in  essence  no  more  than  a  very  sustained
         attempt by Mr Ogilvy to go behind a conviction recorded against him
         some considerable time ago and founded upon  clear  and  compelling
         evidence ..."

    and

         "... I am bound to  observe  here  that  what  has  confronted  the
         Secretary of State, and ultimately, this Court, is neither more nor
         less than a legal filibuster."

50. Mr Justice Ognall  refused  permission.  The  appellant  continued  his
    challenge, Lord Justice Simon Brown and Mr Justice Gage commenting in a
    decision made on 17 October 1996 on  "these  extensive  and  protracted
    proceedings" and agreeing with  Mr  Justice  Ognall's  comment  on  the
    appellant trying to  go  behind  an  entirely  valid  conviction.  They
    refused the application.

51. I include details of this particular litigation as, like  the  SSAT  in
    1994, it appears to me that Mr Justice Ognall, Lord Justice Simon Brown
    and Mr Justice Gage had the appellant's measure, finding the conviction
    which found him to be Alakija to be sound and recognising  his  use  of
    unmeritorious legal proceedings to try to try to  "filibuster"  a  more
    favourable outcome. The evidence considered below show that he has used
    a similar approach in other litigation when trying to show that  he  is
    Ogilvy and not Alakija.

    R (Marfo) v SSHD in 1996

52. As well as representing himself,  the  appellant  has  for  many  years
    represented others in legal proceedings. He appeared before Mr  Justice
    Collins in a judicial review on behalf of a Mr Marfo at a hearing on 25
    June 1996; see tab 5, page 55-62.

53. In R (Marfo), Mr Justice Collins sets out at D of tab 5 page 56 and  at
    B on page 59 that the applicant had been found by Lord  Justice  Brooke
    to have held back documents that he ought  to  have  produced  and  had
    misled the court. This case therefore provides a further example of the
    appellant withholding relevant documentation, already identified  above
    by the SSAT and  in  his  dealings  with  the  NHC  and  which  further
    undermines his credibility.

54. As a result of his conduct in R (Marfo), as set out on tab 5 page 58 at
    G and page 59 at A, the appellant was barred from issuing  applications
    other than on his own behalf.  On tab  5  page  59  at  B,  Mr  Justice
    Collins also notes the lack of skill shown by the appellant.  Shown  on
    page 62 at F, Mr Justice Collins hoped that the appellant would not  be
    seen in court again unless qualified to appear.

    Judicial Review CO/1980/98 - Contempt of Court Finding in 1998

55. In CO/1980/98, the respondent brought  contempt  of  court  proceedings
    against the appellant; see tab 5 page 84-102. This case shows that  the
    criticisms of the appellant's improper and incompetent conduct  by  the
    various judicial bodies set out above had no impact on him.

56. The decision of Mr Justice Jowitt at  tab  5  page  84  refers  to  the
    appellant in three of his identities, Ogilvy, Alakija  and  Adusi.  The
    decision sets out that the appellant had  represented  a  Mr  Ibehi,  a
    detainee facing removal. In the contempt proceedings the appellant  was
    accused of misleading the out of hours judge, Mr Justice Keene,  on  12
    May 1998 when stating that  removal  directions  had  been  set  for  a
    particular time when they had not.

57. Mr Justice Jowitt's conclusion, at tab 5, page 91 at F, is as follows:

         "Second, if (as I am satisfied so as to be sure) Mr Ogilvy has lied
         about what took  place  in  those  two  telephone  calls,  that  is
         something I have to look at in  assessing  the  other  evidence  he
         gave. I say I am satisfied so as to be sure that Mr Ogilvy has lied
         to me about the content of those two telephone calls. I reject  his
         evidence; I am sure it is untrue."

58. Mr Justice Jowitt goes on to find on tab  5  page  95  at  A  that  the
    appellant:

         "... decided to lie to Keene J  and  tell  him  that  he  had  this
         information about the deportation at 7:15am the next  morning  from
         Mr Ibehi himself. He knew that was a  lie.  He  sought  to  protect
         himself by saying that that was the only information he had. But it
         was not information that he had; it was simply a lie."

59. Tab 5 page 100 at E shows that the appellant  was  found  guilty  of  a
    "deliberate" contempt of court as a result of lying to Mr Justice Keene
    and that Mr Justice Jowitt considered a prison sentence. At  B  on  the
    same page, the decision shows  that  the  appellant  avoided  a  prison
    sentence by making an undertaking:

         "... not to make any application, written or oral, on behalf of any
         other person to the Crown Office of the Queen's Bench Division,  or
         the Judge in chamber of the Queen's Bench  Division,  or  the  duty
         judge, nor to contact any office of the Immigration and Nationality
         Department or the Treasury Solicitors Department on behalf  of  any
         other person, whether in writing or by telephone or in person".

60. This decision shows that the appellant has been found in  the  clearest
    of terms to be someone capable of lying quite deliberately to a  senior
    judge, and, even when caught  out,  attempting  to  deny  it.  That  is
    consistent with the findings  on  his  conduct  from  the  other  cases
    already considered above. It behoves a very high level of caution  when
    considering the appellant's evidence as to his identity  (and  anything
    else). This contempt of court case and those considered above and below
    in which he has repeatedly been found not credible and  to  have  acted
    dishonestly, for example in withholding material evidence he knew could
    damage his interests, make it very difficult indeed to accept  anything
    the appellant  says.  His  claim  to  be  Ogilvy  and  not  Alakija  is
    significantly undermined as a result.

    Grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain in 1999

61. As already mentioned above, unable to persuade the Nigerian authorities
    to accept the appellant as  a  Nigerian  national,  in  July  1999  the
    respondent informed  him  that  it  had  been  decided  not  to  pursue
    deportation. The deportation order was revoked and on  12  August  1999
    the appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain (ILR); see  tab  4
    page 63-65.

62. The grant of ILR was made in the name of Ogilvy. It is not my view that
    this was an indication that the respondent positively accepted that the
    appellant was Ogilvy and not Alakija. The ILR decision referred to  the
    appellant by the name of Ogilvy but  stated  that  he  was  a  Nigerian
    national with a date of birth of 10 August 1965; see tab 4 pages 63-65.
    Those are the personal details of Alakija.  In  the  vast  majority  of
    documents before me, the respondent maintains  that  the  appellant  is
    Alakija, a Nigerian national born on 10 August 1965; see, for  example,
    the letter dated 22 August 1995 from Nicholas Baker MP to Simon  Hughes
    MP at tab 5 page 47-54 which sets out the respondent's full view of the
    appellant's history at that time.  I  am  at  a  loss  as  to  why  the
    respondent issued ILR (and, later, travel documents)  in  the  name  of
    Ogilvy where that it so. It remains the case, when  considered  against
    all the evidence before me, that the grant of ILR in the name of Ogilvy
    is not a matter capable of showing that the appellant is Ogilvy and not
    Alakija or that the respondent has ever made a substantive decision  to
    that effect.





    CO/2695/99 - The "Eady Order"

63. The appellant was not satisfied with his grant of ILR where it referred
    to him as a Nigerian national with a date of birth of 10 October  1965.
    He used judicial review proceedings (CO/2695/99) to argue that the  ILR
    decision of 12 August 1999 was unlawful as he was stateless and  had  a
    date of birth of 1 March 1968. The grounds in CO/2695/99 are at  tab  5
    page 103-105.

64. As part of those proceedings, the appellant made an  out  of  hours  ex
    parte application to Mr Justice Eady on 2 September 1999.  He  obtained
    an interim injunction; see tab 5, page 105A to 105B.  Paragraph  ii  of
    the order states:

         'The Secretary of State for the Home Department whether by himself,
         agent or servants must preserve the relevant minutes registered  on
         the applicant's Home Office file which reads thus: "We  are  unable
         to prove that Mr O is neither Nigerian or  Portuguese  and  we  are
         unlikely to do so in the future.  It  is  accepted  that  Mr  O  is
         stateless and therefore unremovable".'

65. The final sentence of the order (the Eady order) on  page  105B  states
    that it was to remain in force only until a hearing which  had  already
    been listed for 9 September 1999. The order was made initially to be in
    force only for a week, therefore.

66. On 9 September 1999, the matter came before Mr Justice Collins; see tab
    5 page 106. In an  order  dated  15  September  1999,  he  directed  as
    follows:

         "1)  This matter  be  adjourned  either  to  be  withdrawn  by  the
             Applicant or dismissed by the Crown Office on  a  date  on  or
             before the 31st day of October 1999.

         2)   Directed that the Applicant write to the Respondent  regarding
             whether the Respondent is prepared to treat the Applicant as a
             stateless person and clarify his date of birth.

         3)   Directed the Respondent to reply within 14 days

         4)   Directed the Applicant to issue fresh proceedings  limited  to
             issue that matters depending on reply from the Respondent

         5)   The order made by the Honourable Mr Justice Eady dated the 2nd
             day of September 1999 be extended to the 31st day  of  October
             1999"

67. This shows that the order of Mr Justice Collins  acted  to  extend  the
    Eady order to 31 October 1999. In line with the  order  of  Mr  Justice
    Collins, the appellant wrote to the respondent on 9 September 1999  and
    15 September 1999 about his  claim  to  be  stateless  and  to  have  a
    different date of birth to that on his grant of ILR; see tab 5 page 107-
    108 and tab 5 page 109-112.

68. The respondent replied on 17 September 1999; see tab  4  page  75.  The
    respondent stated in clear terms that the appellant's true identity was
    Alakija and referred to his having been  removed  to  Nigeria  in  that
    identity. Reliance was placed on the findings from the criminal case in
    1992. The respondent stated that the appellant  was  not  credible  and
    that, without proper evidence, his claimed date of  birth  of  1  March
    1968 was not accepted. The respondent declined to amend the  letter  of
    12 August 1999 granting ILR. I wonder again, given the clear  statement
    that the respondent considered that the appellant was Alakija, why  the
    grant of ILR and, in time, travel documents were issued to him  in  the
    name of Ogilvy. I remain unable to find an answer but  do  not  accept,
    for the reasons already given, that  this  meant  that  the  respondent
    positively accepted that the appellant was Ogilvy or that  it  supports
    his claim to be Ogilvy.

69. The appellant wrote again to the respondent on 17 September  1999;  see
    tab 5 page 113-115. He requested that  a  travel  document  was  issued
    urgently in order for him to travel to St Lucia to the funeral  of  his
    fianc�es mother. The final paragraph of the letter of 17 September 1999
    threatened court action if the respondent did not grant his request.

70. The appellant did return to  court  but  only  as  anticipated  in  the
    decision of Mr Justice Collins. On 23 September 1999 Mr  Justice  Moses
    refused permission; see the first entry on tab 7 page 87.  He indicated
    that the burden was on the appellant to show that he was stateless  and
    had a different date of birth and that the dispute was not suitable for
    court resolution.

71. The outcome of the litigation in CO/2695/99 was,  therefore,  that  the
    appellant had ILR in the name of Ogilvy but was still considered by the
    respondent to be Alakija, a Nigerian, with a date of birth of 10 August
    1965. It was not accepted by the court or the respondent  that  he  was
    stateless. The Eady order  had  no  legal  force  following  the  final
    determination of the  judicial  review  by  Mr  Justice  Moses  in  his
    decision of 23 September 2019.

72. Notwithstanding the outcome of that litigation, some 20 years later the
    Eady order remains a core part of the appellant's claim  to  be  Ogilvy
    and to be stateless. The appellant has sought to rely on  it  in  other
    cases he has brought in the intervening years, discussed below. In  all
    of the cases before me in which  he  relied  on  the  Eady  order,  the
    appellant asserted that the order amounts to incontrovertible  evidence
    that either the Home Office found him to be  stateless  or  Mr  Justice
    Eady found him to be stateless. It is entirely obvious from the wording
    of the order itself that it  does  not  make  any  kind  of  definitive
    statement on the appellant being stateless and merely requires  a  Home
    Office minute to be preserved.

73. Further, the materials before me show that when repeatedly  relying  on
    the Eady order the appellant has never provided the order of Mr Justice
    Moses showing that the Eady order was superseded and that the existence
    of the Home Office minute of no avail to him in his attempt to persuade
    the High Court to declare that the respondent should recognise  him  as
    stateless. It is my conclusion, having considered in more detail  below
    the appellant's extensive reliance on the Eady order, that  he  did  so
    knowing  that  he  was  misrepresenting  what  the   order   said   and
    deliberately attempting to conceal the fact that it had  only  been  in
    force for a short period of time and no longer had any legal  force  by
    failing to provide the order of Mr Justice Moses.

    Further Convictions and St Lucia - 2000 to 2007

74. Although he was unable to persuade the respondent to recognise  him  as
    stateless, the appellant was left in the position of having ILR  and  a
    travel document. He proceeded to use the travel document to  travel  to
    St Lucia.  The  appellant  claims  that  he  married  [JC],  a  British
    national, in St Lucia on 16 December  2000;  see  tab  4,  page  77  in
    paragraph 1.4.

75. The appellant did not appear to pay any heed to the views of Mr Justice
    Collins  in  R  (Marfo)  or  the  finding  of  contempt  of  court  and
    undertaking made to Mr Justice Jowitt in  CO/1980/98  as,  on  10  July
    2003, he was convicted of 3 counts of unlawfully providing  immigration
    advice and was sentenced to 150 hours community punishment.

76. On 20 September  2004,  the  appellant  applied  to  renew  his  travel
    document, maintaining again  that  this  document  should  reflect  his
    status as a stateless person and his claimed date of birth of  1  March
    1968; see tab  4  pages  77-79.  On  this  occasion  he  pressured  the
    respondent for a  quick  decision  as  his  father-in-law  was  getting
    married; see tab 5, page 79. He again threatened legal  action  if  the
    travel document was not issued as he requested. He  continued  to  make
    baseless assertions,  for  example  stating  that  the  respondent  had
    recorded him as having a date of birth of 1 March 1968 and that he  was
    born in Porto. As above, the respondent has  never  accepted  that  the
    appellant has this date of birth or accepted any of his various  claims
    to be connected to Portugal.

77. On 4 November 2004,  the  respondent  refused  to  amend  the  material
    details in the travel document,  amending  the  new  document  only  to
    reflect the respondent's view of the  appellant's  date  of  birth  and
    remove an additional entry of his claimed date  of  birth;  see  tab  4
    pages 81-83. The respondent reminded the appellant that it was for  him
    to adduce new materials supporting his claim to be  stateless  and  the
    date of birth of 1 March 1968.

78. On 4 May 2005, the appellant was named in an application for  leave  as
    the Portuguese sponsor  of  Anne  Marie  Pencille/Rickets,  a  Jamaican
    national, whose application  was  refused.  Nothing  in  the  materials
    before me addresses how he came to be the sponsor where he also claimed
    to be married to Ms [C]. His claim  to  be  a  Portuguese  national  is
    obviously wholly at odds with the assertions he has made for many years
    that he is stateless. The application was refused on 29 July 2005.

79. The appellant then commenced a period of  travelling  to  and  from  St
    Lucia. A document from the Eastern Caribbean Supreme  Court  at  tab  4
    page 85-106 sets out that on 18 March 2006 the Attorney General  of  St
    Lucia obtained an injunction preventing the appellant  from  practising
    as an attorney. The appellant was subsequently arrested trying  to  fly
    to the UK and charged with seven  counts  of  working  without  a  work
    permit. Allegations of improper  or  illegal  actions  brought  against
    judges, legal representatives and the media by the appellant  were  all
    rejected other than a period of unlawful  detention  of  14  hours  for
    which the appellant was awarded $1500.

80. The respondent also relied on a Government Notice from  St  Lucia;  see
    tab 5, page 146-149. This document sets out that the appellant  used  a
    number of aliases in  St  Lucia,  Leonardo  Eusibio  Assumpcao,  Robert
    Leonard Ogilvy, Hubisi Nwenmely, Thomas  Raymond  and  Leonard  Raymond
    Ogilvy as well as the aliases used in the UK. The document goes  on  to
    state that his true identity and nationality were  unknown.  It  states
    that his wife had given information that  he  was  Nigerian,  that  his
    mother, Celestina A Alakija, formally Celestina  Assumpcao,  was  alive
    and working in Lagos. The appellant's sister  was  in  Canada  and  his
    brother, Christopher Alakija was in Nigeria. The St Lucian  authorities
    had seen a handwritten letter from  the  appellant's  mother  dated  23
    November 1999. The Attorney General's Chambers had  made  contact  with
    Christopher Alakija on 13 March 2007. He confirmed  the  appellant  was
    his brother and that their mother was in Nigeria.

81. The Government Notice goes on to state that in an  application  for  St
    Lucian nationality the appellant had stated that he was  from  Nigeria.
    He subsequently maintained that he was Portuguese. He stated first that
    he was born in Portugal and later that he was born on an English vessel
    heading for Portugal. His parents did not register his birth  so  there
    was no record. He maintained that his father died when  he  was  7  and
    that his mother was still alive. He referred to being brought up by his
    uncle and also by friends of his  father,  Sir  James  and  Lady  Kathy
    Ogilvy. After the appellant's case in St Lucia became well  known,  the
    Attorney General's Chambers were contacted by solicitors in the UK  who
    were looking for the appellant as there was a bankruptcy order  against
    him obtained on 10 October 2002. The document also refers  to  the  Law
    Society prohibiting the appellant from working for a solicitor.

82. The appellant submitted to me that he knew, from his personal knowledge
    of St Lucian law, that these were not valid documents. For the  reasons
    already set out, any assertion  made  by  the  appellant  that  is  not
    supported by good evidence has to  be  approached  with  great  caution
    given his propensity to act dishonestly to further his own interests. I
    considered these documents with care,  however,  where  the  respondent
    could not tell me how they came to be on the appellant's file and  that
    the Government Notice did not appear to be complete.

83. In the context of the evidence as a whole, I found I could place weight
    on the document from the Eastern Caribbean Supreme  Court  and  the  St
    Lucia Government Notice. The documents reflect the  appellant  behaving
    in St Lucia exactly as he has in the UK, attempting to represent others
    in legal proceedings when he was  not  qualified  to  do  so.  He  also
    pursued unsuccessful legal actions on his own behalf and  was  arrested
    for  working  illegally.  Further,  the  Government  Notice  refers  to
    undisputed  facts  from  the  appellant's  history  in  the   UK,   the
    deportation order made in 1993, his criminal  record,  the  court  case
    before Mr Justice Jowitt (and a conviction on 22 March 1999 for  breach
    of the undertaking), his legal studies  at  Thames  Valley  University,
    failure to qualify as a lawyer and so  on.  The  Government  Notice  is
    accurate in those regards and I find, in the  context  of  all  of  the
    evidence before me, notwithstanding the appellant's submission that the
    documents from St Lucia are not reliable, that they  are  documents  on
    which I can place weight. They show the appellant's conduct in St Lucia
    to have been the same as that in the UK, acting dishonestly  and  in  a
    profoundly  self-serving  manner  and  assuming  a  variety  of   false
    identities.  They  provide  further  strong  evidence  that  he   lacks
    credibility and is Alakija, a  Nigerian  national  who  has  family  in
    Nigeria.

    Return to the UK in 2007

84. The appellant returned to the UK on 19 March 2007.  He was arrested  at
    Gatwick South Terminal on arrival in  connection  with  allegations  of
    deception and arson. He was released the following day although his ILR
    was suspended and his passport was retained; see tab 4 page 129-130. In
    the event, no criminal charges were brought on that occasion.

85. The appellant commenced further litigation. On 16 April 2007 he  issued
    a judicial review (CO/3114/2007) (see paragraph 11 of tab 7  page  10),
    maintaining that the respondent acted unlawfully in suspending his  ILR
    and retaining his passport. In an order dated 6 June 2007,  Mr  Justice
    Bennett ordered the return of his travel document in the event of there
    being no objection from the respondent; see paragraph 11 of tab 7, page
    30.

86. Mrs Justice Dobbs dismissed the claim in an order dated 13 August  2007
    after a substantive hearing and refused permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal; see tab 4 page 133-137. The application was  found  to
    be academic where the respondent had reinstated the appellant's  leave.
    Lord Justice Brooke refused permission in a decision dated 19  November
    2007; see tab 4, page 139-141.

    Further Convictions 2015 - 2017

87. Notwithstanding all that had gone before, including the matters set out
    in the documents from St Lucia, the appellant  continued  to  represent
    others in legal proceedings. As a result, on 30  March  2015  at  South
    London Magistrates' Court, he was convicted of  3  counts  of  wilfully
    pretending to be a barrister and fraud. He was sentenced to  a  6  week
    suspended  sentence,  200  hours'  unpaid  work  and  to   pay   �2,000
    compensation.

88. Undeterred by even that conviction, on 3 July 2017  the  appellant  was
    convicted at Southwark Crown Court on 3 counts of  wilfully  pretending
    to be a barrister and 3  counts  of  fraud.  On  5  July  2017  he  was
    sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment; see tab 4 pages 149-157. His appeal
    against  conviction  was  refused  on  24  January  2018.  It  is  that
    conviction which led to the current deportation proceedings.

89. In his sentencing remarks (see tab 4  page  152)  Mr  Justice  Gledhill
    stated that the offence involved the appellant telling "a complete lie"
    about being a barrister. He comments on page 151 at D that as  part  of
    the offence, the appellant deceived his wife:  "you  would  leave  your
    home in Abbey Wood every day, suited and booted, leaving your wife with
    the impression that you were going out to work".  Mr  Justice  Gledhill
    stated (page 153 at  D)  that  the  appellant's  conduct  was  "totally
    unacceptable it undermines the justice  system  in  this  country".  He
    referred to the "huge risk" to others in being represented  by  someone
    not qualified to do so. He also commented on the evidence  being  "very
    strong indeed, if not overwhelming" and questioned  why  the  appellant
    had not pleaded guilty. The 2017 conviction, together with the  others,
    shows the appellant to be a dishonest person who tells lies in order to
    try to promote his own interests. It further undermines his claim to be
    Ogilvy and stateless.

90. Notwithstanding the sentencing remarks and unsuccessful appeal  against
    the 2017 conviction, the appellant continues to maintain that he is not
    guilty, asserting that in his evidence before me  and  maintaining  the
    same to the Probation Service as recorded in the progress report  dated
    26 July 2019. This is a further example of his refusal  to  accept  his
    misconduct and dishonesty. Possibly even more alarming,  he  stated  in
    his oral  evidence  that  he  continues  to  assist  or  advise  others
    informally in legal actions in the  Employment  Tribunal  and  judicial
    review. His evidence that he continues to operate in  the  legal  field
    suggests he has not had any regard to his convictions and  comments  of
    numerous judges on his lack of competence  and  improper  conduct  when
    litigating.

91. It is also of note that when taken to prison  in  2017  following  this
    conviction, the appellant maintained to the Probation Service  that  he
    was Portuguese, clearly at odds with his strenuous assertions over more
    than 20 years that he is stateless; see tab 6, page 65.

    CO/801/2018 (Tab 7)

92. I turn now to three judicial review applications made by the  appellant
    following his conviction  in  2017.  Although  two  of  them  challenge
    detention and  the  third  challenges  the  cancellation  of  a  travel
    document,  they  repay  study  as  they  show  the  appellant   further
    undermining  his  reliability  as  a  witness  by  continuing  to  make
    misrepresentations to the High Court in regard to the Eady  order,  the
    May 1994 decision of the SSAT which was set aside and  the  refusal  of
    the NHC to  recognise  him  as  Nigerian  on  the  basis  of  incorrect
    information provided by him.

93. The case of CO/801/2018 was a judicial review application issued on  21
    February 2018 challenging refusal of release  from  detention  under  a
    Home Detention Curfew. The index to CO/801/2018, at tab 7 page 2, shows
    that the  appellant  asserted  that  Eady  order  stated  that  he  was
    stateless. Paragraph 6 of the grounds in CO/801/2018 also seeks to rely
    on the Eady order; see tab 7, page 10. These aspects of the appellant's
    pleadings were misleading. The appellant can only but have  known  that
    the order of Mr Justice Eady does not say that  he  was  stateless  and
    that it was only an interim order with no residual force where  it  was
    superseded by the decision of Mr Justice Moses on 23 September 1999.

94. In paragraph 13 of the grounds in CO/801/2018 at  tab  7  page  13  the
    appellant again sought to rely on the NHC  refusal  to  accept  him  as
    Nigerian. Paragraph 14 of the grounds asserts that the  May  1994  SSAT
    decision was not appealed. That is untrue and the  appellant  can  only
    but have known this.

95. The appellant's claim in CO/801/2018 was rejected  as  totally  without
    merit by Mr Roger Ter Haar QC on 5 April 2018; see tab 7 page  149.  Mr
    Roger Ter Haar QC commented that it was unclear that the appellant  had
    properly served the respondents in that matter and warned the appellant
    that if this recurred in any future judicial review  applications  they
    would be liable to be struck out for lack of service.

    CO/1520/2018 (Tab 8)

96. This was  a  judicial  review  issued  on  17  April  2018  challenging
    detention. In CO/1520/2018 the appellant again relied on the Eady order
    and makes incorrect assertions about what it said. Paragraph 1.5 of the
    grounds at tab 8 page 2 is incorrect in suggesting that the deportation
    order was revoked in 1999 as a result of the Eady order. The  applicant
    had already been granted ILR by the date of the Eady  order.  Paragraph
    1.1.5 (i) of  the  grounds  asserts  that,  as  well  as  ordering  the
    retention of the Home Office file note, the Eady  order  "categorically
    makes clear" that the appellant was stateless and unremovable. The Eady
    order does not do anything of the kind.

97. Before the application came to be considered by  a  High  Court  judge,
    there were procedural problems as  the  appellant  did  not  serve  the
    respondent. Mr Justice Ouseley made an unless order on  26  April  2018
    allowing the appellant 14 days to serve the application; see tab 8 page
    37-38. He records that the Government  Legal  Department  informed  the
    High Court that the appellant had a history of not serving claims  even
    though he knew the correct address for service from other  proceedings.
    Mr Justice Ouseley refers to CO/801/2018  being  found  to  be  totally
    without merit and the service problems in  that  case.  He  points  out
    that, as far as he could be aware, the appellant "has brought  some  16
    judicial review proceedings in some 20 years" and that two recent  ones
    were found totally without merit.

98. On 12 June 2018, Mr Justice Walker refused permission on the papers  in
    CO/1520/2018; see tab 8 page 73. It  is  of  particular  note  that  in
    paragraph C of  that  decision,  Mr  Justice  Walker  referred  to  the
    appellant failing to mention the outcome of CO/801/2018 "even though it
    was obviously relevant to your claims".  Mr Justice Walker goes  on  to
    state that if this is what happened "you committed a  grave  breach  of
    your duty of full and frank disclosure". This is, in my view, given all
    of the other examples before me, a further  example  of  the  appellant
    acting dishonestly in legal proceedings  by  withholding  materials  he
    considered might damage his position.

99. The appellant renewed his  application  in  CO/1520/2018  and  after  a
    hearing on 19 July 2018, Mr Justice Lane refused  permission  to  amend
    the grounds and dismissed the application.

100. The appellant appealed that decision to the Court  of  Appeal  and  his
    case came before Lord Justice Holroyde on 4 March 2019; see tab 8, page
    93-94. Lord Justice Holroyde sets out a  definitive  statement  on  the
    appellant's improper reliance on the Eady order:

         "Mr Ogilvy relies on the order of 2.09.99 as a judicial declaration
         of his status. In my view, it was no such  thing  and  Mr  Ogilvy's
         reliance on it is misconceived. On 2.09.99, a week before a hearing
         scheduled for 09.09.99, Eady J granted an application by  telephone
         for an order to the effect that the SSHD must preserve documents on
         Mr Ogilvy's HO file, including in  particular  an  internal  minute
         accepting that he was a stateless person. That minute was obviously
         a relevant document in determining Mr Ogilvy's status, and  it  can
         be readily understood why the court was prepared to make an interim
         order to ensure that it was preserved for the hearing a week later.
         But Eady J did no more than order the preservation  of  a  document
         which would be relevant to the argument as to Mr  Ogilvy's  status;
         he did not declare that status, or make a judicial finding that  Mr
         Ogilvy was stateless. It follows that in my view, Mr Ogilvy has  no
         prospect of succeeding in submissions based on the proposition that
         the SSHD, and indeed the court, were bound by the order of 02.09.99
         to find that he was and is a stateless person.

         I should add (because I know it will concern Mr Ogilvy) that  I  am
         aware that the recent decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         took a different view as to the effect of the order of 02.09.99.  I
         respectfully disagree with that decision, which is not  binding  on
         me."

    CO/2996/2018 - the 2014 Travel Document (Tab 9)

101.  This  is  an   ongoing   judicial   review   application   challenging
    cancellation of a travel document issued  to  the  appellant  in  2014.
    Permission was granted on 15 January 2019 but the application was  then
    stayed pending the outcome of this appeal.

102. The appellant maintains that the travel document issued to him in  2014
    supports his claim to be stateless and also seeks to draw support  from
    the  High  Court  granting  him  permission  to  appeal   against   the
    cancellation of that travel document. It is my conclusion that  neither
    the travel document nor the grant of permission assists the  appellant.
    In order to explain why that it is so, it is necessary to look  at  the
    evidence provided as to how the travel document came to be  issued  and
    then cancelled and the appellant's claim in CO/2996/2018.

103. On 9 July 2014 the appellant applied for a  new  travel  document;  see
    tab 5, page 150-159. He maintains that he applied for a travel document
    showing him to be stateless. The application form he  filled  out  does
    not support his claim; see tab 5 page 150. The appellant ticked the box
    showing that he  was  applying  for  a  Certificate  of  Travel  not  a
    stateless person's document.

104. A Home Office file note dated 17 July 2014 at  tab  5  page  142  shows
    that, consistent with the appellant's  indication  on  the  application
    form, the respondent did not treat the application as  one  made  by  a
    stateless person. The file  note  commenting  on  the  travel  document
    application states that:

         "It is clear that he may be Nigerian but the  Nigerians  would  not
         accept him when the  DO  action  was  underway,  neither  could  he
         produce evidence that he was born in Portugal.

         He was granted leave as a Nigerian and his last travel document his
         nationality was recorded as a Nigerian  national.  However,  I  see
         little point in labouring the point  as  we  have  no  evidence  of
         either so I have changed  his  nationality  to  XXX,  a  person  of
         unspecified nationality."

105. The contents of this file note are reflected  in  the  travel  document
    that was issued as it was endorsed with the Civil Aviation  code  "XXX"
    which shows that the holder of the document is someone  of  unspecified
    nationality. The travel document  was  again  issued  in  the  name  of
    Ogilvy. It contained a date of birth of 10 August  1965,  the  date  of
    birth of Alakija.

106. The travel document also stated  in  the  nationality  field  that  the
    appellant was "Unknown - Stateless". This  is  clearly  not  consistent
    with the Home Office's view of the appellant's status set  out  in  the
    file note or the "XXX" code on the travel  document  referring  to  the
    appellant as someone of unspecified nationality

107. When the appellant again came to the respondent's attention because  of
    his conviction in 2017 for wilfully pretending to be  a  barrister  and
    fraud, the respondent noticed the  inconsistent  entries  on  the  2014
    travel document.  On  11  April  2018,  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
    appellant requesting the return of the 2014 travel document; see tab  2
    page 89. The letter set out that there was an inconsistency between the
    Civil Aviation code and the nationality field  but  slightly  misstated
    the contents of the nationality field, stating that it said "stateless"
    rather than "Unknown - Stateless".

108. In an email dated 12 April 2018, the respondent wrote in similar  terms
    to Ms Rensten  of  the  Prisoners'  Advice  Service  as  she  had  been
    authorised by the appellant to correspond with the Home Office; see tab
    3 page 84.

109. In a letter dated 19 April 2018, the appellant declined to  return  the
    2014 travel document; see tab 2 page 90-92. He stated that he would not
    return the travel  document  as  the  respondent's  officers  had  been
    "obstructive" concerning his prison conditions and in  the  refusal  to
    release him on Home Detention Curfew (HDC). He was prepared to consider
    returning the travel document if the respondent undertook to amend  and
    return it within 14 days and the appellant was released  on  bail.  For
    what it is worth, he again relied on the Eady order as stating  that  a
    court had accepted that he was stateless and could not be removed;  see
    tab 2 page 92.

110. On 20 April 2018, Ms Rensten emailed the respondent on  behalf  of  the
    appellant;  see  tab  3  page  86.  She  reported  that  the  appellant
    maintained that when he had applied for the travel  document  this  had
    been "on the specific  basis  that  he  was  stateless"  and  that  the
    endorsement in the travel document was not an error.

111. As the appellant declined to return the travel document the  respondent
    cancelled it in a decision dated 4 May 2018; see tab  9  page  24.  The
    cancellation decision set out that the appellant was not accepted to be
    a stateless person and the travel document had not been issued on  that
    basis. It was a Certificate of Travel and not a document  issued  under
    the  Stateless  Persons  Convention.  The  cancellation  letter   again
    misstated the incorrect endorsement in the nationality field, referring
    to the travel document showing the appellant as "stateless" rather than
    "Unknown - Stateless".

112. In my judgment, this evidence shows that the travel document issued  in
    2014 and cancelled in 2018 cannot assist the appellant's claim that  he
    is stateless. The materials indicate that the appellant did  not  apply
    for a travel document showing him to be a stateless  person.  The  Home
    Office file note shows that the respondent considered him only to be of
    unspecified nationality, as does the "XXX" endorsement. The ""Unknown -
    Stateless" endorsement in the nationality field was a mistake which the
    respondent sought to rectify but could not as the appellant refused  to
    return the travel document. The appellant maintains that the respondent
    must show how this mistake or IT error occurred. The  materials  before
    me are sufficiently clear for that not to  be  necessary  in  order  to
    reach a view on the weight to be attached to the 2014 travel  document.
    I do not find that the 2014 travel document shows that  the  respondent
    considered the appellant to be stateless at any point or that there was
    any reason at all why the respondent should  have  done  so.  The  2014
    travel document does not support  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  is
    stateless.

113. On 27 July 2018 the applicant lodged an application for  permission  to
    judicially review the decision of 4 May 2018 cancelling the 2014 travel
    document. The documents from that application, CO/2996/2019, are at tab
    9.

114. The grounds in CO/2996/2018 again set out misstatements concerning  the
    Eady order in paragraphs 1.7 to 1.9; see tab 9  page  15-16.  Paragraph
    1.7 suggests that the Eady order can be  read  as  "tacitly  accepting"
    that the appellant was stateless. Paragraph 1.8 states:

         "Firstly, the Order  is  instructive  of  two  important  features,
         namely, (a) that the court accepts that the Claimant is  Stateless;
         and (b) Secondly, by reason of Statelessness,  he  is  unremovable.
         This is plain from the wording of the terms of the Order."

115. The grounds go on in 1.9:

         "The Court should note that if the Respondent was  dissatisfied  or
         unhappy with the terms of the Order of  the  Court  sealed  on  2nd
         September 1999 as it appears, then it was open to it  to  challenge
         it by way of an appeal to the Court of  Appeal  or  by  way  of  an
         application to the High Court for variation  or  discharge  of  the
         Order. It is now 19 years on since the making of the Order and  the
         Respondent has been on notice of the same, for 19 years. It is  now
         far too late to seek to go behind the Order or act in a manner that
         is plainly in defiance of a valid court order."

116. The  relief  sought  includes  a  "Declaration  that  the  Claimant  is
    Stateless as per Order of 2/09/99"; see tab 9 page 24.

117. It will be obvious from the discussion above that these paragraphs  set
    out a wholly incorrect statement of what is in the Eady order  and  the
    status of the order. The Eady order does not say that the appellant  is
    stateless or unremovable.  The Eady order was always time limited.  The
    allegation that the respondent was seeking to "go behind" the order was
    baseless when the order was superseded by the decision  of  Mr  Justice
    Moses dated 23 September 1999.

118. For completeness sake, I should point out that  in  Section  9  of  the
    claim form in CO/2996/2018 (tab 9 page 10) the appellant  again  relies
    again in paragraph 6 on the findings  of  the  May  1994  SSAT  without
    giving any indication that  they  were  set  aside  and  replaced  with
    adverse findings in December 1994. On the contrary, the appellant  goes
    on in the very next paragraph to assert, essentially, that  his  claims
    as to his identity were accepted by the SSAT.  The  opposite  is  true;
    see paragraphs 40-47 above.

119.  Also,  shown  on  tab  9  page  10,  the  appellant's  claim  form  in
    CO/2996/2018 again relied on the refusal of the NHC  in  the  1990s  to
    accept him as Nigerian. As before, that refusal arose  because  of  his
    provision of only the May 1994  SSAT  decision  to  the  NHC,  not  the
    December 1994 SSAT decision and repeated incorrect  statements  to  the
    NHC that he was Ogilvy and not a Nigerian national.

120.  On  22  October  2018,  HHJ   Evans-Gordon   refused   permission   in
    CO/2996/2018; see tab  9  page  79-81.  She  found  that  even  if  the
    appellant had shown that he was stateless, the decision to  cancel  the
    travel  document  was  lawful  as  it  required  correction  where  the
    statement  of  the  applicant's  immigration  status  as   "Unknown   -
    Stateless" did not match  the  International  Civil  Aviation  Code  of
    "XXX".

121. The appellant renewed his application. On 15 January 2019 there  was  a
    hearing before Mr Justice Swift. In an order dated 18 January 2019,  Mr
    Justice Swift granted permission limited to the ground challenging  the
    cancellation of the travel document; see tab 5 page 83-84. The judicial
    review application was then stayed pending the outcome of this appeal.

122. On 20 June 2018, Mr Justice Walker refused to  order  the  re-issue  of
    the travel document by way of interim relief;  see  tab  page  85.  The
    appellant made that application on the basis that he had an urgent need
    to travel to participate in a pilgrimage.

123. On 23 October 2019 at 05:32, the first day of the  re-hearing  of  this
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal, the appellant emailed the Upper Tribunal,
    submitting that on 14 October 2019 he had made  an  urgent  application
    for a lifting of the stay in CO/2996/2019. He maintained that "it  will
    be inappropriate to proceed right now without knowing  the  outcome  of
    the current application before the High Court". The respondent  opposed
    the adjournment application.

124. Neither  the  documents  accompanying  the  email  application  for  an
    adjournment of these proceedings nor those provided at the  hearing  on
    23 October 2019 showed that  the  urgent  application  for  a  stay  of
    CO/2996/2019 had been accepted by the Administrative Court.

125. Further,  even  had  that  been  shown,  I  did  not  accept  that  the
    proceedings of the High Court should "take precedence" as suggested  in
    the urgent application or  that  anything  provided  a  basis  for  the
    hearing of the statutory appeal to be  adjourned  or  stayed,  as  also
    sought in the application to the  High  Court.  The  outcome  of  these
    proceedings is not "highly prejudicial to the proceedings of  the  High
    Court". They are separate proceedings considering  different  decisions
    of the respondent and contain different grounds and materials.  Nothing
    before me indicated that this appeal could not be determined justly and
    fairly even if it had been shown that the stay in CO/2996/2018 had been
    applied for and lifted.

126. Further, the Upper Tribunal had set aside two  days  for  the  hearing,
    the respondent had instructed Counsel  and  the  appellant's  wife  had
    taken time off work to give evidence. It was my conclusion that no good
    reason had been provided to adjourn the hearing and that it was in  the
    interest of justice to proceed.

127. One further matter arose concerning CO/2996/2018. On the first day of
    the hearing, the appellant handed up a transcript that he had obtained
    of the hearing on 15 January 2019 before Mr Justice Swift.  No good
    reason was given for this not being provided much sooner where the
    hearing had taken place some 10 months earlier. No good reason was
    given for the failure to make an application under Rule 152A on notice
    to the respondent for the new material to be admitted. The respondent
    did not object to the appellant relying on this document, however.
    Where that was so, I allowed the appellant to admit the transcript. I
    adjourned the hearing in order for the respondent's legal
    representatives to have time to consider the transcript.

128. With the utmost respect to the  Administrative  Court  and  Mr  Justice
    Swift, the permission decision of 18 January 2019 is not binding on  me
    and that is so whatever was said at the hearing on 15 January 2019. The
    materials that I have been provided with  from  that  application  show
    that the grounds and the materials are wholly different to those before
    me. The judicial review and this appeal  address  different  issues  on
    different evidence.  Further, even  if  the  two  cases  were  on  more
    similar ground, the  decision  of  Mr  Justice  Swift  only  finds  the
    appellant's case on the cancellation of the  travel  document  met  the
    "modest" threshold for granting permission.

129. For these reasons I do not find that anything arising  from  the  issue
    and cancellation of the 2014  travel  document  or  anything  from  the
    proceedings in CO/2996/2018 supports the appellant's claim that  he  is
    Ogilvy or that he is stateless.

    HU/12785/2018 - Article 8 appeal against deportation

130. The appellant's conduct in these proceedings adds to my  view  that  he
    is a dishonest person who seeks to mislead  when  litigating  and  that
    this further undermines his claim to be Ogilvy and stateless.

131. By early March 2019 and certainly by the  time  of  the  error  of  law
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 30 July 2019, the  appellant  knew
    of the order of Lord Justice Holroyde in CO/1520/2018 and the  specific
    comments of the Court of Appeal on his baseless  assertions  concerning
    the Eady order; see paragraph 100 above. Even then, in a  supplementary
    skeleton argument submitted to the Upper Tribunal on 24 April 2019  the
    appellant again proceeded as if the Eady order  were  still  in  force,
    asserted that the Upper Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to  consider  his
    statelessness where the respondent had not attempted to  challenge  the
    Eady order and that the file note referred to in the Eady order was  "a
    concession". It is my view, in the context of all  that  is  before  me
    including formal findings made by  senior  judges  that  he  has  acted
    dishonestly in legal proceedings  and  the  comments  of  Lord  Justice
    Holroyde,  that  the  appellant  simply  could  not  have  made   those
    submissions in good faith.

132. Further, the date of the acknowledgment of service and summary  grounds
    in CO/2996/2018 is 1 October 2018; see tab 9 page 42. It was served  on
    the appellant as part of  those  proceedings.  In  this  document,  the
    respondent sets out some  of  the  appellant's  dishonest  history  and
    refers to the criticism of Mr Justice Walker in CO/1520/2018 concerning
    a failure to provide full and frank disclosure, set out in paragraph 98
    above. Despite this document being available to the  appellant  he  did
    not provide it to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  hearing  of  this
    appeal on 11 October 2018. That is,  perhaps,  not  surprising.  It  is
    dispiriting that the  respondent  did  not  provide  it  or  the  other
    materials showing  the  appellant's  full  history  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. On the basis of the limited material provided by both  sides,
    the appellant was able to continue to rely on the Eady  order  and  the
    travel  document  and  these  documents,  divorced  from  their  proper
    context, played a significant part in the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant was stateless; see tab 1 page 6-10.

133. What is striking, however, is that that the  appellant  still  did  not
    provide  the  respondent's  highly   adverse   summary   grounds   from
    CO/2996/2018 to the Upper Tribunal despite being directed  on  1  April
    2019 to serve "all documents available to him from that judicial review
    application, including ... any summary defence  and  skeleton  argument
    from the respondent (my emphasis)". The bundle of materials he provided
    on 23 April 2019 in response to that  direction  did  not  contain  the
    summary grounds of defence.  My  view  of  that  conduct  is  that  the
    appellant deliberately withheld a document he knew to  be  damaging  to
    his case despite being directed to serve it. He has been found to do so
    on numerous previous occasions; see paragraphs 46, 53, 73, 98 above.

134. Even on 23 and 24 October 2019 at the hearing before me, the  appellant
    continued to argue that the Eady order showed that he had been accepted
    as stateless. As indicated above, by October 2019 he had been  told  in
    the clearest of terms by the Court of Appeal that the  Eady  order  did
    not say this and did  not  support  his  claim  to  be  stateless.  The
    appellant's conduct in this appeal, combined with  all  that  has  gone
    before, can only lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  a
    profoundly dishonest individual and a seriously unreliable witness.

    Appellant's Evidence on Statelessness

135.  Even  setting  aside  all  of  the  matters  considered   above,   the
    appellant's own evidence on his personal history is highly  unreliable.
    His account of his history has varied widely over  the  years.  It  has
    included  assertions  that  he  was  born  in  Portugal,  that  he   is
    Portuguese, that he was born on a ship and his birth never  registered,
    was adopted by his uncle, was adopted by the Ogilvys and  so  on;  see,
    for example, paragraphs 29, 38, 39, 76, 78, 80, 81 and 91 above. He has
    never provided a credible explanation of why there  is  no  documentary
    evidence at all of any of the events he claims occurred  prior  to  his
    beginning to work and study in London. He  has  not  explained  why  he
    speaks no Portuguese even though many of his accounts refer to spending
    between 8 and 13 years of his life there and to going to school  there.
    He has not provided any evidence suggesting that he has even  attempted
    to obtain any documents showing his history prior to coming to London.


136. The appellant's evidence before me  was  different  again,  maintaining
    that he was adopted first by a Portuguese family when he was  8  year's
    old, not the Ogilvys. When first asked he could not remember  the  name
    of this family even though he lived with them for "a  good  part  of  2
    years". This would have made  him  approximately  10  years'  old  when
    adopted by the Ogilvys. He  then  stated  that  the  Portuguese  family
    travelled back and  forth  between  Portugal  and  Brazil  and  so  the
    appellant travelled with them and that this was for 3 years between the
    age of 8 and 11. He later recalled the name of the Portuguese family as
    Rodriguez. The father was Paolo and mother was Celestina.  He  did  not
    remember the names of their two sons with whom he  lived  for  2  or  3
    years. He went to a private Catholic school in Portugal but  could  not
    remember the name. He was  a  "recluse"  at  school  so  did  not  have
    friends. He was treated as servant by this family.


137. He went on to say that he was adopted from Portugal by the  Ogilvys  at
    the age of 13. He maintained that he refused to go to school  while  he
    lived in Scotland and that a priest would come to the home to give  him
    lessons including Bible  study.  The  Ogilvys  were  called  James  and
    Maximiliana. They had a son called Paul but he could not remember their
    daughter's name.


138.  I  did  not  find  this  account  credible.  It  was  not   internally
    consistent, the appellant giving  different  times  and  ages  for  the
    adoption by the Ogilvys. It is not credible that he would not  remember
    the name of the Portuguese family and their children if he  lived  with
    them for at least 2 years. Like SSAT in December 1994, I find his claim
    to have been able  to  travel  between  Portugal,  Brazil  and  the  UK
    undocumented on a number of occasions over a  period  of  years  to  be
    "inherently improbable". The evidence that he was a recluse  at  school
    in Portugal and refused to go to school in Scotland appeared to  me  to
    be an attempt to explain his inability to speak Portuguese  and  to  be
    unable to provide  details  of  any  friends  or  contacts  from  those
    periods.




139. This evidence is also highly inconsistent with other  accounts  he  has
    provided over the years, for example his statement in 1992 (tab 5  page
    14) as to being the son of  Eusibio  Carla  Maximiliana  Assumpcao  and
    adopted by Sir James and Lady Catherine Ogilvy after his  parents  died
    in 1975. There was no mention of being adopted by a  Portuguese  family
    prior to the Ogilvys in the 1992 statement or any of the other accounts
    he has provided in the documents before me. As above,  as  recently  as
    2017 he was claiming to be Portuguese (to the  Probation  Service)  and
    stateless (to the respondent and Administrative Court)




140. It is therefore my conclusion that  the  appellant's  own  evidence  on
    being Ogilvy and stateless consists of a multiplicity  of  inconsistent
    and incredible accounts of his birth and upbringing with no documentary
    evidence at all to support any of these  versions  including  even  the
    existence of his alleged adopted family, the Ogilvys which would not be
    difficult to establish.




141. Part of the appellant's case as to being  stateless  is  an  allegation
    that the respondent has deliberately withheld documents supporting that
    claim. He refers in an email of 24 July 2019 to the  respondent  having
    "hoarded" and "obliterated" documents. These allegations are  not  made
    out. On 23 July 2019 the appellant  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  ex  parte
    requesting a  direction  that  the  respondent  disclose  a  number  of
    documents. On 25 July 2019 the Tribunal directed  that  the  respondent
    provide the appellant with the documents requested  where  not  already
    provided and where identifiable from the information  provided  by  the
    appellant. Notwithstanding the respondent's objection on 26  July  2019
    to that direction, in the error of law decision  issued  on  16  August
    2019, the Tribunal confirmed that the respondent  was  to  provide  the
    materials sought by the appellant as far as she was able.


142. The respondent complied with this direction on 10 September  2019.  The
    respondent indicated that any letters from the  NHC  had  already  been
    provided. The respondent confirmed that after a further search  of  the
    appellant's file it had not been possible to find  a  letter  from  the
    Portuguese Embassy from 1997, the file note which was  the  subject  of
    the Eady order or a letter from a Mr  Emezie  from  litigation  in  the
    1990s. It is of passing note that a Mr Tiki Emezie was copied in to  an
    email from the appellant to the Tribunal dated 25 October 2019  but  it
    is not clear if this is the person who might be  able  to  provide  the
    appellant with a copy of the letter on which he seeks to rely  or  give
    evidence as to its contents.


143. Having identified which documents had already been provided  and  which
    were not available, the respondent sent the appellant his  2014  travel
    document application form. The respondent confirmed that  she  did  not
    have a copy of any covering letter to that application. The  respondent
    also provided the appellant with a complete copy of the SSAT  decisions
    from 1994.




144. It is my view that the respondent  has  used  her  best  endeavours  to
    provide the appellant with the documents he requested. It also is  very
    difficult to see how the documents sought by the appellant could assist
    his claim to be stateless in the context of the matters set out  above.
    A letter from a legal representative in the 1990s and  the  appellant's
    cover  letter  from  the  2014  travel  document  application  are  not
    objective and, in the context of the other very strong evidence  as  to
    the appellant's identity and  nationality,  are  most  unlikely  to  be
    probative. A letter  from  the  Portuguese  authorities  in  the  1990s
    stating that he has never been registered in  Portugal  and  is  not  a
    Portuguese citizen is immaterial where the weight of the evidence shows
    him to be Alakija, a Nigerian national.


145. In short,  there  is  no  merit  in  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
    respondent has acted in bad faith or otherwise improperly and that this
    has prevented him from making out his claim to be stateless.


    Conclusion on Identity and Nationality


146. I have set out above the cases in which the appellant  has  been  found
    to be Alakija and to be Nigerian. I have  also  set  out  the  evidence
    showing that he has been seriously dishonest in his dealings  with  the
    public and the legal system. I have set out above  that  the  May  1994
    SSAT decision, the refusal of the NHC in the 1990s to recognise him  as
    Nigerian, the Eady order, the  grant  of  ILR  and  issuing  of  travel
    documents in the name of Ogilvy and the 2014  travel  document  do  not
    amount to evidence even when taken together that are in any way capable
    of showing that the appellant is Ogilvy or that he is stateless. I have
    not found his own evidence on  his  personal  history  to  be  remotely
    credible. The appellant's claims to be Ogilvy and stateless are without
    merit as a  result.  The  evidence  shows  overwhelmingly  that  he  is
    Alakija.




147. The appellant cannot show  that  he  meets  the  Immigration  Rules  on
    statelessness. Paragraph 403(c) of the Immigration Rules  requires  him
    to take reasonable steps to facilitate admission to  Nigeria  and  show
    that he has been unable to secure the right  of  admission.  As  in  AS
    (Guinea) at paragraph 57, set out above in paragraph 19,  in  order  to
    meet this requirement he must take all reasonably  practical  steps  to
    submit all documents which bear on  his  nationality  to  the  Nigerian
    authorities. Nothing here shows that he has done so  where  this  would
    require him to provide the NHC with full disclosure  of  the  materials
    that are before me. It is wholly insufficient to rely on the refusal of
    the NHC in the 1990s to accept him as a Nigerian  national  where  that
    decision was made on the basis of other information which  was  limited
    and incorrect.

148. In summary,  for  the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  have  reached  the
    following conclusions:

          I. The appellant is Olusegun Adedeji Alakija

         II. He was born on 10 October 1985

        III. He is a citizen of Nigeria

         IV. He entered the UK in 1987 using a Nigerian passport

          V. He returned to Nigeria in 1989

         VI. He is not stateless

        VII. There is no valid decision from any Court or Tribunal  finding
             him to be Leonard Ogilvy, to be stateless or to have a date of
             birth of 1 March 1968

       VIII. The appellant has used the aliases of Leonard Ogilvy,  Adedeji
             Olusegun Alakija, Alakija Olusegun Adedeji and Aderemi Odunsi

         IX. He  may  also  have  used  the  aliases  of  Leonardo  Eusibio
             Assumpcao, Robert  Leonard  Ogilvy,  Hubisi  Nwenmely,  Thomas
             Raymond and Leonard Raymond Ogilvy, the  aliases  recorded  in
             the Government Notice from St Lucia; see tab 5, page 146-149




Decision on Article 8 claim




149. The appellant maintains that his deportation would  breach  his  rights
    under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.  In  her
    decision of 12 June 2018 the respondent decided that  Article  8  would
    not be breached if the appellant were to be deported; see tab  4  pages
    207-227.




150. In my assessment of the appellant's Article 8 claim, I proceed  on  the
    basis of the findings set out in paragraph  148  that  he  is  Olusegun
    Adedeji Alakija, a Nigerian national born on 10 August 1965 who came to
    the UK in 1987. He is not  stateless  so  this  does  not  need  to  be
    addressed in the Article 8 assessment.


    Section 117C(4) - Exception 1

151. The appellant cannot meet the requirements of Exception 1  set  out  in
    s.117C of the NIA 2002 or the  provisions  of  paragraph  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He is now 54 years' old. At best, he has had  lawful
    residence in the UK for 20 years since he was granted ILR in 1999. That
    is not more than half of his life.

152. I do not find that the appellant is socially and culturally  integrated
    in the UK. I accept that he has been in the UK most of the  time  since
    he came as a visitor in 1987. That is a period of 32 years and provides
    a basis on which  he  could  be  found  to  have  become  socially  and
    culturally integrated. There was very little evidence of  any  positive
    social and cultural links formed during that  period,  however.  Taking
    his evidence at its highest he has studied  and  worked  at  times  and
    currently attends church and is still studying.  The  evidence  on  the
    extent of his integration is very limited, however.

153. Set against his long residence and history of work and study, it is  my
    judgment the appellant has conducted himself throughout his  time  here
    in a manner that shows contempt for the social and cultural  values  of
    the UK. He has acted profoundly dishonestly throughout his time here in
    using aliases, in particular the false assertion over at least 29 years
    that he is Ogilvy. He has been dishonest in asserting vociferously  and
    wholly untruthfully that he is not Nigerian but is either Portuguese or
    stateless. He avoided deportation and was granted ILR in the 1990s only
    because of his profound dishonesty.  He  has  conducted  extensive  and
    meritless  litigation  on  his  own  behalf  in  which  he   has   made
    representations which he knew were false and has withheld documents  in
    a dishonest attempt to bolster his various claims. He has been found to
    be a dishonest person by a number of judges and has been found formally
    in contempt of court.

154. His criminal convictions for theft,  unlawfully  providing  immigration
    advice, pretending to be a barrister and fraud also weigh  against  his
    being socially and culturally integrated. He has repeatedly  acted  for
    others in legal proceedings when not qualified or competent to  do  so.
    His evidence before me that he continues to assist or advise others  in
    legal matters even in the face of his criminal convictions  and  having
    been found to be incompetent to do  so  by  the  judiciary  was  deeply
    concerning. He continues to assert his innocence  of  the  most  recent
    conviction, maintaining this to be so at the hearing before me  and  to
    the Probation Service as shown in the progress  report  dated  26  July
    2019. This is in the face of the comments of the sentencing judge  that
    the evidence against him was  overwhelming  and  the  conviction  being
    upheld on appeal.

155. These matters show that the appellant's  conduct  throughout  the  time
    that he has been here has been inimical  to  the  social  and  cultural
    values of the UK. There is very little positive evidence of social  and
    cultural integration. My conclusion is that the appellant is  far  from
    being socially and culturally integrated.

156.  Further,  the  appellant  cannot  show  that  there  would   be   very
    significant obstacles to reintegration in Nigeria. I accept that he has
    not lived or been there since approximately 1990. That is a  period  of
    29 years and there will inevitably be  a  period  of  readjustment  and
    difficulties to overcome on return, as a result. As above, however, the
    evidence from St Lucia  indicates  that  he  is  likely  to  have  some
    contacts there. The evidence as a whole shows the  appellant  to  be  a
    highly dishonest person and I do not accept that he has no contacts  in
    Nigeria from whom he could obtain some support on return, even if  this
    was limited.

157. Even if the appellant does not have any contacts in Nigeria, the  facts
    as found show that he lived there until the age of 22  and  voluntarily
    returned there in 1989.  He speaks English, one of the  main  languages
    used there. In addition, the appellant has qualifications from  the  UK
    he can use to try to find work. The energy and resourcefulness  he  has
    shown in holding himself out as Ogilvy and as stateless, in  persuading
    numerous individuals to allow him to represent them and  in  conducting
    his own numerous cases can be redeployed in Nigeria. He showed  similar
    energy and resourcefulness in  the  time  that  he  was  in  St  Lucia,
    indicating his ability to operate  in  different  environments.  Having
    spent all of his formative years in Nigeria and given his abilities and
    qualifications it is my conclusion that he will be able to  become  "an
    insider" with understanding of how life is conducted in Nigeria and  be
    able to participate, be accepted and operate on a day to day basis with
    significantly more ease than most individuals;  SSHD  v  Kamara  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813 applied.

158. There will  no  doubt  be  some  obstacles  to  reintegration  for  the
    appellant on return to Nigeria after nearly 30 years but  the  evidence
    before me  indicates  that  he  is  not  someone  who  will  find  them
    significant, certainly not very significant.

    Paragraph 399(b) and Exception 2 of s.117C(5)

159. The appellant maintains that he is  in  a  relationship  with  [CO],  a
    British national. Given  the  findings  above,  anything  said  by  the
    appellant about  this  relationship  has  to  be  viewed  with  extreme
    caution.

160. The appellant and Ms [O]  both  gave  evidence  that  they  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship.  They  gave  consistent  evidence
    about meeting in 2009, marrying in 2010 and living together since then.
    They provided many photographs  of  what  they  called  their  marriage
    ceremony  and  a  wedding  reception.   There  is  no  valid   marriage
    certificate, however. The document provided by the appellant (after the
    hearing) is not a valid  marriage  certificate,  merely  reflecting  an
    informal ceremony having taken  place  on  21  August  2010  under  the
    auspices of the Jesus Cares Crusaders' Ministries  International.  Such
    is the appellant's dishonesty, it is my view that he knows that  he  is
    not legally married to Ms [O]. I also  noted  that  nothing  before  me
    shows that the appellant has ever divorced Ms  [C];  see  paragraph  90
    above.

161. It is not  necessary  to  be  married  (or,  indeed,  divorced  from  a
    previous partner) in order to  demonstrate  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, however. I noted that the photographs from 2010  provided
    show  a  public  ceremony  and  reception  that  would  appear  to   be
    recognising  a  relationship.  Ms  [O]'s  brother  was  identified   as
    participating in the ceremony. I accept that the couple underwent  some
    form of ceremony attesting to their being in a relationship in 2010.

162. Further, the appellant provided a visitors'  log  from  HMP  Wandsworth
    between 11 July 2017 and 18 June 2018 and it shows Ms [O] visiting  the
    appellant on twenty five occasions, the equivalent of every two  weeks.
    I also noted that she attended all of the hearings before me.

163. Further, the appellant was bailed to [~] Road the property on which  Ms
    [O] has a mortgage. I also accept  that  she  was  interviewed  at  the
    property as part of the assessment of whether the appellant could leave
    prison on a Home Detention Curfew. Ms [O] also  spoke  in  some  detail
    about the difficulty  she  had  maintaining  the  mortgage  whilst  the
    appellant was in detention and provided evidence her  mortgage  arrears
    of approximately �800 in a letter dated  30  September  2019  (provided
    after the hearing). In addition, the appellant was able to describe  Ms
    [O]'s current employment and the location and hours of her work.  These
    matters weigh in favour of the appellant and Ms [O] having some kind of
    relationship and living in the same property.

164. I did not find it significant that Ms [O]  retained  her  maiden  name,
    for example using it on her passport as this can be the case reasonably
    often even for married couples.

165. I did  find,  however,  a  distinct  absence  of  documentary  evidence
    showing that the appellant and Ms [O] had a genuine relationship rather
    than merely living in the same property. There was no evidence  showing
    any joint interests such as bank accounts, utilities,  memberships  and
    so on. It was of particular note that there was no evidence at all from
    anyone who knows the couple supporting the claim that  they  are  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.

166. There was also a notable inconsistency in the evidence.  The  appellant
    maintained that Ms [O] took in tenants whilst he was  in  detention  in
    order to help pay the mortgage. He stated that one tenant  remained  in
    the property and that he would not permit more as there were repair and
    other issues in the property making this  inappropriate.  Ms  [O]  said
    that there were no tenants in the property. This clear inconsistency on
    what should be an uncontentious matter suggested to me that either  the
    appellant or Ms [O]  was  being  untruthful  about  who  lived  in  the
    property. This could be for any number of reasons unconnected with  the
    nature of  the  relationship  but,  considering  the  evidence  on  the
    relationship as a whole, I found  it  undermined  the  claim  that  the
    couple are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

167. The appellant and Ms [O] also maintained that they are trying  to  have
    a baby and that this has been difficult as Ms [O] had medical problems.
    There was no documentary evidence at all to support this claim.   Where
    documents to support this oral evidence would be easily  available  but
    were not provided and given the degree of the appellant's dishonesty, I
    did not accept that the  couple  have  been  trying  to  have  a  child
    together, notwithstanding that this was Ms [O]'s evidence  as  well  as
    the appellant's.

168. I also  noted  the  comment  made  by  Mr  Justice  Gledhill  that  the
    appellant has deceived Ms [O] in the past, stating that he would "leave
    your home in Abbey Wood every day, suited and booted, leaving your wife
    with the impression that you were going out to work".  That  deception,
    the appellant's profoundly  dishonest  conduct  over  many  years,  the
    untruthful evidence about a formal marriage, the  absence  of  evidence
    showing the couple have any kind of joint  life  and  the  inconsistent
    evidence about a tenant led me  to  conclude  that  whatever  Ms  [O]'s
    position may be, the appellant is  not  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her.

169. The appellant therefore  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    399(b) or s.117C(5) of the NIA 2002.

170. It was also my view that even if  the  relationship  was  found  to  be
    genuine and subsisting, these provisions could not be met. There is  no
    dispute that had the relationship been shown  to  be  genuine,  it  was
    formed when the appellant had ILR and so could have met the requirement
    set out in paragraph 399(b)(i) of the Immigration Rules.

171. I did not  find  that  the  evidence  showed  that  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 399(b)(ii) and (iii) of the Immigration Rules could have been
    met, however, even taking the evidence of  the  appellant  and  Ms  [O]
    about their relationship at its highest. The test is whether  it  would
    unduly harsh for Ms [O] to go to Nigeria with the appellant and  unduly
    harsh for her to remain without him in the UK.  The  latter  assessment
    mirrors that of Exception 2 in s.117C(5) of the NIA 2002.

172. The appellant and Ms [O] were asked why she could not  be  expected  to
    go to Nigeria with him. Ms [O] confirmed that she was  originally  from
    Ivory Coast and had been in the UK  for  approximately  20  years.  She
    lived in another culture for all of  her  early  life,  therefore,  and
    albeit that was not in  Nigeria,  she  has  significant  experience  of
    living in an African country. The appellant and Ms [O] referred to  the
    difficulty in her finding work  in  Nigeria,  having  to  rely  on  the
    appellant, potentially losing her home in the UK and  the  difficulties
    they had had in conceiving  a  child.  The  appellant  has  educational
    qualifications from the UK, as does Ms  [O]  who  recently  obtained  a
    Masters' degree in banking and finance. She also has work experience as
    a finance controller. She could expect to find some  kind  of  work  in
    Nigeria in due course, as could the appellant. I accept that she  would
    have to make arrangements for the house in the UK on which  she  has  a
    mortgage, either by selling it, or  renting  it  out  if  she  went  to
    Nigeria but this is an administrative matter which does  not  begin  to
    reach the level of undue harshness. The concerns expressed about  being
    unable to obtain assistance in order to have a child together were  not
    supported by any objective material  on  the  particular  problems  and
    whether they could be addressed by the  public  or  private  healthcare
    systems in Nigeria. I therefore did not find that the evidence  of  the
    appellant and Ms [O] was capable of showing that life would  be  unduly
    harsh for her in Nigeria.

173. The couple also stated that life in Nigeria would be difficult  as  the
    appellant was not Nigerian and had never been there. As above, it is my
    settled view that the appellant is Nigerian and  that  he  lived  there
    until 1987, so for 22 years before  he  came  to  the  UK.  He  can  be
    expected to use the knowledge he has of  the  country  to  re-establish
    himself and assist Ms [O] to establish herself.

174. My conclusion was that there would be difficulties for Ms  [O]  if  she
    goes to Nigeria with the appellant but  that  her  circumstances  there
    would not be harsh, certainly not unduly harsh.

175. It is also not my view that the  provisions  of  paragraph  399(b)(iii)
    and Exception 2 of s.117C could be met, even taking the evidence on the
    relationship at its highest. The evidence as to Ms [O]'s  circumstances
    if the appellant were deported was that she  would  miss  him  greatly,
    that it would be very difficult where they were hoping to have a  child
    together and it would be hard for Ms [O] financially, needing  to  take
    in lodgers for example to help pay her mortgage and needing to  find  a
    full time rather than a part-time job. As above, there was no  evidence
    of the extent of the problem in  Ms  [O]  conceiving  and  whether  the
    couple could not continue to try to have a child using  the  healthcare
    system in Nigeria on visits there. Taking  the  evidence  on  Ms  [O]'s
    situation if the appellant were deported at its highest, it cannot meet
    the high threshold for a finding of undue hardship. It is, at best, the
    level of hardship that is due when a partner is deported and nothing in
    the evidence on this question could show that Ms [O] would find herself
    in unduly harsh circumstances.

    Section 117C(6) - Very Compelling Circumstances

176. The appellant cannot meet the Exceptions set out in s.117C (4) and  (5)
    or the provisions of the Immigration Rules.  He  does  not  meet  those
    provisions by some margin. He has not been  here  more  than  half  his
    life, he is not socially and culturally integrated and would  not  face
    very significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria. He is  not  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms [O] and even if he was,  it
    would not be unduly harsh for her to go  to  Nigeria  with  him  or  to
    remain in the UK when he is deported. The  circumstances  here  do  not
    come close to being the "near miss" situation described in paragraph 32
    of NA (Pakistan). The appellant's relationship  with  Ms  [O]  and  his
    length of residence in the UK and time away from Nigeria cannot  amount
    to very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the  provisions  of
    paragraphs 399, 399A or Exceptions 1 and 2 of s.117C, therefore.  There
    was nothing further put forward in the evidence that could show a  "far
    stronger case" by reference to Article 8 interests that could  possibly
    begin to weigh against the strong public interest in  this  appellant's
    deportation.

Notice of Decision

177. The appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    is refused.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 9 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


