
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12267/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                               |                              |
|                                                |On 23 October 2018            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           OLADELE MICHAEL SOLANKE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill instructed by UK Migration Lawyers Ltd.

For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Fox who in a decision promulgated on 8  August  2018
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.









Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, was born on 26 September 1988.
        On 23 July 2003 the appellant was  granted  entry  clearance  as  a
        visitor. On 25 January 2012 the appellant was  encountered  by  the
        police and issued with an enforcement notice  as  an  overstay  and
        subsequently convicted of possessing a Class B drug.
     3. On 12 October 2012 the appellant married in the United Kingdom  and
        on p;7 August 2013 applied for leave to remain pursuant to  article
        8 ECHR. The application was refused but allowed on appeal on 1  May
        2015.
     4. On 17 November 2016 the appellant was convicted of possession  with
        intent to supply a Class A and Class B  drug  and  sentenced  to  a
        total of 3 years imprisonment. On 21 January  2017  the  respondent
        issued a notice of decision to deport although on 6 April 2017  the
        appellant was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  valid  to  6
        October 2017. On 6 October 2017 the appellant applied for leave  to
        remain pursuant  to  article  8  ECHR  which  was  refused  by  the
        respondent.
     5. A decision to deport the appellant from the United Kingdom was made
        in a notice dated 25 May 2018. The appellant sought to  appeal  the
        rejection of his human rights submissions relying on article 8 ECHR
        and section 55 Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
     6. The Judge sets out an  issue  that  arose  during  the  proceedings
        together with the evidence made available  and  submissions  before
        setting out findings of  fact  from  [83]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge.
     7. The Judge, in accordance with the Devaseelan principles,  commenced
        consideration of the merits of the appeal with  a  decision  of  an
        earlier tribunal but found that matters had  moved  on  since  that
        decision, especially as the appellant had  received  a  significant
        custodial sentence for drug related offences.
     8. The Judge has serious reservations about  the  credibility  of  the
        appellant and his wife leading to it being concluded at [101]  that
        it was not accepted that family life existed between the  appellant
        and his children as claimed. The Judge's  conclusions  set  out  at
        [119 - 129] are in the following terms:

             "119.    Based upon the findings as stated above I  apply  the
                  facts to the law. Firstly I consider  the  appeal  in  the
                  context of Article 8 ECHR as codified by  the  respondent.
                  There  is  no  dispute  that  the  appellant   falls   for
                  consideration in accordance  with  Rule  398(b).  For  the
                  reasons stated above I do not accept  that  the  appellant
                  has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
                  the children.


             120.     By his own evidence he has failed to engage with  the
                  partners  family  unit  and  he  has  merely   sought   to
                  demonstrate an intention to engage with family life in the
                  future.  This  is  unconvincing  when  one  considers  the
                  significant period of "lost opportunity" and  the  obvious
                  motivation  that  the  appellant  has  for   making   such
                  assertions at present.


             121.     If I am wrong about this it would not be unduly harsh
                  for the children to live separately  from  the  appellant.
                  The  3  eldest  children  enjoy  family  life  with  their
                  biological father and  an  amicable  association  prevails
                  between the partner and father to facilitate contact  with
                  the father and extended family members.


             122.      In  relation  to  the  2   youngest   children   the
                  appellant's conduct as particularised  above  goes  beyond
                  whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
                  remain in the UK  without  the  appellant.  The  available
                  evidence demonstrates that it would be beneficial for  the
                  children  if  the  appellant  was   required   to   reside
                  separately from the  children.  This  appears  to  be  the
                  position according to the  evidence  at  page  G2  of  the
                  appellant's bundle.


             123.     With regard to the  partners  relationship  with  the
                  appellant the relationship was formed at a time  when  the
                  appellant's   immigration   status   was   unlawful    and
                  precarious. For the same reasons it would  not  be  unduly
                  harsh to expect the partner to live without the appellant.
                  On the contrary it is  reckless  at  best  to  attempt  to
                  integrate the appellant into the partners family unit when
                  the available evidence is considered  in  the  round.  The
                  partners  protestations  amount  to  no  more   than   the
                  convenience of childcare arrangements. Something more than
                  this must be shown to defeat the public  interest  in  the
                  appellants deportation.


             124.     There is no suggestion that the partner and  children
                  are  expected  to  leave  the   UK   and   therefore   the
                  respondent's decision does not interfere  with  article  8
                  ECHR in that context; Robinson considered.


             125.     In addition  the  appellant  has  not  been  lawfully
                  resident in the UK  for  the  majority  of  his  life.  He
                  entered the UK in 2003 as a visitor  under  the  direction
                  and  control  of  his  parents.  He  remained  in  the  UK
                  unlawfully and took no steps to regularise his immigration
                  status when it was brought to his attention  in  2008.  He
                  subsequently relied  upon  the  partner  and  children  to
                  regularise his immigration  status  following  enforcement
                  action in 2012.


             126.      There  is  no  reliable  evidence   of   significant
                  obstacles to his reintegration  in  Nigeria.  By  his  own
                  evidence he has made no effort to trace his parents and he
                  has failed to demonstrate  that  he  has  lost  ties  with
                  Nigeria as claimed. Nor is there any reliable evidence  to
                  demonstrate that he has made efforts to trace  his  sister
                  who allegedly relocated to Kent. As stated above I do  not
                  accept that the appellant has lost ties  with  Nigeria  as
                  claimed.


             127.     These findings are also relevant to section  117C  of
                  the 2002 Act and  the  assessment  of  proportionality  in
                  accordance with Article 8 ECHR; Hesham  Ali  applied.  The
                  appellant has also failed to demonstrate  very  compelling
                  circumstances to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
                  deportation.


             128.     For the reason stated above I accept the family  life
                  exists between the appellant and the partner. However  any
                  interference  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim
                  pursued;  economic  well-being  of  the  country  and  the
                  prevention of disorder and crime.


             129.     If I am wrong to find that family life does not exist
                  between the appellant and the  children  any  interference
                  with  article  8  ECHR  is  proportionate  for  the   same
                  reasons."

     9. The appellant sought permission to appeal claiming the  Judge  went
        behind a concession made by the respondent who  accepted  that  the
        appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
        his children which is stated, at  least,  to  be  a  concession  of
        family life with the two children the appellant is  the  biological
        father of. The appellant asserts the finding of the Judge at  [101]
        and [118] that the appellant does not enjoy family life with any of
        the children was not open to him in the absence of any  application
        by the respondent to  withdraw  the  concession.  Ground  2  claims
        impermissible departure from the findings of the earlier First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge who  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        removal direction at the time the  appellant  was  not  subject  to
        deportation, but who found the appellant played  an  important  and
        valuable part within the family unit and that it was preferable for
        the children to remain with both  parents.  Ground  3  asserts  the
        Judge denied the appellant a fair hearing and that the  finding  at
        [122] is said  to  be  based  upon  evidence  at  page  G2  of  the
        appellant's bundle which is a letter stating that a release address
        proposed by the appellant was approved by  the  National  Probation
        Services which was different from the one given  as  the  sponsor's
        current address. It is argued it was not  open  for  the  Judge  to
        conclude from that evidence alone that  living  separate  from  the
        appellant will be beneficial for  the  children  as  there  was  no
        evidence as to whether the sponsor's home address had been assessed
        as a possible release address  or  what  the  outcome  of  such  an
        assessment would be. It  is  asserted  neither  the  appellant  nor
        sponsor was  asked  to  comment  upon  the  issue  of  whether  the
        appellant could safely reside in the family home and nor  was  this
        issue raised by the respondent.
    10. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal on 23 August 2018.



Error of law


    11. At [122] of the  impugned  decision  the  Judge  makes  a  specific
        finding that in light of the appellant's conduct it  would  not  be
        unduly harsh for the children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
        without   the   appellant.   Paragraph    399(a)(ii)(b)    requires
        consideration of whether it will be unduly harsh for  the  children
        to remain in the United Kingdom if the appellant is to be deported.
        The undue harshness test is also applicable to 399(b)(iii)  of  the
        Immigration Rules.
    12. The conclusion by the Judge that the separation  of  the  appellant
        from the family unit would not be unduly harsh deals with the  core
        issue of the appellant's inability to succeed under the Immigration
        Rules.
    13. Even if the Judge was wrong in relation to his  assessment  of  the
        existence of family life, family life between a  parent  and  child
        being recognised by article 8 ECHR  from  birth,  the  Judge  makes
        findings in the alternative if such family life exists. Accordingly
        no arguable unfairness has been made out.
    14. Outside the Immigration Rules, the Judge  reminds  himself  of  the
        terms of section 117C and relevant case law at [127] and finds  the
        appellant has failed to demonstrate very  compelling  circumstances
        sufficient to outweigh the public interest in his  deportation  and
        that, accordingly, any interference in a protected right  had  been
        shown to be proportionate. No arguable legal error material to that
        decision has been made out on the  basis  the  pleaded  grounds  or
        submissions.  The  only  situation  in   which   consideration   of
        proportionality will  arise  is  if  the  Tribunal  is  considering
        interference with a protected right,  such  as  family  or  private
        life.
    15. There was a material difference between the  circumstances  of  the
        earlier appeal and the current appeal although the Judge  accepted,
        according to the Devaseelan principle, that  the  earlier  decision
        should be the starting point. The Judge finds however that  matters
        have moved on particularly as the appellant is now the subject of a
        deportation order based upon his conduct in the interim.
    16. There is arguable merit in the submission by Mr Wilding that  there
        is no challenge to the findings made by the  Judge,  the  challenge
        being to the question of whether it was unfair to depart  from  the
        findings of the earlier Tribunal. It has  not  been  made  out  the
        conclusions reached are outside the range of those reasonably  open
        to the Judge on the evidence, warranting departure from the earlier
        decision although, as stated above, the findings in the alternative
        effectively accept that that will be the position  if  family  life
        does exist.
    17. No arguable unfairness is made  out  sufficient  to  amount  to  an
        arguable legal error of  law  warranting  the  decision  being  set
        aside.
    18. The appellant's partner shall remain in the United Kingdom  and  it
        was not made out that it was unduly harsh or not proportionate  for
        her to remain in the UK without the  appellant,  in  light  of  the
        history of this matter as identified by the Judge.
    19. Whilst the best interests of the children may  be  to  remain  with
        both their parents this is a  deportation  decision  and  the  best
        interests of the children are not the determinative factor.
    20. I do not find it made out the Judge has erred in law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on the basis that it
        had not been made out that it will be unduly harsh for those family
        members who will remain in the United Kingdom to do so without  the
        appellant, or that any  interference  with  a  protected  right  is
        proportionate in light of the decision to deport the appellant from
        the United Kingdom as a result of his conviction  for  drug-related
        offences. It is known drugs have a devastating  effect  upon  those
        addicted to the same and family members of such individuals  and  a
        negative impact upon society in general.


Decision

    21. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.........................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 October 2018.
