
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: HU/12925/2019     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 July 2021                   |On 9 July 2021                   |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ADIL MEHBOOB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, instructed by Lumbini Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals, with permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan, against FtT Judge  Lucas's
    decision to allow Mr Mehboob's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. Mr Mehboob had sought leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  spouse.   The
    application was  refused  under  the  Five-Year  Route  because  of  an
    allegation of ETS fraud and because he did not  have  extant  leave  to
    remain.  It was refused under the Ten-Year Route because the  Secretary
    of State did not accept that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in Pakistan.

 3. Judge Lucas allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds,  finding  that  it
    was difficult see any public interest in the removal of Mr Mehboob.  He
    noted, amongst  other  matters,  that  he  had  had  appropriate  leave
    throughout; that the relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting;  that
    there had been no recourse to public funds; that the ETS allegation had
    fallen away; and that the separation of Mr Mehboob from his wife  would
    affect the mental health problems from which they both suffer.

 4. What was said in the Secretary of State's grounds was that Judge  Lucas
    had erred in law in failing to note  that  there  was  a  clear  public
    interest in Mr Mehboob's removal, in that he was  unable  to  meet  the
    Financial Requirements of the Immigration Rules.  That error  was  said
    to have skewed the proportionality assessment undertaken  in  the  FtT.
    Judge Chohan considered that point to be arguable.

 5. In a concise and robust response to the grounds of appeal,  Mr  Solomon
    submitted that the grounds misunderstood the situation before the  FtT.
    There had been agreement between the parties,  based  on  the  evidence
    which was before the judge, that  Mr  Mehboob  was  able  to  meet  the
    Financial Requirements of Appendix FM at the date of hearing.   It  was
    on that basis, he submitted, that the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    point in his assessment of proportionality under Article 8 ECHR.

 6. Having considered the evidence and the  skeleton  argument  before  the
    FtT, Mr Walker did not pursue the grounds of appeal.  He accepted  that
    there had been no disagreement before the  judge  about  the  financial
    position at the date of hearing and he accepted that the point taken in
    the grounds had fallen away as a result.  He did not seek to  criticise
    the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds in any way.

 7. In the circumstances, I was able to indicate to Mr Solomon that  I  did
    not need to hear from him and that the decision of the FtT to allow the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds would stand.



Notice of Decision

There was no legal error in the decision of the FtT, which shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                                 1 July 2021

