
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/12309/2015
                                                               HU/12311/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2018                            |On 1 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                            Hon Mr Justice WARBY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Mr bedang limbu
                               miss anu limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Dieu, instructed by NC Brothers & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, but nonetheless for the
    purposes of this decision we shall refer to the parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are siblings and nationals of Nepal born on 12th January
    1987  and  18th  April  1988  respectively.   They  applied  for  entry
    clearance to settle in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  adult  dependent
    relatives of their father, an ex Ghurkha soldier, Mr Jagat Limbu.  That
    application was refused and they appealed.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Birk allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds finding that  family  life
    had been established between the appellants and their  sponsor  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision advancing  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge misdirected herself in law.  The grounds read as follows:

         'The Tribunal reminds itself of the appropriate test  at  paragraph
         16 where it  refers  to  Kugathas.   However,  it  is  respectfully
         submitted that it did not go on to apply that test.  The appellants
         are 30 and 29 years old and they have been living  apart  from  the
         sponsor for 9 years and their mother for  5  years.   Although  the
         appellants' family has maintained regular contact and their parents
         have  visited  them  on  several  occasions,  it  is   respectfully
         submitted that the Kugathas standard requires more than  that.  The
         Tribunal has not gone on to consider elements of dependency  beyond
         the normal emotional ties.  Furthermore, it has not even gone on to
         make evidence based findings on emotional dependency.  In  view  of
         this the decision on this case is incomplete and  it  is  submitted
         that the case needs to be looked at afresh'.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on the basis that

         'Although their family have maintained regular  contact,  including
         visits on several  occasions  it  is  arguable  that  the  Kugathas
         standard requires more than that.  The Judge has  not  gone  on  to
         consider elements of dependency beyond the normal emotional ties or
         based any findings on emotional dependency'.

 5. The main issue raised by the appeal is whether the FTTJ erred in law in
    her approach to the question of whether a family life within the  ambit
    of Article 8 existed at the material time between the adult  Appellants
    and their father, "the sponsor".

    Legal and policy context

 6. The applicable  principles  are  well-established,  and  were  recently
    reviewed and re-stated in Rai  (Jitendra)  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320. Some key points are that:

      1) The burden of proof to show family life  exists  and  the  ECHR  is
         engaged, rests with the appellants and the standard of proof is the
         balance of probabilities.  The Secretary of  State  must  show  the
         decision is proportionate.

      2) It is not enough to show the normal emotional ties  that  would  be
         expected between a parent and their  adult  child;  something  more
         must be shown: Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  Sedley LJ  said
         in paragraph 17 of his judgment that 'if dependency is read down as
         meaning 'support', in the personal sense, and if one adds,  echoing
         the Strasbourg jurisprudence, 'real' or 'committed' or 'effective';
         to the word 'support' then it represents...'the irreducible minimum
         of what family life implies'.

      3) One factor that is relevant, though not determinative,  is  whether
         the adult child has formed a family of his or  her  own:  Gurung  v
         SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

      4) The judgments in  Kugathas  should  not  necessarily  be  read  too
         restrictively.

      5) In the end, the assessment is a holistic one and ultimately as  per
         Lord Dyson M.R. in Gurung v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8  '[it]  all
         depends on the facts'.  There should be  careful  consideration  of
         the facts in the case.

      6) As Sir Stanley Burnton stated in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630

             'there is no legal or factual presumption as to the  existence
             or absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8 ...The
             love and  affection  between  an  adult  and  his  parents  or
             siblings will not of itself justify a finding of family  life.
             There has to be something more'.

    The evidence

 7. The Judge recorded in her decision that she had heard evidence from the
    sponsor, who gave evidence via  a  statement  and  was  cross-examined,
    giving evidence through a Nepalese interpreter. The Judge also referred
    to documentary evidence and the fact that she had heard submissions  on
    the Appellants' behalf from Mr Dieu, who has appeared  before  us,  and
    from Mr Hogg, the Home Office Presenting Officer who appeared below.

    The Judge's decision

 8. In paragraphs [9] and [19] of the decision under appeal, the FTTJ  made
    the following findings of fact:

      1) The sponsor came to reside in the UK in  2008.  He  left  Anu,  the
         second Appellant, in order to take the  opportunity  to  come  here
         even if it meant leaving his daughter (she was 20 years old at  the
         time).  The appellants are their only children.

      2) In 2010 the Appellants applied for entry to the  UK.  In  the  same
         year the sponsor went to visit them.

      3) In 2012 the Appellants' mother followed her husband to the UK.

      4) The Appellants "had been studying though that  is  now  completed".
         They live together in a rented house as the family house is  rented
         out, "because it is Dharan and the Appellants were not  willing  to
         live there when the sponsor came here." There are no jobs there.

      5) Throughout the period of  separation,  the  Appellants  "have  been
         supported by the sponsor", by means of regular payments,  evidenced
         by money transfer receipts.  The  sponsor  pays  the  rent  on  the
         property in Nepal.

      6) The sponsor visited his adult children again in 2014  and  a  third
         time in 2016.

      7) There was "evidence of contact between  the  Appellants  and  their
         parents which is described as using modern forms of communication".

      8) Neither Appellant had formed a separate family unit.

 9. For these reasons, the FTTJ reached the conclusion that

         "... the Appellants have established that their  family  life  does
         exist with their father and they are  a  family  unit  despite  the
         physical separation for a number of years.... and that they  remain
         the responsibility of their parents."

10. The Judge proceeded to conclude  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision  represented  an  interference  with  the  family  life   thus
    established. She accepted that the interference pursued the  legitimate
    aim of maintaining  effective  immigration  control  by  lawful  means.
    However, having balanced all  the  relevant  factors  the  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance was held to be disproportionate.

11. In reaching this last conclusion the Judge placed great weight  on  the
    historical injustice to the children of  ex-Gurkha  soldiers,  and  the
    implications of that for the Article 8 balancing exercise, referring to
    Patel v ECO Mumbai  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  17  and  Ghising  (Gurkhas/BOCs:
    historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567. She found  on  the  evidence
    that the parties spoke English and that the sponsor would be  providing
    accommodation and  financial  support  so  that  none  of  the  factors
    specified in s 117B seriously undermined the claim.

    Submissions

12. For the Secretary of State, Mr Avery does  not  criticise  the  Judge's
    approach to the proportionality assessment. He focuses  his  attack  on
    the finding that a family life existed.  He  argued  that  the  Judge's
    findings on both law and fact were 'thin' and  that  there  was  little
    reasoning. He referred us to Rai (Jitendra).  The family connection and
    financial support were indicators of family life  but  insufficient  to
    establish family life.  There was little indication in this instance of
    any participation by the sponsor in decisions for or the emotional life
    of the appellants. The decision should be sufficiently detailed  to  be
    understood.   There needed to be a finding with regard family life when
    the sponsor left Nepal and the continuing nexus to the present day.

13. Mr Dieu assured us that the decision when read as a whole  referred  to
    the  relevant  authorities  at  [16]  and  urged  us  to  consider  the
    assessment of family life in stages. The  parent  blood  bond  was  the
    first stage but insufficient; the next stage was love and affection and
    the authorities confirmed that more than that was required and  it  was
    what was beyond and this next stage which was important.   He  referred
    us to Kugathas. At paragraph [18] the  Judge  set  out  the  levels  of
    support which were real committed and effective. There was evidence  of
    financial transfers, payment of rent on the property in Nepal  for  the
    appellants and emotional support in the form of three separate  visits.
    The reference to modern communication identified the log  of  telephone
    contact between the sponsor and the appellants.    There  had  been  no
    challenge from the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  to  any  of  the
    evidence supplied.  Financial and emotional support was intertwined. He
    accepted that  the  Judge  failed  to  detail  the  statements  of  the
    appellants which were present in the bundle but the Judge  specifically
    accepted the statement and evidence of the  sponsor  which  was  highly
    pertinent.

    Discussion and conclusions

14. It is a fair observation that the reasoning in the Judge's decision, on
    first blush, appears rather thin. We have however been  persuaded  that
    the decision, when read carefully as a whole, makes  adequate  findings
    in relation to the central issue that is family life under Article 8.

15. Before coming to her findings of fact and her evaluation of the  merits
    the Judge had made clear (in paragraph [8] of the  Decision)  that  she
    would summarise in her decision "only the most salient points"  of  the
    evidence of submissions,  and  that  she  took  into  account  all  the
    documentation before her.

16. At the hearing of this appeal it became apparent that the documentation
    before the FTTJ was more extensive and more detailed than might  appear
    from  her  summary.  It  has  proved  possible,  by  reference  to  the
    underlying evidence, to appreciate fully the reasoning in  the  Judge's
    account of the facts.  This, however, is not an  exercise  in  creating
    reasons where none existed.

17. In terms of  the  law  the  Judge  cited  the  correct  authorities  at
    paragraph [16] of her  decision.   She  directed  herself  to  Kugathas
    clearly identifying that more  than  normal  emotional  ties  would  be
    expected of adult family members.  She also identified that Gurung  (in
    fact with reference to Ghising (family  life  -  adults-Gurkha  policy)
    [2012] UKUT 160) gives clear direction on the approach to be taken with
    reference to adult  Gurkha dependants.  Extensive recitation of the law
    is not required when it is evident that the Judge applied  the  correct
    law in substance. That the Judge used a form of shorthand in  referring
    to the law does not indicate an error of law when no error can be found
    in its application.  The Judge cut through verbiage to  arrive  at  the
    heart of the matter which was whether family life existed. Brevity  and
    concision does not necessarily indicate an error of law.

18. At  paragraph  [18]  the  Judge  specifically  accepted  the  sponsor's
    evidence finding his answers consistent and clear and she relied on his
    statement to support her findings  in  relation  to  family  life.   At
    paragraph [7] of the sponsor's statement he recorded

         'I understand that once, the British Government stated that it  was
         not their intention to split up Gurkha families  just  because  one
         child was over eighteen years, but that is exactly what  they  have
         done in Anu and Bedang's cases.  They are completely  dependent  on
         their mother and I for absolutely  everything.  We  pay  for  their
         accommodation, their clothes, their food and drink, all their bills
         and we paid for all of their studies until they graduated'  W/S [7]



         'However, their settlement applications have never been just  about
         money.  They are my dependent children.  Even though they are  over
         eighteen they need their mother and me to look  after  them.   They
         have shown that alone, they do not cope very  well  and  that  they
         miss their mother and me' W/S [8].

         'There are also cultural considerations that we have  to  consider.
         Nepalese society expects a family to stay together and support each
         other until a child is able to support himself, and neither Anu nor
         Bedang can do that yet, because they cannot work because  there  is
         no work available, and they are not married. ' W/S [9].

19. This evidence was reflected by the witness statements of the appellants
    which identified (as noted by the Judge in her recitation of the facts)
    that the mother had stayed with the appellants for a further four years
    after the father had departed for the United Kingdom.   The  appellants
    made their first applications  immediately  on  the  departure  of  the
    sponsor,  in  2010,  which  were  refused.   Their  applications  which
    generated the decisions and this appeal was in fact dated  7th  October
    2015.   Although criticised for failing to consider whether  there  was
    family life at  the  point  of  separation  and  currently,  the  Judge
    specifically  noted  that  the  family  lived  together  prior  to  the
    departure of the sponsor, and then their mother, and the Judge accepted
    that throughout the period  of  separation  the  appellants  had  'been
    supported by the sponsor'.  The Judge had this to say

         'There have  been  produced  bank  statements  and  money  transfer
         receipts and the sponsor pays for  the  rent  on  the  property  in
         Nepal'

    Indeed there are financial remittance  receipts  in  the  documentation
    from the sponsor to the appellants dating back to October 2013 and bank
    statements of the  appellants  showing  their  financial  transactions.
    These referred to IME transactions and for which a substantial quantity
    of receipts were produced and which dated back to 2010.

20. There were also certificates from the Dharan Municpality  Office  dated
    2009 confirming the appellants' single status.  The  sponsor  confirmed
    this persisted. The Judge found that 'neither  has  formed  a  separate
    family unit elsewhere'.

21. The Judge made a rather oblique reference to the  evidence  of  contact
    between the 'Appellants and their parents which is described  as  using
    modern forms of communication' but continued to find 'the  sponsor  and
    the appellants' statements are sufficiently detailed about the level of
    contact'.   We note there was a 'Call Record History'  from  Lycamobile
    and a log from Nepal Telecom and numerous and frequent  screenshots  of
    contact showing evidence of ongoing contact which continuing over time.
     The documentation was substantial since at  least  August  2015.   The
    first appellant confirmed in his statement that

         'I speak to them usually everyday, and they come to see Anu and  me
         as often as they can afford.  We speak using our mobile phones  and
         using the  social  media  application  Viber.  Copies  of  all  our
         itemised phone bills and Viber communications are attached to  this
         statement'.

22. The Judge also identified that the contact was not  limited  to  modern
    means of communication but also 'the sponsor has visited the Appellants
    on 3 occasions, 2010, 2014 and 2016'.  The expense of those visits  was
    highlighted in the statement of the first appellant.

23. In our view the Secretary of State is attempting to  argue  that  there
    needs to be something akin to exceptional in  order  to  succeed.   The
    policy is aimed at rectifying historic injustice and as  explained  the
    children of the sponsor would have settled with him  had  he  not  been
    denied that right hitherto. The Judge did address the issue  of  family
    life albeit that the family were separated for 9 years but that was not
    merely through choice. The Court of Appeal in Rai  (Jitendra)  analysed
    the approach of the Secretary of State regarding the approach to family
    life and rejected the approach of 'looking not just  for  a  sufficient
    degree of financial and emotional dependence to constitute family life'
    [our emphasis].  This was considered to be an approach  which  was  too
    exacting.  Nor did the  Court  sanction  any  critical  emphasis  on  a
    sponsor's voluntary choice to leave  adult  children  in  Nepal.   This
    might have the effect of undermining the existence of family life.  The
    question was whether family life existed at the time of  the  sponsor's
    departure and whether  it  endured  beyond  it  'notwithstanding  their
    having left Nepal when they did'. [39].

24. As set out in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT
    00085 (IAC)    'Although  there  is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having  regard  to  the  material  accepted  by  the
    judge'.

25. Unpicking the threads of the Judge's decision  it  is  clear  that  the
    decision is concise but nevertheless the judge has enlisted the correct
    interpretation of the law and made relevant findings on the key  points
    regarding Article 8 family life.  Overall the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  fulfilled  the  requirement  of  the  irreducible
    minimum for family life because the support was 'real' and  'committed'
    and 'effective.  To our minds although the Judge has, in some respects,
    expressed herself in shorthand the meaning is clear and  the  Secretary
    of State is seeking to varnish the requirements  to  show  family  life
    exists  by  adding  an  extra  layer  to  the  established  test.    As
    identified above 'it all depends on the facts'.  In this instance those
    facts as found support the finding of continuing  family  life  between
    the sponsor and appellants.  We  therefore  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  therefore  dismissed  and  the
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Helen Rimington                  Signed 27th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

