
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12337/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2019                            |On 25 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                          Mrs Lynita Leslie Fisher
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Ahmed, Solicitor Advocate, Regents and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Bart-Stewart, who dismissed her appeal against the Secretary of
State's refusal of her application for leave to remain on human rights
grounds as the spouse of a person present and settled in the United
Kingdom.

The application was originally refused on two grounds under paragraph
287(a)(v) and (vi) of the Immigration Rules for the following reasons.
First, that the Home Office was not satisfied that there was adequate
maintenance for the couple in the United Kingdom because their income,
after deducting housing costs, was lower than the income support level
required for a couple and secondly, the English language certificate that
had been submitted was not to the required standard and was not within two
years preceding the date of application.  Appendix FM and in particular
paragraph EX.1 was considered as was paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
Rules but leave to remain was not granted on any of those bases.

The appellant appealed and the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal
on 15 November 2018.  The appellant had originally requested an oral
hearing but had later changed that to request a determination on the
papers.  It appears that the hearing went ahead as an oral hearing with
Counsel representing the Secretary of State and no-one appearing for the
appellant and her not appearing in person.

At the oral hearing, Counsel for the respondent, as recorded in paragraph
11 of the decision, noted that the appellant appears to have met the
financial conditions and has subsequently submitted an English language
certificate to the required standard, albeit that it post-dated the
application and decision.  Submissions were also made as to whether there
would be insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing abroad.  There
was no issue taken either in the original refusal letter or in the
submissions made by Counsel for the respondent at the hearing as to the
genuineness of the relationship between the appellant and her spouse.

In the decision, Judge Bart-Stewart dismissed the appeal under paragraph
287 of the Immigration Rules on a number of grounds.  These included that
she did not accept that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship
between the couple, that there was no evidence of the appellant's current
circumstances other than payslips showing that she was in employment and
there was no reference to payslips or income for her husband.  There was
also a note that the English language certificate had been filed but this
post-dated the date of application.  Overall, it was not accepted that the
Applicant met the requirements of paragraph 287 for these reasons.  There
was then a consideration of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the
Immigration Rules, but the appeal was ultimately dismissed on human rights
grounds on those bases as well.

The appellant seeks to appeal the decision on a number of grounds, only
three of which are material in this case.  The first is that the judge
proceeded to find that there was no genuine and subsisting relationship
without this ever having been raised as an issue by the respondent without
any request for evidence on the same point.  Obviously, as they did not
attend the hearing the matter was not raised with them on the day by the
Judge either.  There was in fact documentary evidence within the bundle
which showed cohabitation and no further evidence should have been required
on the basis of the respondent's decision letter.  The finding that there
was no genuine and subsisting relationship in these circumstances is a
clear error of law, particularly when it was not an issue taken by the
respondent at all and the appellant had no opportunity to address the
issue.  It is and error for the First-tier Tribunal to find against the
appellant when a matter has not been raised by anyone, including the Judge,
and where there is no clear basis for dismissing the appeal on the
available evidence for that reason.  The appellant has clearly not had an
opportunity to address any evidence on the point and it is a matter that is
expressly accepted by the respondent.  In those circumstances, the Judge
gave inadequate reasons for looking at the issue at all, let alone
dismissing the appeal on that basis.

The second theme within the grounds of appeal is that there was evidence of
the appellant's spouse's income and payslips supported by P60s and bank
statements within the bundle submitted which had not been taken into
account by the First-tier Tribunal.  The evidence showed that the income
was above what was needed for adequate maintenance without recourse to
public funds for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.  That again was
expressly accepted on behalf of the respondent at the hearing and
insufficient reasons have been given by the Judge to explain findings to
the contrary.  That again is a clear error of law, particularly when there
is evidence in the files supporting that the requirement is satisfied.

The next ground of appeal is in relation to the English language test, the
ground of appeal being that discretion should have been exercised to accept
the English language test in all of the circumstances.  In submissions
before me today, Mr Walker had to accept it is just that this is taken into
account.  Although the certificate post-dated the date of application and
date of decision there is an English language test certificate showing that
the requirement in the Immigration Rules is met in substance.

The other grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give
any proper consideration to the test of insurmountable obstacles and failed
to apply the cases of Huang and Razgar.  It is not necessary to consider
those grounds in any detail on the basis that Mr Walker accepts before me
today that as the appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules
in terms of maintenance and English language as well as being in a genuine
and subsisting relationship, that the requirements of the Immigration Rules
are in fact satisfied.  These are matters which are material to the outcome
of the appeal, on which there are clear errors of law in the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal and which require the decision to be set aside.

In these circumstances, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
for the material errors of law I have identified and remake the decision to
allow the appeal on human rights grounds. I am only permitted to allow the
appeal on human rights grounds under the current system but given the
Respondent's acceptance that the substantive requirements of the
Immigration Rules are met, there can be no public interest in dismissing
the appeal on Article 8 or human rights grounds.  That is the reason why I
allow it and there is no further need to consider the final three grounds
of appeal as to any alternative way in which the appeal may be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  re-make  it  as
follows:
The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     21st February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


