
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12018/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2017                           |On 15 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                           MOHAMMOD EMADUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel instructed by Kalam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals the decision of a First-tier  Judge  following  a
    hearing on 17 February 2017 to dismiss his appeal against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State on 16 November 2015 to refuse his application
    for indefinite leave to remain as the husband  of  Mrs  Runa  Begum,  a
    British citizen.

2.   The appellant had entered this country on 28 April  2013  on  a  spouse
    visa.  The application was refused on the basis that the appellant  had
    submitted a Test of English  for  International  Communication  (TOEIC)
    certificate dated 21 February 2012 which had been fraudulently obtained
    by  the  appellant  through  the  use  of  a  proxy  test  taker.   The
    application had been refused under paragraph  289  of  the  Immigration
    Rules with reference to paragraph 287(a)(vii) and  paragraph  322(5)  -
    the refusal was on the basis that the appellant's presence  in  the  UK
    was not conducive to the public good.  The Presenting Officer  accepted
    that because the appellant's application for leave to remain  had  been
    made on the back of a previous grant of leave  to  enter  as  a  spouse
    under paragraph 281 of the Rules, the old Immigration  Rules  prior  to
    the changes made by Appendix FM continued to apply  to  the  appellant.
    The only matter in issue was the validity of the TOEIC certificate.  If
    the judge found there had been no deception in the TOEIC exam then  the
    appellant would satisfy paragraph 287  of  the  Rules  and  the  appeal
    should be allowed.  If the judge were not satisfied that there  was  no
    deception then the appeal fell to be considered under Article 8 outside
    the Rules.  The judge noted that the appellant had stated that  he  did
    not wish to use an  interpreter  and  he  gave  evidence  initially  in
    English but she records that he struggled to do so "and fairly  quickly
    moved to giving  evidence  using  an  interpreter  the  language  being
    Bengali".  His wife also gave  evidence  with  the  assistance  of  the
    interpreter.

3.   The judge refers to the submissions made on behalf of  the  respondent.
    It was noted that the TOEIC test had been marked as questionable and as
    a result the appellant had been called to an interview to give  him  an
    opportunity to address whether or not a proxy had been used to take the
    test and it was to be noted that he had requested an interpreter during
    that interview.  The appellant had struggled at interview  and  at  the
    hearing to answer questions in English.  He could not remember where he
    had taken the test or what the test comprised of.   The  appellant  did
    not meet the suitability requirements of the Rules and  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances.   It  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to be with both their parents.  The appellant's family life in
    the UK had been developed at a time when  the  appellant's  immigration
    status was precarious.

4.   Counsel then acting for the appellant pointed out that the  appellant's
    test had been found to be questionable but not  invalid.   He  accepted
    that the evidential burden on the respondent  had  been  satisfied  but
    submitted that there was no evidence before the judge to show that  the
    appellant had used a proxy.  The generic evidence was not sufficient to
    discharge the legal burden.  In relation to Article 8  the  appellant's
    wife and two young children were British  citizens  and  reference  was
    made to the respondent's guidance on family life as a partner or parent
    and the guidance on whether  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a
    British citizen child to leave the UK.  He submitted that it was in the
    children's best interest to be with both their parents and it would not
    be reasonable to expect the appellant's children to leave the  UK.   He
    pointed out that the appellant's family life had been  developed  at  a
    time when his immigration status was lawful although precarious.

5.   Having heard the  submissions  the  judge  gave  the  reasons  for  her
    decision on the issue of the evidential burden (which, as I have  said,
    had been conceded by Counsel) as follows:

         "25. The burden is on the Respondent to bear the initial burden  of
             furnishing proof of deception - SSHD v Shehzad  and  Chowdhury
             [2016] EWCA  Civ  615  ('Shehzad').   I  have  considered  the
             documentary evidence in the Respondent's supplementary bundle.
              Document 1 of the  Respondent's  supplementary  bundle  is  a
             witness  statement  from  senior  caseworker,   Raana   Afzal,
             relating to the process by which the Appellant was  identified
             as a person who  had  sought  to  obtain  leave  by  deception
             through the use of a fraudulently obtained  TOEIC  certificate
             provided by Educational Testing Services (ETS).  Document 2 is
             the ETS SELT source data relating to the Appellant which shows
             that  the   Appellant's   test   has   been   categorised   as
             questionable.  Document 3 is the ETS TOEIC test centre  lookup
             tool for Elizabeth College  showing  the  MIDA  matched  data.
             Document 4 is the project facade criminal enquiry  into  abuse
             of the TOEIC  relating  to  Elizabeth  College,  London.   The
             ongoing criminal enquiry relating  to  Elizabeth  College  has
             revealed that  between  18/10/2011  and  26/09/2012  Elizabeth
             College undertook 3919 TOEIC tests  of  which  ETS  identified
             2074 as invalid and 1845 as questionable.  There were no tests
             where there was no evidence of invalidity i.e. no tests  where
             the TOEIC were not withdrawn.  This shows that  there  was  an
             organised and widespread abuse of the TOEIC exam at  Elizabeth
             College.  Document 5  is  the  witness  statement  of  Rebecca
             Collings.  Document  6  is  the  witness  statement  of  Peter
             Millington and document 7 is the report by Prof  Peter  French
             dated 20 April 2016 relating to  forensic  speaker  comparison
             tests undertaken by ETS.


         26.   In  addition  there  is  also  a  copy  in   the   Respondent
             supplementary bundle of the  Appellant's  temporary  migration
             credibility interview which took place on 7 October 2015.   In
             that interview the Appellant is asked when  he  took  the  ETS
             TOEIC English language test.  He responds that he is taken two
             tests and indicates he has taken one that was at level B1.  He
             is asked when he undertook the test and states  that  he  took
             the test at the end of January (specifying  28  January  2015)
             and that he took the test  at  Harrow  International  Business
             School.  He is asked whether he  has  ever  taken  a  test  at
             Elizabeth College and responds he cannot remember  that  test.
             He states that he completed a test in 2011 that being  the  A1
             test.  It is then put to the Appellant that  the  Home  Office
             records show that he  sat  a  test  at  Elizabeth  College  in
             December 2012 and the Appellant then  appears  to  recall  the
             test and states that it was an A1 test.  He  states  that  the
             test was for the purpose of an application  in  Bangladesh  on
             the grounds of a spouse  visa.   The  Appellant  is  expressly
             asked why he could not  remember  taking  the  test  Elizabeth
             College until advised about the record of  the  test  and  his
             explanation is that he cannot remember due  to  the  time  has
             passed.  It is a matter of note that he cannot remember taking
             the test.


         27.  The Appellant is also asked  whether  he  completed  a  course
             before taking the English test and responds that 'he did  some
             classes with them'.  He has however unable to recall where the
             classes took  place  other  than  a  vague  reference  to  the
             Whitechapel area.  According to the  Appellant's  evidence  in
             the interview his test was booked by the people  that  he  did
             the  class  with.   The  Appellant  is  asked  to   tell   the
             interviewer what the test involved and is able  to  give  very
             little detail simply referring to there being 3 or  4  answers
             and he marked the right answer and that it was  the  same  for
             every question.   The  Appellant  had  the  assistance  of  an
             interpreter for the first 17 questions but answered  questions
             18 to 21 without  the  assistance  of  the  interpreter.   The
             interviewer notes that in relation to the questions where  the
             interpreter was not used he had to  speak  slowly  and  repeat
             almost all of the questions asked.


         28.  I find that the information which specifically relates to  the
             Appellant  and  the  evidence  in  the   temporary   migration
             interview, including the fact that  the  Appellant  could  not
             recall having  taken  the  test  at  Elizabeth  College  until
             prompted and could provide very little detail about the  test,
             when taken with the statements provided by  Peter  Millington,
             Rebecca Collins and Raana  Afsal,  discharges  the  evidential
             burden on the Respondent".

6.   The judge then noted that  the  burden  shifted  to  the  appellant  to
    provide a plausible or innocent explanation.  She reminded herself that
    on the authorities such questions  would  invariably  be  intrinsically
    fact- sensitive.

7.   The judge noted that the appellant  had  given  contradictory  evidence
    about whether the appellant had personally booked his test and how long
    it had lasted.  The inconsistencies undermined his evidence that he had
    taken the test.  No detail had been provided about the content  of  the
    test.  The appellant had successfully  passed  other  English  language
    tests in 2015 but the judge was not satisfied that at the time  of  the
    TOEIC certificate the appellant had passed a similar test to show  that
    his standard of English in 2012 was such that  he  would  have  had  no
    motivation to cheat in  the  TOEIC  exam.   In  relation  to  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    struggled significantly to give evidence in  English  and  his  answers
    "were  not  particularly  detailed  and  rather  garbled".   The  judge
    observed:

         "While I appreciate  that  the  hearing  is  a  significantly  more
         stressful experience than for example if the appellant was  engaged
         in  general  conversation  with  other  people  I  find  that   the
         appellant's English language ability during  the  hearing  was  not
         impressive".


    She noted that the appellant had confirmed that  he  communicated  with
    his wife in Bengali.   The  judge  in  paragraph  35  of  her  decision
    commented that it was odd that the appellant had been able to  remember
    details about registering for the exam in 2012 and the  exact  location
    of the exam but could remember almost nothing about the exam itself.

8.   The judge also heard  from  Mrs  Begum  who  had  not  accompanied  her
    husband on the day of the test at Elizabeth College.  When she  visited
    her  GP  she  did  not  require  an  interpreter  unless  she  was  not
    accompanied by her husband.  In relation to her desire to remain in the
    UK with her two young children and husband  rather  than  returning  to
    Bangladesh she stated that she had no  family  in  Bangladesh  and  she
    wished to stay in the UK because prospects were not good in Bangladesh.
     She had visited Bangladesh in 2012 staying for just over a  month  and
    for approximately five to six weeks in 2013.  Her passport  showed  she
    had been in Bangladesh on 3 February 2013 until 27 April 2013.  She had
    stayed with her mother-in-law on both occasions.

9.   The determination continues:

         "37. Considering the evidence in  the  round  I  do  not  find  the
             Appellant to be a credible witness.  I accept that  the  score
             of which is recorded for the Appellant in the  TOEIC  test  is
             not particularly high being 110.  Nevertheless, the very  fact
             he could not remember taking  the  test,  his  inconsistencies
             regarding the booking  of  the  test  and  when  he  took  the
             particular  parts  of  the  test  undermine  his   credibility
             significantly.   In  addition,  the  contrast  in  his  fairly
             detailed evidence about the formalities which were carried out
             before he sat the test  when  compared  with  his  very  vague
             recollection of what he actually had to do in the  TOEIC  test
             again undermine his credibility.  This  taken  with  the  fact
             that the Appellant  exhibited  a  fairly  poor  grasp  of  the
             English language during the hearing which took place nearly  5
             years after the TOEIC test  leads  me  to  conclude  that  the
             Appellant has not provided an innocent explanation which would
             show that he did not use a proxy to take the TOEIC test.


         38.  I find that the Secretary of  State  has  established  on  the
             balance of probabilities  that  the  Appellant's  prima  facie
             innocent explanations are to be rejected.   The  Secretary  of
             State has discharged the legal burden of proof.  I  find  that
             the Appellant did submit a TOEIC certificate  which  had  been
             obtained through the use  of  a  proxy  test  taker  with  his
             application dated 30 March 2012.


         39.  Paragraph 322 of the Immigration  Rules  makes  provision  for
             refusal  of  leave  including  refusal  of  leave  to  remain,
             variation of leave to enter or remain or curtailment of leave.
              Paragraph 322 (5) is a ground on which leave to remain should
             normally be refused.  The Respondent has exercised  discretion
             to refuse the Appellant's application under paragraph 322 (5).
               I  require  to  consider  whether  there  are  any   special
             circumstances which would point to the Appellant's conduct  in
             submitting the fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate meaning
             that while the conduct of this type should  normally  lead  to
             refusal under paragraph 322 (5) it should not  do  so  in  the
             Appellant's case.  I do not consider  there  to  be  any  such
             factors in the Appellant's case.  The Appellant has engaged in
             deceitful conduct in submitting a TOEIC certificate which  was
             fraudulently obtained.   The  requirement  for  those  seeking
             entry to the UK as a spouse having passed an  English-language
             test has important policy objectives and  a  fraudulent  TOEIC
             test such as the one submitted by the Appellant undermines the
             system of immigration control in the  UK.   I  find  that  the
             Respondent was entitled to exercise discretion under paragraph
             322  (5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  find  that  it  is
             undesirable to permit the Appellant to remain in the UK in the
             light of his conduct in  submitting  a  fraudulently  obtained
             TOEIC certificate and that there are no special  circumstances
             in this case  which  mean  that  the  Appellant's  application
             should not be refused with reference  to  paragraph  322  (5).
             The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules".

10.  In relation to Article 8 the judge noted that  the  appellant  and  his
    wife had a genuine and subsisting marriage and had two daughters.   One
    had been born on 6 February 2014 and the other on  10  September  2015.
    They and their mother were British citizens.   The  judge  referred  to
    what the Court of Appeal had said at paragraph 35 of EV (Philippines) v
    Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 874:

         "A decision as to what was in the best interests of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (d) what stage their education has reached; (e) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (f) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (g) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in the country; and (h)  the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens".


11.  The judge  in  paragraph  44  noted  that  the  importance  of  British
    citizenship could not be downplayed  and  the  children  could  not  be
    forced to leave the UK.   However  they  were  very  young.   They  had
    resided in the UK all their lives but neither of the children  was  yet
    in education.  The older child might have been  attending  nursery  but
    there was no evidence provided to the judge on this issue.   While  the
    children had not lived in Bangladesh both  of  their  parents  were  of
    Bangladeshi origin.  The appellant had family who lived  in  Bangladesh
    including his mother with whom his  wife  had  previously  stayed  when
    visiting.  The appellant and his wife would be in a position to  assist
    the children  in  integrating  into  Bangladesh  and  if  the  children
    returned to Bangladesh they would be able to get to know their paternal
    grandmother and other extended family.  The appellant  said  he  had  a
    family of four brothers and two sisters.  The children  could  maintain
    contact with their maternal grandparents in the UK using modern methods
    of  communication.   The  grandparents  could  visit  the  children  in
    Bangladesh.  Both the appellant and his wife spoke  Bengali  which  was
    the language spoken in the home and accordingly the children  had  been
    exposed to the Bengali language.  The  judge  found  that  it  was  not
    likely that there would be any significant linguistic difficulties  for
    the children should they return to Bangladesh, neither of the  children
    had any medical conditions.  As the children were young they  would  be
    focused on their parents rather than their  peers  and  they  would  be
    adaptable - the judge referred to Azimi-Moayed  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).

12.  If the parents relocated outside the UK then it would be  in  the  best
    interests of the children to go with them and in such circumstances  it
    would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK  with  their
    parents and the judge found that it would be in the best  interests  of
    the children for them to return to Bangladesh  with  their  mother  and
    father as part of a family unit.

13.  The judge concludes her determination as follows:

         "46. Mrs Begum is a British citizen and cannot be forced  to  leave
             the UK.  Should she choose not to return  to  Bangladesh  with
             the Appellant I do not find that the welfare of  the  children
             would be significantly compromised.  They are both very  young
             and would be residing in the UK with their mother who is their
             primary caregiver.


         47.  While Mrs Begum is a British citizen  she  is  of  Bangladeshi
             origin.  She has visited Bangladesh in 2012 and  2013  and  in
             particular 2013 stayed for a relatively lengthy  period.   She
             speaks Bengali and is aware of the culture and  traditions  in
             Bangladesh.  On her holidays to Bangladesh he stayed with  the
             Appellant's mother and there is nothing before me  to  suggest
             that the Appellant's mother would not be  disposed  to  assist
             the family should they return to Bangladesh.


         48.  It was not suggested by Mr Hasan that the Appellant could meet
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to  remain
             as a partner or a parent and I find that he does not meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules.


         49.  The Respondent considered the  Appellant's  application  under
             the provisions of  Appendix  FM  and  leave  to  remain  as  a
             partner.   The  Appellant  does  not  meet   the   suitability
             requirements for leave to remain as a partner or parent.  As I
             have found that he submitted a  fraudulent  TOEIC  certificate
             and his presence in the UK is not conducive to the public good
             due to his conduct he cannot meet the suitability requirements
             with reference to S-LTR paragraph 1.6.  The  Appellant  has  a
             British spouse but there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life with Mrs Begum continuing in Bangladesh.


         50.  While the Appellant has 2 British  citizen  children  for  the
             reasons already given I have found that it would be reasonable
             for the Appellant's children to return to Bangladesh with  the
             Appellant as part of a family unit.  The Appellant cannot meet
             the requirements in the Immigration Rules for leave to  remain
             as a parent.


         51.  I do  not  find  that  there  is  a  significant  gap  in  the
             Immigration Rules which is not  covered  in  this  case  which
             would mean that I should go on and  consider  the  Appellant's
             case under Article 8 outwith the rules.  Nevertheless in  case
             I should be wrong in this conclusion I go on to  consider  the
             Appellant's case under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In  considering
             Article 8 of the ECHR I require to consider the rights of  the
             Appellant, Mrs Begum and the Appellant's 2 children.


         52.  In a case where removal is resisted in reliance on  Article  8
             of the ECHR, Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 (Razgar) sets out  a
             number of questions which require to be determined.  I do  not
             find  that  the  Respondent's  decision  interferes  with  the
             Appellant's family life as the Appellant, Mrs Begum and  their
             two children could return to Bangladesh and continue to  enjoy
             their family life there.  There  was  no  particular  evidence
             before me in relation to any private life that  the  Appellant
             had  developed  in  the  UK.   I  accept  however   that   his
             relationship with Mrs Begum and his children  in  addition  to
             falling within family life the purposes of Article 8 may  also
             fall within the Appellant's private life on the basis  of  his
             ability to develop relationships with his wife  and  children.
             On that basis I accept that if the Appellant was to be removed
             to Bangladesh on the may be an  interference  in  his  private
             life developed in the UK.


         53.  The Appellant has only been away from Bangladesh since 2012  a
             period  of  5  years.   He  has  family  members  residing  in
             Bangladesh including his mother and siblings.   The  Appellant
             would be able to re-establish his private life  in  Bangladesh
             with little difficulty.  He  could  keep  in  touch  with  any
             friends in the UK using modern methods of communication.


         54.  I now turn to the weight that must  be  given  to  immigration
             control within the proportionality exercise.   The  importance
             of and weight to be given  to  immigration  control  has  been
             emphasised by Parliament through the provisions in section  19
             of the Immigration Act 2014, which introduces part 5A  of  the
             Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   This  contains
             section 117A to D which must be applied when  considering  the
             public interest question as  applied  to  the  proportionality
             assessment which is the fifth test in Razgar.


         55.  In this case I am required to have regard under  section  117B
             to the statutory requirement that the maintenance of effective
             immigration controls is in the public interest.


         56.   The  Appellant  can  speak  English.   There  is  documentary
             evidence of this in the City and Guilds certificate  submitted
             with the Appellant's appeal.


         57.  There  was  no  evidence  before  me  as  to  the  Appellant's
             financial situation or which  shows  that  he  is  financially
             independent.  Section 117B (3) does not therefore  assist  the
             Appellant.


         58.  Section 117B (5) provides that little weight should  be  given
             to a private life established by a person at a time  when  the
             person's  immigration  status  is   precarious.    While   the
             Appellant has been lawfully in  the  UK  having  been  granted
             leave to enter as the spouse  of  Mrs  Begum  his  immigration
             status has always been precarious given that he was here on  a
             visa which was valid to 6 June 2015.  The precariousness of  a
             person's immigration status is also  relevant  to  any  family
             life developed in the UK.


         59.  Section 117B (6) provides that in a case of a  person  who  is
             not liable  to  deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not
             require the person's  removal  where  (a)  the  person  has  a
             genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying
             child and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
             to leave the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant's  two  daughters
             are qualifying children as they are British citizens.  However
             for the reasons given I have found that it would be reasonable
             to expect the Appellant's children to leave the  UK  with  him
             and his wife as part of a family unit.  Section  117B  (6)  is
             not applicable in the Appellant's case.


         60.  I also take account of the fact that I  have  found  that  the
             Appellant submitted a TOEIC certificate which was fraudulently
             obtained.  This is a weighty factor against the  Appellant  in
             the balancing exercise which requires to be carried out  under
             Article 8 in assessing the proportionality of the Respondent's
             decision.  The Appellant does not meet the requirements of the
             Immigration  Rules.   Weighing  the  competing  interests  and
             having regard to the need to  maintain  effective  immigration
             controls, I am satisfied that it would not be disproportionate
             to remove the Appellant to Bangladesh.  I find that there  are
             no compelling circumstances such that the  Appellant's  appeal
             should succeed outside the Immigration Rules under  Article  8
             of the ECHR".

14.  The judge accordingly dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.  There  was  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  There were three grounds.   The  first  ground  concerned  the
    credibility findings of the judge.  It was said that she had failed  to
    take into account material  matters  and  given  weight  to  immaterial
    matters.  In ground 2 it was claimed  that  the  judge  had  materially
    erred in law while  considering  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Rules  and
    paragraph S-LTR.1.6. of Appendix FM.  The threshold of falling foul  of
    paragraph 322(5) was very high  as  it  was  concerned  primarily  with
    criminality, a threat to national security, war crimes or travel  bans.
    Paragraph S-LTR.1.6. could be surmounted even where there was some low-
    level criminality.  Reliance was placed on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance published on 1 March 2017.  I note that this was in fact after
    the promulgation of the judge's decision.  The part relied on reads:

         "The main types of cases you need to  consider  for  refusal  under
         paragraph 322(5) or referral to other teams are those that  involve
         criminality, a threat to national security, war  crimes  or  travel
         bans.


         A person does not need to have been convicted of a criminal offence
         for this provision to apply.  When deciding whether to refuse under
         this category, the key thing to consider is if  there  is  reliable
         evidence to support a decision that the  person's  behaviour  calls
         into  question  their  character  and/or   conduct   and/or   their
         associations to the extent that it is undesirable to allow them  to
         enter or remain in the UK.  This may include cases where a  migrant
         has entered, attempted to enter or facilitated a sham  marriage  to
         evade immigration control.  If you are not  sure  the  evidence  to
         support your decision is reliable then speak to your  line  manager
         or senior caseworker".


    In relation to the Immigration Directorate Instruction of  August  2015
    on the ten year routes reference was made to paragraph 5.1:


         "The decision maker must consider whether  criminality  which  does
         not fall within paragraphs S-LTR1.2.  to  S-LTR.1.4  may  fall  for
         refusal within paragraphs S-LTR.1.5. to S-LTR.1.6.


         In doing so, decision makers should look at whether  their  conduct
         (including any convictions which do not fall within  paragraphs  S-
         LTR.1.3. to S-LTR.1.4.) mean the applicant's presence in the UK  is
         undesirable or non-conducive to  the  public  good  under  conduct,
         character, associations or other reasons.  It is  possible  for  an
         applicant to meet the suitability requirements even where there  is
         some low-level criminality".


    In ground 3 it was said  that  the  judge  had  materially  erred  when
    considering  the  test  of  reasonableness.   Reference  was  made   to
    paragraphs 48 and 49 of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.   The  judge
    had approached the test too strictly.  Reference was made to  paragraph
    11.23 of the respondent's guidance  -  referred  to  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 22 of her decision - a  decision  maker  should  not  take  a
    decision which would force the British child to leave the EU to reflect
    the principles in Zambrano.  A case must  always  be  assessed  on  the
    basis that it would be unreasonable to expect a British  citizen  child
    to leave the EU in circumstances where  the  parent  or  primary  carer
    would be required to return to a country outside the EU.  It  would  be
    necessary to consider quite apart from the Zambrano  principle  whether
    it was reasonable to expect a child to  leave  the  UK.   it  had  been
    accepted by Counsel in the case of  MA  (Pakistan)  that  it  would  be
    relatively rare for it to be reasonable to expect  a  child  who  is  a
    British citizen to leave the UK.  The judge  had  wrongly  treated  the
    children as an appendage of their parents contrary to EV (Philippines).

15.  In granting permission to appeal the First-tier Judge stated  that  she
    could see nothing in ground 1 and while the judge's decision was  clear
    and careful, grounds 2 and 3 were considered to be arguable.  Reference
    was made to the case of SF and Others  (Albania)  (Guidance,  post-2014
    Act) [2017] UKUT 120 which had been promulgated very shortly before the
    judge's decision.

16.  In a response on 31 October 2017  the  respondent  submitted  that  the
    grounds had  no  merit  and  merely  expressed  disagreement  with  the
    decision although it had not been possible to produce a  full  response
    to the grounds.  Counsel referred to the guidance and to the case of SF
    which had in fact been published after the decision on 22  March  2017.
    SF established that the Tribunal ought to take guidance into account if
    it pointed clearly  to  a  particular  outcome  in  the  instant  case.
    Reference was made to the policy  at  paragraph  7  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision.

17.  In relation  to  the  first  ground  although  the  judge  when  giving
    permission had seen nothing  in  it,  it  was  to  be  noted  that  the
    appellant would not have had to sat a similar exam  to  that  taken  by
    students.  They sat at the B1 level whereas the appellant as  a  spouse
    would have taken the test at the most basic level.   Therefore  it  was
    not so remarkable that the appellant was not  speaking  fluent  English
    some years after the exam.  There was also  a  difference  between  the
    case where a test had been invalidated and where it  was  questionable.
    Although the appellant had taken a test  more  recently  (in  2015)  he
    would still be nervous in the Tribunal proceedings.

18.  Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that  there  was  no  material  error  of  law
    disclosed in ground 1 of the  appeal.   The  issue  of  the  evidential
    burden had been conceded by Counsel and the  appellant's  evidence  had
    been considered in detail.  The judge had referred to all the  evidence
    in the round.  She had gone on to consider the appellant's evidence and
    had found that no  innocent  explanation  had  been  advanced  and  the
    Secretary of State had discharged the legal burden of proof.  There was
    no material difference between the tests as set out in  the  Rules  and
    what was said in Appendix FM and in relation to suitability.  What  was
    at issue in this appeal however  was  a  serious  matter  as  had  been
    reflected on page 2 of the reasons for refusal decision.  The judge had
    referred to the appellant's deceitful conduct and  the  undermining  of
    immigration control in paragraph  39  of  her  decision.   It  was  the
    appellant's deceitful conduct that was at issue, the  conduct  did  not
    necessarily have to be criminal conduct.   In  relation  to  the  final
    ground the policy statement only  related  to  Section  117B  (6),  the
    appellant's wife and children would not be expected or forced to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  Reference was made to VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ
    255.  She referred to paragraph  60  and  the  case  of  FZ  (China)  v
    Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 550  -  the  critical  question  was
    whether there was "an entire dependency of the relevant  child  on  the
    person who is refused a residence permit or who is being deported".  As
    in that case in the instant case there was no  "entire  dependency"  on
    the appellant because they could remain in the UK with their mother who
    was a British citizen and had a right  to  be  in  this  country.   The
    guidance was consistent with the guidance given in Agyarko v  Secretary
    of  State  [2017]  UKSC  11  at  paragraphs  61-67.  The  approach  was
    consistent with the findings of the First-tier  Judge.   The  appellant
    had used deception which  was  relevant  to  the  consideration  as  to
    whether he could be separated from his wife and children.

19.  In reply it was submitted that deportation was under  consideration  in
    the case of VM which was accordingly  not  applicable  in  the  instant
    appeal.  The judge had not properly considered the policy.

20.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.  I would endorse the comments
    of the First-tier Judge who granted permission when  stating  that  the
    decision was clear and careful.  I would also agree  with  the  comment
    that there was nothing in ground 1.  Ground 1 is simply  an  expression
    of disagreement with the findings made by the judge which were open  to
    her.  The judge was entitled  to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    difficulties with speaking in English both at the hearing  and  at  the
    interview as one of a number of credibility issues that caused  her  to
    find as she did.  The issue of language was by no means the only factor
    that the judge had in mind in a lengthy and carefully analysis  of  the
    evidence before her.  Her conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness was reached after meticulous examination of  the  oral
    and documentary evidence.

21.  In relation to the arguments based on the guidance it is  important  to
    note that it is the conduct of the appellant that is relied on in  this
    matter and the judge properly addressed this in  paragraph  39  of  her
    decision.  The appellant had engaged in deceitful conduct in submitting
    a certificate which had been fraudulently obtained.  The requirement to
    obtain an English language test had important policy objectives as  the
    judge noted and a fraudulent test such as  the  one  submitted  by  the
    appellant undermined the system of immigration control in the  UK.   It
    was open to the judge to find that the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
    entitled to exercise discretion under paragraph 322(5)  of  the  Rules.
    This is not a case of low-level criminality  and  I  am  not  satisfied
    there is any material  difference  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal
    between the suitability requirements and  what  is  said  in  paragraph
    322(5).  As the Secretary of State put it in the reasons for  decision,
    the appellant's complicity in the fraud  contributed  to  an  extremely
    serious attack on the maintenance of effective immigration controls and
    the public interest more generally.

22.  In relation to the Zambrano point the law has, as Ms Fijiwala  put  it,
    moved on and the Court of Appeal at paragraph 52 of VM (Jamaica)  noted
    that the Tribunal appeared to have  been  misled  by  an  "ill  advised
    concession" made by the Secretary of State in  Sanade  [2012]  UKUT  48
    (IAC).  It had been conceded in effect that a British child's  location
    in the UK was to be treated as a fixed point and the Article 8 analysis
    had to be moulded in that light.  As was said in VM  (Jamaica)  and  FZ
    (China) the possibility of the children relocating did not violate  the
    fundamental precepts of  EU  law.   The  children  could  alternatively
    remain in the UK with their mother - there was no  "entire  dependency"
    of the children and the appellant. The children are not being forced to
    leave the EU and the circumstances are not the same as in the  case  of
    SF (Albania) where, of the three appellants,  only  one,  the  youngest
    child, was a British Citizen. The mother and elder child were  citizens
    of Albania.

23.  Having carefully considered the arguments  advanced  I  find  that  the
    grounds raise no material error of law and the decision of  the  First-
    tier Judge stands.

    The appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity Order

The First-tier judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 12 January 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


