
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12065/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2017                            |On 23 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        Mrs ammankili selvavelayutham
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CHENNAI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel, instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pacey (the judge), promulgated on 27  January  2017,  in
    which she dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 3 November 2015, refusing her human rights claim  (made  by
    way of an entry clearance application for leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as an adult dependent relative).

The judge's decision

 2. The judge refused to  admit  a  letter  purporting  to  come  from  the
    Appellant's carer in India on the basis  that  this  document  did  not
    comply with Practice Directions and did not contain a date, address  or
    signature.  The judge appears to note the  importance  of  meeting  the
    Immigration  Rules  as  part  and  parcel  of  an  overall  Article   8
    proportionality assessment.  It is noted that the Appellant  had  lived
    away from her children for a number of years.  In all the circumstances
    the judge concluded that there  was  no  family  life  as  between  the
    Appellant and any of her children, including the  United  Kingdom-based
    Sponsor.

 3. Notwithstanding this, the judge goes on to consider the other stages of
    the Razgar methodology.  At paragraph 37 she appears to accept that the
    Appellant had certain medical conditions (based upon a  letter  from  a
    consultant psychiatrist referred  to  briefly  at  paragraph  10).   At
    paragraphs 39 to 41 the judge finds that the Appellant did  not  suffer
    from significant functional limitations, based in large  part  on  what
    she said  in  an  interview  with  the  Respondent.   Paragraph  40  in
    particular appears to suggest that the Appellant might  not  have  been
    suffering from geriatric depression.   Paragraph  41  states  that  the
    Appellant was not suffering from any cognitive impairment such that she
    had no insight into her health problems.

 4. The judge goes on to consider the situation of  the  Appellant's  other
    children who live in various places around the world and concluded that
    the Appellant could potentially reside with one or  more  of  them,  or
    that her children could go and live  with  her  in  India.   The  judge
    concludes that an Article 8 claim is not based upon the convenience  of
    an Appellant's children.

 5. At paragraph 51 the  judge  states  that  the  letter  from  the  carer
    contained in the Appellant's bundle was not  translated  and  therefore
    could not be taken into account.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. A number of challenges are made to the judge's approach  and  findings.
    In summary, these relate to the letter  from  the  carer,  the  judge's
    approach to the medical evidence, certain alleged factual  errors,  and
    whether the Appellant was able to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules
    (specifically Appendix FM).

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Black  on
    5 September 2017.

The hearing before me

 8. Ms Jones submitted that the judge had been wrong to refuse to admit the
    letter from the carer.  A translation of the letter  contained  in  the
    bundle was provided at the hearing but the judge had  refused  even  to
    read it.  No  reasons  for  this  refusal  had  been  stated.   It  was
    submitted that this was material because the letter contained important
    information about the care for the Appellant in India.  The  Brit  Cits
    case has now been decided by the Court of Appeal ([2017] EWCA Civ  368)
    and I was referred to paragraph 76 of its judgment.  She submitted that
    the medical letter had not been adequately addressed by the  judge  and
    there appeared  to  be  an  inconsistency  between  what  she  says  in
    paragraphs 37 and 40.  The medical letter was sufficient  to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE.

 9. Mr Clarke submitted that the judge was entitled not  to  have  admitted
    the letter, but he accepted that the  judge  had  not  dealt  with  the
    sponsor's evidence set out in paragraph 14, nor had she dealt with  the
    requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.5.   He  also  accepted  that  the  findings
    relating to the psychiatrist's letter were somewhat  unclear.    Having
    said that, Mr Clarke submitted that the medical evidence in  this  case
    was thin and that the judge was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  interview
    record.  The face of the decision appeared to show that the Appellant's
    case was argued only on the basis that she should succeed  outside  the
    context of  Immigration  Rules.   Mr  Clarke  suggested  that  even  if
    compliance with the Rules had been argued the judge clearly found  that
    the various provisions were not in fact met.  The judge was entitled to
    find that there was no family life.

10. In reply Ms Jones emphasised  the  point  acknowledged  by  Mr  Clarke,
    namely that the judge had not dealt with the sponsor's  evidence.   She
    submitted that cumulatively there were enough errors for  the  decision
    to be set aside, particularly when it was viewed in the context of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Brit Cits.

Decision on error of law

11. Having given this case careful consideration I conclude that there  are
    material errors of  law  such  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.  My reasons for this are as follows.

12. In my view there is an error in respect of the  refusal  to  admit  the
    letter from the carer.  The original, (which is in Tamil) is  contained
    in the Appellant's  bundle.   Without  a  translation  of  course  this
    document would not have been considered at all.  However, a translation
    of the letter was provided at the  hearing.   Therefore  the  objection
    that the letter in the bundle was untranslated fell  away.   The  judge
    states that the original Tamil letter was not  in  line  with  Practice
    Directions.  Having regard to  the  relevant  Practice  Directions,  in
    particular paragraphs 8.2(b) and 8.3, the production of a  translation,
    (albeit late in  the  day),  meant  that  the  original  letter  became
    compliant.  There was nothing in the Practice  Directions  relating  to
    addresses, dates and the name of the author.  These matters  of  course
    would go to the question of weight, but did not necessarily  justify  a
    refusal to admit into evidence at all.  On the face of the decision the
    judge has failed to provide adequate reasons for refusing to admit  the
    letter and its translation.  This letter  may  have  provided  material
    evidence in that its  contents  apparently  went  to  the  question  of
    whether the Appellant was receiving or was able to receive a reasonable
    level of care appropriate to her needs in India.

13. Even if the judge had been entitled to refuse to admit the letter,  the
    substance of  that  letter  (i.e.  the  nature  of  the  care  and  the
    Appellant's attitude towards it) was given  in  oral  evidence  by  the
    sponsor (paragraph 14).  As  Mr  Clarke  acknowledged,  the  judge  has
    failed to grapple with  this  potentially  significant  oral  evidence.
    There was no finding as to the  credibility  of  the  sponsor  on  this
    particular  issue  and  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  he  was   deemed
    untruthful.  In my view there is an error here, and a material  one  at
    that.

14. Whilst the judge mentions the letter from the  consultant  psychiatrist
    at paragraph 10, when it comes to consideration  of  the  evidence  and
    findings thereon there is  a  real  tension  as  to  what  is  said  in
    paragraphs 37 and 40.  In the former the judge appears to be  accepting
    that the Appellant had certain medical conditions.  If  this  statement
    was based  upon  the  psychiatrist's  letter,  those  conditions  would
    include geriatric depression and memory loss.   However,  at  paragraph
    40, and based upon what the Appellant herself said  at  her  interview,
    the judge appears not  to  accept  that  she  suffered  from  geriatric
    depression.  Even reading these two paragraphs generously and in  light
    of the decision as a whole,  I  conclude  that  there  is  an  apparent
    contradiction here.  It is material because it goes to the  Appellant's
    particular circumstances, the type of care required, and the  issue  of
    who could reasonably provide that care.

15. The errors that I have identified  above  all  involve  factual  issues
    which in turn go to an assessment of the Appellant's  Article  8  claim
    both within the Rules or, without.  It is unclear  as  to  whether  any
    specific concession was made by the Appellant's representative  at  the
    hearing on the ability to comply with the Rules.  However, there  still
    needed to be a clear and thorough assessment of the facts before proper
    conclusions could be drawn on Article 8 as a whole.

16. As to the situation relating to the Appellant's other  children  around
    the world, in a sense that is immaterial in that the focus of the Rules
    and Article 8 claim at large was on either India or the United Kingdom.
     That was the basis on which the appeal fell to be considered.

17. Finally, I note that whilst the decision of the Court of Appeal in  the
    Brit  Cits  case  post-dates  the  judge's  decision   it   nonetheless
    represents a statement of the law as it was all along.  The comments in
    paragraph 76 of the judgment make it clear that all  the  circumstances
    of an appellant must be taken into account, and an assessment  made  of
    whether available care is reasonable  for  the  individual  to  receive
    psychological and emotional needs of elderly parents can be relevant to
    this assessment.  As a result of the errors I have  highlighted  above,
    this assessment has not been adequately undertaken in the present case.



Disposal

18. Both representatives were agreed that if I were to find that there were
    material errors of law this appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that there are a number of factual  issues  which
    require determination.  I agree with that approach and remit this case.



19. It will be heard afresh with no preserved findings of fact.  It will be
    important for the Appellant to adduce the best evidence possible as  to
    not only her conditions, but also her functionality (which is  not  the
    same thing), the type of care reasonably required, the type of care  in
    fact being received, whether alternative care could be provided  within
    India (even at added cost to the family), and  whether  there  are  any
    other particular circumstances which may be  relevant  to  the  overall
    assessment.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law.   I
set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 22 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
