
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12626/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |On 9 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Oluwatobi Emmanuel Kuforiji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Chigbo, Legal Representative, Moorehouse
Solicitors






                            DECISION AND REASONS
BACKGROUND

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference  we
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Respondent challenges the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cassel promulgated on 14 November 2019 ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing the Appellant's  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of  a
    decision to deport him to Nigeria following a conviction on 21 December
    2017 for possession with intent to supply two controlled Class A  drugs
    (crack cocaine and heroin).  The Appellant was sentenced to a  term  of
    eighteen months' imprisonment in January 2018. It is his first and only
    offence.

 3. The focus of the Appellant's appeal is his private life in the UK.   He
    does not have a partner  or  child  here.   The  Judge  considered  the
    applicable law as to which there is no  dispute.   In  particular,  the
    Judge applied Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("Section 117C").

 4. The Appellant comes originally from Nigeria.  He entered the  UK  as  a
    visitor aged only six years, accompanying his mother.  He did not  then
    have leave to  remain  until  7  November  2013  when  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave until 6 May 2016 in line with his mother. His leave
    was extended until 3 December 2018,  but  within  that  period  he  was
    notified of his liability to deportation under Section 32(5) of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  It is therefore the case that the Appellant has been
    in the UK since the age of six, but for much of that time he  has  been
    here unlawfully.

 5. Although the Appellant has been in the UK  for  some  time,  therefore,
    given the lack of lawful leave for much of that time, he could not meet
    all three limbs of exception 1 as set out in Section 117C (4). However,
    other than the criterion as to lawfulness of residence, the Judge found
    the other two limbs of exception 1 to be met.  He carried forward  that
    finding into his consideration of whether there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the exceptions and  concluded  that  there
    were.  The Judge therefore concluded that the Respondent's decision was
    a disproportionate interference with the Appellant's private life.

 6. There are three grounds raised by the Secretary of State.  At the heart
    of those grounds is the Judge's finding that the Appellant suffers from
    a "very severe stutter" which the  Judge  found  would  exacerbate  his
    difficulties on return to Nigeria. Ms Bassi very fairly accepted in the
    course of her submissions, that this finding lays at the heart  of  all
    three of the grounds.  Ground one is said to be a failure by the  Judge
    to resolve conflict of evidence or the giving of weight  to  immaterial
    matters.  That is, as I say, the Judge's reference to the stutter.  The
    second ground is that there is a material misdirection  of  law  or  an
    inadequacy of reasoning regarding the Appellant's ability to  integrate
    in his home country, and the third ground makes the same  complaint  as
    regards the finding that there are very compelling  circumstances.   As
    we say, those turn largely on the same factual finding.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designed First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    McClure.  As the Judge said when granting permission:

         "Central to a consideration of this matter was whether  there  were
         very significant obstacles or very compelling circumstances.  Given
         the current case law on such issues it is arguable that  the  judge
         has erred in his consideration of such factors".

 8. The matter comes before us at this stage to determine whether there  is
    an error of law and if so what to do about it.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

 9. Turning then to the Judge's analysis of the relevant factors, the Judge
    confirms at [37]  of  the  Decision  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet
    exception 1 based on his private life due  to  the  absence  of  lawful
    leave.  As the  Judge  there  observed,  during  the  period  when  the
    Appellant did not have leave, he was still a  minor.   The  Judge  then
    went on to consider the other two limbs within exception 1, that is  to
    say whether the Appellant is socially and  culturally  integrated  into
    the UK and whether there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Nigeria.

10. Although the Respondent does not challenge the conclusion as to  social
    and cultural integration in the UK, it is necessary  to  say  something
    about that because it becomes relevant when one turns  to  the  finding
    that there are very compelling circumstances.  As the Judge notes,  the
    Respondent's case was that the  Appellant's  commission  of  a  serious
    offence undermined any social and cultural integration which  he  might
    have established to that point.  However, as the Judge pointed  out  at
    [39] of the Decision, the sentencing Judge's  remarks  noted  that  the
    Appellant was not a drug addict, was a courier, that he pleaded  guilty
    and had previously been a man  of  good  character.   In  other  words,
    notwithstanding the seriousness of the offence, and it is very  serious
    concerning as it does the supply of Class A drugs, this was  a  one-off
    offence. The Appellant had no previous convictions and there  has  been
    no repeat offending.

11. There was also evidence before the Judge from the Appellant's probation
    officer confirming that the Appellant had been compliant on licence and
    had completed all offence-focused work including  a  course  on  victim
    empathy.

12. The Appellant has a very good education history.  The Judge noted  that
    the Appellant is a "serious student" who has had some  success  in  his
    studies.  He has "a solid family upbringing and has an extensive family
    network in the UK".  He "feels ashamed of his criminal behaviour".

13. For those reasons, the Judge accepted that the Appellant  was  socially
    and culturally integrated in the UK, notwithstanding the commission  of
    the serious offence of which he was convicted.

14. I come  on  then  to  the  matter  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  the
    Respondent's grounds - the Appellant's stutter.  The Judge  deals  with
    this at [42] of the Decision as follows:

         "During the proceedings it was apparent that the  appellant  had  a
         very severe stutter.  He was able to give evidence with clarity but
         the time in which he needed to do so was far greater  than  someone
         who is able to speak without a stutter.  It has not been  addressed
         in either the statement of the appellant or in representations made
         to the Respondent but it is clearly apparent that  this  creates  a
         significant obstacle in normal day-to-day life.   I  bear  this  in
         mind when considering  whether  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles  in  his  reintegration  into  Nigeria.   I  accept   his
         evidence, which has been confirmed by his two  witnesses,  that  he
         has no family in Nigeria and that  his  mother,  sister  and  other
         relatives are all in the United Kingdom.  He does have knowledge of
         the culture, is healthy and speaks  English  which  is  the  common
         language of Nigeria."

15. The Respondent's first ground is based on the submission  that  it  was
    not open to the Judge to take this factor into account at all or, if he
    was going to do so, he needed to put this  to  the  Respondent  because
    neither party had relied upon it.  It is perhaps unsurprising that  the
    Respondent would not rely on it;   it  would  not  be  evident  to  the
    Respondent unless she had interviewed the appellant, and it  might  not
    have occurred to her in any event that this might have any  bearing  on
    the Appellant's ability to integrate.  For similar reasons perhaps  the
    Appellant did not think it necessary to mention  this  in  his  witness
    statement.  It would have been evident of course  to  the  Home  Office
    representative at the hearing, but the Home Office  representative  may
    not have thought that he or she needed to make any submission about it.



16. This is however a matter of record  about  the  Appellant's  demeanour.
    The Judge is entitled to take into account factors such as this whether
    they are evidenced or not.  It is not disputed by the  Respondent  that
    the Appellant suffers from this affliction.  Whether that was  relevant
    to any of the issues is a matter for the Judge  unless  it  is  clearly
    immaterial, or such reliance would be  irrational.  As  we  put  to  Ms
    Bassi, it is difficult to see what the Respondent would have said about
    this if it had been drawn to her attention.   Ms  Bassi  says  that  it
    could have been pointed out that this had not been an obstacle  to  the
    Appellant's day-to-day life in the UK to the extent that the Judge  has
    relied on this as reason to take the stutter into account, because this
    is an appellant who had managed to survive day-to-day life  in  the  UK
    and has succeeded including in higher education.   However,  the  Judge
    was entitled to take into account the fact that this was a very  severe
    stutter which caused the Appellant some problems when giving  evidence.
    Moreover, this Appellant has family support in the UK and therefore the
    fact that he may be able to cope with day-to-day life in the  UK  is  a
    very different proposition from returning to a country where he has not
    lived for very many years without any family support.

17. For that reason, we do not consider there is  any  error  made  by  the
    Judge in failing to draw this factor to the attention of the Respondent
    in the course of the hearing before placing reliance on  it.   We  also
    consider that the Judge was entitled to take the stutter  into  account
    as a factor going to the Appellant's ability to integrate in Nigeria.

18. That brings us on then to the second ground which  is  that  there  has
    been no broad evaluation of whether the Appellant has  the  ability  to
    integrate, or put another  way,  whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration in Nigeria.  We note from  the
    citation at [42] of the Decision above that the Judge accepts that  the
    Appellant has some knowledge of the  culture,  is  healthy  and  speaks
    English, but those are not the  only  factors  relevant  to  whether  a
    person can integrate in his home country.

19. As is made clear by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 ("Kamara"), what has to be
    considered is whether the evidence indicates that  an  appellant  being
    returned to his home country will be, as the Judge put it  at  [43]  of
    the Decision, "whether the individual will be enough of an  insider  in
    terms of understanding how life in the society in that other country is
    carried on and a capacity to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a
    reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a
    day-to-day basis in that society and to build up  within  a  reasonable
    time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the
    individual's private or family life".  That requires no gloss; it turns
    on the facts.  It cannot be said that the Judge did  not  consider  the
    relevant case law.  Reference is made  to  the  relevant  extract  from
    Kamara and that  is  properly  summarised.   The  Judge  also  directed
    himself to the very high threshold which applies due to  the  need  for
    there to be "very significant  obstacles".   The  Respondent  does  not
    assert that the Judge has materially misdirected himself.

20. The Judge then goes on to make the  following  findings  applying  that
    test to the facts at [44] and [45] of the Decision:

         "44. The Respondent has suggested that he would have family support
             if he returns to Nigeria. That seems to be on the basis  of  a
             network of family in the United Kingdom and the support  which
             he is presently receiving.  On closer examination however that
             is not borne out by the facts in this case.  He lives with his
             mother and sister, both of whom  are  struggling  financially.
             They would not be in a position to support him financially  if
             he were returned to Nigeria.  His uncle,  well-meaning  though
             he is, has referred to giving the appellant �50 'as and when'.
              Although I heard no  evidence  as  to  his  means  there  was
             nothing to suggest that he could provide anything  approaching
             sustained financial support.  I heard evidence from  both  the
             Appellant and his mother, that  out  of  shame  following  his
             criminal conviction  he  had  little  contact  with  remaining
             members of his family.  Again, there  is  nothing  to  suggest
             that they would be willing or able to  help  him  financially.
             The Appellant and his mother have  given  consistent  evidence
             that there is no contact with the Appellant's father.  Indeed,
             there was no challenge to his mother's evidence that the  very
             reason that she came to the United Kingdom was to escape  from
             the domestic violence at the hands of her estranged husband.

         45.  The Respondent refers to him [that is to  say  the  Appellant]
             having valuable transferable skills.  Those  skills  have  not
             been described in any way, and although there is evidence that
             he has worked as a volunteer and in customer services, he  has
             presented as a relatively immature young man.   There  can  be
             little sensible  challenge  to  the  effect  that  his  severe
             stutter would have in his ability to  establish  relationships
             in an environment which is in reality almost wholly unknown to
             him without any  family  or  other  support.   For  all  these
             reasons I do find that the obstacles to integration  would  be
             very significant."

21. Taking that reasoning as a whole, it is evident that the severe stutter
    is not the only or indeed a central factor relied upon in the findings.
    Further, it cannot be said that the Judge has done other  than  make  a
    very broad, evaluative assessment of all the relevant factors.  This is
    an appellant who came to the UK as a child.  He was not, on the face of
    it, educated in Nigeria, he certainly has never worked in that country,
    he has no ties to that country.




22. We were told by Mr Chigbo who represents the Appellant today  that  the
    only time that the Appellant has returned to Nigeria is for a period of
    three days.  This is a man who would be returning to a country he  does
    not know as a young adult with no knowledge of how to  gain  employment
    in Nigeria, without financial support, and with no  family  members  in
    that country.




23. It might be said that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  has
    knowledge of the culture, is healthy and speaks English indicates  that
    the Appellant could find work in Nigeria, but the Judge deals with that
    suggestion at [45] of the Decision.  The Appellant has  not  worked  in
    the UK other than as a volunteer and in customer services.   The  Judge
    also there takes into account the  Appellant's  demeanour  -  both  his
    stutter and lack of maturity.  There would, in  the  Judge's  view,  be
    obstacles  to  the  Appellant  finding  work  in  Nigeria  without  the
    financial support and family ties which, on  the  Judge's  finding,  he
    would not have in Nigeria.




24. For those reasons,  the  Judge  concluded  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to integration.  That is a finding which was open
    to the Judge for the reasons given.  Those  reasons  are  adequate  and
    there is no error of law in that regard.

25.  That  brings  us  finally  to  the   question   of   very   compelling
    circumstances.  Ms Bassi appeared to accept that if  the  Secretary  of
    State failed on grounds one and two as we have found is the  case,  she
    probably  could  not  succeed  on  ground  three  either  because  that
    assessment brings into play the findings made earlier in the  Decision,
    but for the sake of completeness we deal with that ground also.

26. It cannot be said that the Judge has misdirected himself as to the  law
    which applies.   The  Judge  was  very  clearly  aware  that  the  very
    compelling circumstances threshold is a  high  one  (see  [48]  of  the
    Decision in particular).  There is in any event  no  challenge  to  the
    Judge's self-direction as to the law.

27. The Judge sets  out  what  he  considers  to  be  the  very  compelling
    circumstances at [49] to [52] of the Decision as follows:

         "49. Those factors which weigh in favour of immigration control are
             the serious nature of  the  offence  itself.   The  sentencing
             judge made it clear that acting as a courier  of  drugs  is  a
             very serious matter and requires a sentence  of  imprisonment.
             There is no evidence that  the  Appellant  has  a  partner  or
             dependent children and he  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
             without leave for a significant period of time, albeit  cannot
             be held responsible for that, but nonetheless had been without
             lawful leave."

    We pause to observe that this passage encapsulates the public  interest
    which applies in this case, both as to the criminal offending  and  the
    Appellant's presence without leave.

          "50.    Those factors that weigh in favour of family  and  private
             life are that he is under the age of 25, he  is  23.   He  has
             lived in the United Kingdom for the vast majority of his life.
              He committed a single offence albeit with two types of  class
             A drugs for which he is remorseful.  His probation officer has
             made positive comments about his period on  licence.   He  and
             his mother have given credible evidence  which  is  consistent
             and supported by his uncle, that he fully intends to return to
             his studies and all the evidence points to him being likely to
             succeed and obtain his degree.  He  lives  at  home  with  his
             mother,  who  undoubtedly  has  a  very  strong  and  positive
             influence on his behaviour.  While he  was  employed  he  gave
             financial support to her.  She gave convincing  evidence  that
             the Appellant was fully aware of the enormous  impact  on  her
             that his criminal behaviour had and  although  there  were  no
             further reports from the probation service it appears that  he
             is at low risk of reoffending.  I have  already  commented  on
             the severe stutter he has and the impact that undoubtedly  has
             on his ability to communicate."

    That passage sets out the factors weighing in favour of the  Appellant:
    in other words, it deals with the strength of his private life  in  the
    UK and the interference  which  deportation  will  have.   We  take  Ms
    Bassi's  point  that  such  things  as  rehabilitation,  expression  of
    remorse, etc. are only neutral factors; a person is expected  to  abide
    by the law.  However, the level of risk is something  which  the  Judge
    was entitled to take into account when looking at the overall  balance,
    particularly in light of his earlier  comments  regarding  the  one-off
    nature of the offence.  None of the case law suggests that the level of
    risk is not relevant.

28. The Judge repeats the reference to  the  pressing  public  interest  at
    [51].  He there takes into account his earlier finding that  there  are
    very significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria.  He concludes  at
    [52] of the Decision that there would be disproportionate  interference
    when a balance is struck between the competing interests.

29. The paragraphs which we have just set out are a paradigm example of the
    sort of balancing exercise which is advocated by the Supreme  Court  in
    Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.
     We can see no reason to interfere with the findings which were open to
    the Judge on the evidence for the reasons he gave.  Those reasons  were
    adequate in the circumstances.

30. We conclude by saying that this  is  not  a  decision  which  we  would
    necessarily have  made  ourselves.   It  is  perhaps  generous  to  the
    Appellant but that is not the test for us.  The test for us is  whether
    there is an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  Decision.
    For the reasons we have given, there is  not.   For  those  reasons  we
    uphold the First-tier Tribunal's Decision.



Notice of Decision

We are satisfied that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cassel
promulgated on 14 November 2019 does not  contain  an  error  of  law.   For
those reasons we uphold the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.


Signed[pic]                         Dated: 26 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge L Smith

