
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12988/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 1 February 2021                          |On 15 February 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                Anaglate [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rana, instructed by Cardinal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 28 August 1976.  She  has
      been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK.

   3. The appellant entered the UK on 22  February  2008  with  a  six-month
      visit visa and overstayed. She was encountered on 3 July  2017  on  an
      enforcement visit and was served with removal papers. On 6  July  2017
      she made a human rights claim.

   4. The appellant's claim was made for the most part on  medical  grounds,
      under Articles 3 and 8, in relation to her mental health condition. It
      was stated that she suffered from Bipolar Affective Disorder  and  had
      been briefly sectioned in 2015, since which  time  her  condition  had
      been managed by medication provided by her GP. She also suffered  from
      type 2 diabetes which required medication.

   5. The respondent, in refusing the claim in a decision of 25  July  2019,
      did not consider that her condition met the Article  3  threshold  and
      considered there to be some medical  treatment  available  to  her  in
      Ghana. As for Article 8, the respondent considered that the  appellant
      could not meet the family and private life requirements in Appendix FM
      of the immigration rules and that her circumstances were not  such  as
      to justify a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

   6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by  First  tier
      Tribunal Judge Abebrese on 17 December 2019. The judge heard from  the
      appellant and from her representative. He did not  consider  that  her
      medical condition was sufficient to meet the Article 3  threshold  and
      neither did he find there to be  any  very  significant  obstacles  to
      integration in Ghana  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  or
      compelling circumstances outside the immigration rules for  Article  8
      purposes. The judge accordingly dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
      human rights grounds.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
      grounds that the judge had failed properly  to  consider  the  medical
      evidence and the appellant's documents and had erred by expecting  the
      appellant to research medical facilities in Ghana  when  she  was  not
      mentally able to do so.

   8. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal and the matter  then
      came before me.

   9. Mr McVeety accepted that the judge's decision had to be set aside  for
      the reasons given in the grounds and the  grant  of  permission.  Both
      parties requested that  the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh hearing before another judge.

  10. I entirely agree with that concession and consider the grounds  to  be
      made out.  The  judge's  decision  fails  adequately  to  address  the
      evidence, provides inadequate reasoning and lacks a  full  and  proper
      assessment of the impact on the appellant of the refusal  decision  in
      terms of her human rights. In the circumstances, and  as  the  parties
      requested, I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de
      novo, with no findings preserved.

DECISION

  11. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with afresh,
      pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Abebrese.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  1 February
2021
