
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12434/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 October 2017                       |On 26 January 2018                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mike [N]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Khan, Counsel instructed by Edward Marshall
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,
       hereinafter "the claimant" against the decision of the Secretary  of
       State on 3 May 2016 refusing him leave to  remain  on  human  rights
       grounds.  The Secretary of State decided to make a deportation order
       against the appellant on 19 October 2015 and that no doubt  prompted
       him to apply for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

    2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He  was  born  in  1960.   He
       claims to have entered the United Kingdom in June 1995.  He came  to
       the attention of the immigration authorities on  28  September  1995
       when he applied for asylum.

    3. On 6 February 1996 he married a British citizen at a registry office
       and on 21 February 1996 he applied for leave to remain in the United
       Kingdom based on his marriage.

    4. Very shortly afterwards, on 25 February 1996, he was apprehended  by
       officials of HM Customs and Excise in connection with the  attempted
       importation of 2.45 kilograms of cocaine.  This was clearly  a  very
       serious matter because on 20  September  1996  at  the  Crown  Court
       sitting at Nottingham he  was  convicted  after  a  trial  of  being
       knowingly  concerned  in  fraudulent  evasion  of   prohibition   or
       restriction on importation of  class  A  controlled  drugs  and  was
       sentenced to fifteen years' imprisonment.  He was  also  recommended
       for deportation.

    5. He was released from prison on licence in January 2004 and  has  not
       been convicted of any offence in the intervening  twelve  years  and
       nine months.

    6. Unremarkably he was made the  subject  of  a  deportation  order  in
       November 2003 but he was not removed at the end of his detention and
       on 8 June 2010  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  revoke  that
       deportation order.  He appealed that decision  and  the  appeal  was
       allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal noted that as well as the matter  for  which
       he was sentenced to fifteen years' imprisonment  he  had  previously
       misbehaved and come to the attention of the criminal justice system.
        He had been cautioned in 2003 for an offence of dishonesty and  had
       used false identities and dates of birth.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       also found that he had twice before 1996 entered the United  Kingdom
       with a false passport and had been removed.

    8. The Tribunal also found that the appellant had made  a  stable  home
       with his wife and there were three children of that family then aged
       19, 17 and 13  years.   The  reasons  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       allowing the appeal are set out particularly at paragraph 45 of  the
       Tribunal's decision in 2010 which states:

  "We find from the evidence before us that Mrs N ---'s disability severely
  affects her ability to cope with day-to-day living, particularly  outside
  her home.  We find that [the eldest child] is still dependent emotionally
  on the [claimant].  We find that, since  his  release  from  prison,  the
  [claimant] has become an integral and  essential  part  of  each  of  his
  children's lives.  We find that, without his day-to-day support, Mrs N---
  would have to rely on either the children for support or  obtain  support
  from social services.  We find that, in these circumstances,  it  is  not
  reasonable to expect either her or any  of  the  children  to  return  to
  Nigeria with the [claimant] and establish a family life there.  We accept
  Mrs N ---'s evidence that to remove the [claimant] would  be  harmful  to
  the children's emotional and intellectual  development,  particularly  as
  the burden of her care would then fall onto  their  shoulders.   We  find
  that the [claimant's] removal from the United  Kingdom  would  result  in
  significant difficulties for both Mrs N--- and the children."

    9. It is therefore particularly annoying to find at the  start  of  the
       "decision to refuse a human rights claim"  the  assertion  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had previously found  that  "you  could  not  be
       deported from the United Kingdom because to do so would breach  your
       Human Rights under Article 8 of the ECHR". Manifestly  the  Tribunal
       had made  no  such  decision.   In  my  experience  appeals  against
       deportation decisions are almost never allowed because of the impact
       of deportation on the person to be deported but on the  impact  that
       deportation would have on members of that person's immediate  family
       and I find it very regrettable  that  a  refusal  letter,  which  is
       thorough and fair in many respects,  so  grossly  misrepresents  the
       First-tier Tribunal's reasons for allowing the appeal in 2010.

   10. However my concern is more  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal not in 2010 but in February 2017.

   11. I will consider the Secretary of  State's  grounds  in  more  detail
       below but, and with respect to Mr Khan who could only work with  the
       material presented to him by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  have  no
       hesitation in saying that the First-tier Tribunal erred materially.

   12. There have been  significant  developments  in  the  law  concerning
       deportation and  human  rights  since  2010,  not  least  being  the
       amendment in July 2014 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002 by the introduction of the extended form  of  Section  117.
       Section 117A provides that this part of the 2002 Act "applies  where
       a court or Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made
       under the Immigration Acts (a) breaches a person's right to  respect
       for private and family life under Article  8;  and  (b)as  a  result
       would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."

   13. It follows that this Section should have been at  the  forefront  of
       the First-tier  Tribunal's  mind.   It  is  something  that  it  was
       statutorily obliged to consider.

   14. Section 117B introduces considerations in all cases in which Article
       8  is  relied  upon   and   Section   117C   introduces   additional
       considerations in cases involving foreign criminals.  There are  two
       schemes; one  applies  where  the  foreign  criminal  has  not  been
       sentenced to a period of four years or more in which  event  certain
       exceptions can apply and the other is where the foreign criminal has
       been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years.
       In that event, according to Section  117C(6)  "the  public  interest
       requires deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances,
       over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2".

   15. Exception 1 applies where a person has been lawfully resident in the
       United Kingdom for most of his life and is socially  and  culturally
       integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  there  would  be   very
       significant obstacles to that person's integration into the  country
       to which it is proposed to deport him.

   16. Exception 2 applies where is a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
       with a qualifying partner or parental relationship with a qualifying
       child so that the effect of deportation  on  the  partner  or  child
       would be unduly harsh.

   17. As is apparent from what I have said above in a case  such  as  this
       where the sentence is  over  four  years'  imprisonment  the  public
       interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  "very  compelling
       circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions  1  and
       2".

   18. With great respect I have to conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       lost sight of this provision when making its  deliberations.   There
       is a "nod" towards the provisions of  the  Act  where  the  Tribunal
       decided at paragraph 17 that "the public interest in deportation  is
       considerably  outweighed  in  the  very   compelling   circumstances
       amounting to such exceptional circumstances" that removal  would  be
       disproportionate.   However  we  are  not  told  what   those   very
       compelling circumstances are.

   19. It is clear from the decision that the judge was  impressed  by  the
       appellant's good behaviour since his release from  prison  and  what
       seems to be, unremarkably, an accepted  fact  by  the  Secretary  of
       State that there  is  little  chance  of  this  claimant  committing
       further criminal offences.

   20. I now turn to the Secretary of State's grounds.

   21. These criticise the judge from his  finding  at  paragraph  15  that
       "expression of societal revulsion" is  not  a  legitimate  component
       justifying interference with a person's  private  and  family  life.
       However the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  quoting  accurately  part
       the judgement of Lord Wilson in the decision in  Hesham  Ali  [2016]
       UKSC 60 and although Lord Kerr's judgment was  a  minority  judgment
       these remarks were based carefully on human rights jurisprudence and
       Lord Wilson who authored the  phrase  "an  expression  of  society's
       revulsion" in a different capacity  expressly  adopted  Lord  Kerr's
       criticism.  It follows that when the grounds  complain  as  they  do
       that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  wrongly  followed  a  dissenting
       judgment it is the grounds and not the First-tier Tribunal  that  is
       wrong.

   22. Nevertheless the legitimate reason for interfering with  a  person's
       private and family life is prevention of crime and disorder and  the
       deterrent effect of deporting a foreign criminal remains legitimate.
        As far as I can  see  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  rely  on
       expression of societal disapproval as a reason for making the  order
       that led to this appeal.

   23. It would  have  been  helpful  if  the  judge  had  considered  more
       carefully Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  This applies in  all  cases
       where  a  Tribunal  has  to  consider  Article  8  of  the  European
       Convention on Human Rights and establishes that the  maintenance  of
       effective immigration control is in the  public  interest  and  that
       when conducting a balancing exercise little weight should  be  given
       to a private life or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner
       established at a time  when  a  person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
       unlawfully.  It also provides that when a person is  not  liable  to
       deportation the public interest does not require removal where there
       is a genuine and subsisting parent relationship  with  a  qualifying
       child.  This Section of  course  does  not  apply  here  but  it  is
       instructive to appreciate that even if there  were  no  question  of
       deportation the judge would be required to give little weight to the
       relationship the appellant has with his children who are  now  adult
       and are no longer qualifying children.   Clearly  this  relationship
       with the children are now outside the statutory exceptions.

   24. The relationship with his wife is a little different.  They  married
       after he had applied for asylum and  so  presumably  had  some  weak
       permission to be in the United Kingdom and he has had permission  to
       be in the United Kingdom at different stages  when  he  has  pursued
       various applications and certainly  since  discretionary  leave  was
       granted in May 2011 following the appeal against the  revocation  of
       the deportation  order  succeeding.   It  follows  that  his  wife's
       relationship has been established at a  time  when  he  was  in  the
       United Kingdom lawfully but that relationship cannot be  given  much
       weight in a balancing exercise because of the clear requirements  of
       Section 117C(6) which prescribes  that  there  be  "very  compelling
       circumstances" over and above those described in  Exceptions  1  and
       2."

   25. Having decided that the First-tier Tribunal erred by not considering
       this point I have to decide on the remedy.  There  was  considerable
       material prepared for the First-tier Tribunal's hearing.  I have  no
       hesitation in accepting, and this has not been challenged, that  the
       claimant remains an important influence in  the  lives  of  his  now
       adult children and that his departure  would  be  disappointing  for
       them.  It would be more than that for his wife who  does  have  some
       health problems and who does not want to settle in Nigeria  even  if
       she were to be permitted in.  However as is  apparent  from  what  I
       have said above these things do not support a finding that there are
       "very compelling circumstances, over and above those described".

   26. Neither can much be made of the  length  of  his  residence  in  the
       United Kingdom.  It started off unlawfully and quite a lot of it was
       spent in prison.  His time since he came out of prison  has  been  a
       time of limited or no leave although I recognise that  he  has  been
       known to the authorities since his asylum application  in  September
       1995 and any periods where he was without leave were  short  between
       different applications.  The position was a little  more  formalised
       after his successful appeal against deportation but his  periods  of
       leave then have always been limited.  At no time was he entitled  to
       assume he was permitted to settle in the  United  Kingdom.   He  has
       always known he had to make a further application and  it  is  trite
       immigration law that a person's legitimate expectation can  only  be
       for a decision in accordance with the Rules  relevant  to  when  the
       decision is made.  The Secretary of State's approach to  deportation
       cases has probably become harsher in the intervening period and  has
       certainly become subject to relevant statutory changes that make  it
       harder for a person to resist deportation but that is  not  unlawful
       and the fact that Parliament has made it  harder  to  remain  is  no
       reason to allow an appeal.

   27. I consider the claimant's age and the fact that he has been  out  of
       Nigeria for a long time.  Setting aside periods in prison he has not
       been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life so
       even if Exception 1 applied the claimant could not  come  within  it
       but it does not apply and the public interest  requires  deportation
       again unless there are  "very  compelling  circumstances"  over  and
       above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  There are  none  here.
       This appeal is quite different  from  the  kind  of  case  that  the
       Tribunal  sees  occasionally  where  a  person  with,  for  example,
       indefinite leave to  remain,  is  allowed  out  of  prison  and  re-
       establishes himself in the community and many years pass before  the
       Secretary of State realises the deportation is a possibility.   Such
       cases are rare but are not unknown and might  very  well  support  a
       finding that there were such very compelling circumstances but  that
       line of argument does not apply when a person has  been  allowed  to
       stay for the sake of his relationship with his children who  can  be
       expected to grow older  and  reach  adulthood  and  his  wife  whose
       circumstances are not necessarily fixed and whose own  leave  is  of
       limited duration.

   28. I raised these points with Mr Khan at the hearing  but  although  he
       pointed out, correctly, the length of time the claimant had spent in
       the United Kingdom, that  his  wife  does  have  significant  health
       problems including problems with her eyes and that the claimant  has
       succeeded in an earlier appeal he was not able to draw my  attention
       to  anything  that  I  regard  as  capable  of  amounting  to  "very
       compelling circumstances, over and above those described".

   29. I appreciate the First-tier Tribunal Judge's concern in  this  case.
       There is something intrinsically worrying to lawyers, and all  fair-
       minded  people,  that  a  person  whose  appeal   succeeds   against
       deportation should find himself deported some years  later  when  he
       has committed no further offence and has established  himself  still
       more firmly in the United Kingdom.  However this is a false  concern
       arising from a false analysis.  This claimant is a man who has never
       had indefinite leave to remain, whose appeal against deportation did
       not succeed because of his circumstances but mainly because  of  his
       children's circumstances and to some extent his wife's circumstances
       and who since that successful appeal has had short periods of  leave
       so that his position can be considered again in the light of the new
       statutory regime.

   30. It follows therefore that I am persuaded that the proper thing to do
       in this case is to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       and substitute a decision dismissing his appeal  against  the  first
       Secretary of State's decision.

   31. I appreciate that this will be most unwelcome to  the  claimant  who
       thought that he had won but as I hope I have made clear my reason in
       this decision is that I am bound by Section 117C(6) of the 2002  Act
       and I can see nothing in my own reading of the papers  or  Counsel's
       representations  that  could  support  the  finding  that  will   be
       necessary to allow the appeal.

   32. I am not allowing it under the Rules which are not a  complete  code
       but I am dismissing it under the Act which binds me.  The Exceptions
       provided in the Act do not assist this claimant.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.  I  set  aside  its  decision  and  I
substitute a decision DISMISSING the claimant's appeal against the  decision
of the Secretary of State





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 24 January 2018               |
|Judge                                |                                     |



