
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12212/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|via Skype for Business               |On 16 September 2020                 |
|On 11 September 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SUZANNE LILI MAY
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nicholson.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born 7 July 1976 and is a female citizen of
    the United States of America  (USA).  She  was  sentenced  to  3  years
    imprisonment in April 2016 having been convicted  of  the  offences  of
    false accounting and fraud by abuse of position. She was served with  a
    notice of intention to  deport  her  in  response  to  which  she  made
    representations on the basis of human rights. Her  human  rights  claim
    was refused by decision dated 2 October 2017. A decision in  an  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal was subsequently set aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing. That hearing
    took place on 6 January 2020 and the judge promulgated his decision  in
    writing on 9 January 2020. The Secretary of State now  appeals  against
    that decision to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds are lengthy  and  as  Mr  Lindsay,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary  of  State  at  the  initial  hearing  explained,  in   parts
    inaccurate. However, the Secretary of State  continues  to  pursue  the
    appeal. She complains that at [39] the judge had,  in  effect,  made  a
    finding that the appellant would not at any time be able to reintegrate
    into  the  society  of  the  USA  including  finding   employment   and
    accommodation of her own. The judge found that, if the  appellant  were
    not accompanied by her partner Mr Reed, such reintegration would not be
    possible whilst her own 'vulnerable mental  health'  would  render  her
    position untenable. Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge's  finding  was
    too sweeping and that the evidence did not support a finding  that  the
    appellant would never obtain employment given that she had shown whilst
    in the United Kingdom that she had found employment  relatively  easily
    and worked hard in many of her jobs. Moreover, with  financial  support
    from Mr Reed, the appellant would be able to access the medication  for
    her mental health conditions.

 3. Mr Lindsay also submitted  that  the  judge  at  [29]  and  incorrectly
    referred to a singular 'very serious incident  of  offending';  it  was
    clear that the appellant's offences had occurred over a period of  time
    and that by  referring  to  a  singular  offence,  the  judge  in  this
    paragraph was effectively seeking to minimise  the  offending  and  its
    impact. I note that that submission is contradicted by reference in the
    same sentence to the appellant's 'convictions' in the plural. Moreover,
    the fact that those convictions were the only time  the  appellant  had
    come to 'adverse attention' in the United Kingdom is  incontrovertible.
    I do not accept, having read the entire decision very  carefully,  that
    the judge has fallen into the trap of minimising the seriousness of the
    appellant's offending.

 4. The Secretary of State also complains that the judge was wrong to  find
    that the public interest concerned with the appellants deportation  may
    be, if appropriate, be diminished. Mr Nicholson, who appeared  for  the
    appellant before the Upper Tribunal, describes in his skeleton argument
    [22] the judge's application of the relevant  jurisprudence  (including
    Akinyemi v The Secretary of State for the Home Department (No 2) [2019]
    EWCA Civ 2098, in  Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60) as 'textbook.' I agree. In  a  very  careful
    decision, the judge has not erred in his application  of  the  law.  At
    [44] and applying Akinyemi, the judge has  explained  in  detail  that,
    whilst it is necessary to  give  considerable  weight  to  Parliament's
    intention that foreign criminals are to be removed, there were in 'this
    particular  case...  factors  which  substantially  reduce  the  public
    interest' in deportation.

 5. The grant of permission highlights the Secretary of State's  contention
    that the judge failed to  make  any  properly  reasoned  finding  under
    paragraph 399A(c). However, as Mr Nicholson pointed out, there  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant could meet the  conjunctive  requirements
    of paragraph 399 given that she had not been  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the required period of years. As regards  reintegration  in
    the USA, the judge has provided a cogent analysis supported by reasons.
    I agree with those submissions. I find that the judge made no  material
    error by not addressing each part of paragraph 399.

 6. Mr Lindsay told me that he did not seek to argue that  there  could  be
    only one outcome (dismissal of the appeal) on the facts as found by the
    judge. He also told me that the Secretary of  State  did  not  seek  to
    minimise the weight which the judge  had  attached  to  the  appellants
    mental health difficulties. The judge's errors lay in  the  process  by
    which the decision had been achieved rather than the outcome itself.

 7. With that latter submission in  mind,  I  refer  to  the  findings  and
    observations which I have detailed above. In my opinion, the judge  has
    indeed adopted a  textbook  approach  to  the  finding  of  facts,  his
    discussion of the appellant's medical condition and in his  application
    of the relevant law. Allowing the appeal on human rights grounds was an
    outcome available to the judge, whose findings on the particular  facts
    that  there  was  a  diminished  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    deportation, set against the existence of very compelling circumstances
    (mainly arising from the appellant's mental health condition)  are  not
    tainted by legal error for the reasons advanced  by  the  Secretary  of
    State or at all. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 11 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




