
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12299/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd April 2019                    |On 25th April 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    [X L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy instructed by Colindale Law
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of China who was  born  in  June  2002.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer to refuse his application for  entry  clearance
    in the United Kingdom to join his mother (the Sponsor) under  paragraph
    297  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Freer
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 17th  December  2018.
    The  Appellant  now  appeals  with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gumsley on 6th March 2019.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Sponsor left China  when  the
    Appellant was young and came to the UK on 10 October 2008. She  met  Mr
    [R], a British citizen, in 2009 and they  married  in  the  UK  on  8th
    October 2010.  It is claimed that the Appellant lived with  his  father
    for a period of time but that he no longer contributes  financially  to
    the Appellant's upkeep and that they have not seen  each  other  for  a
    period of four years.  The Sponsor claims to have  travelled  to  China
    every year and that this put a strain on her marriage to Mr [R] leading
    to them divorcing in December 2016 because she wanted to move  back  to
    China to live with the Appellant.  However she remained  in  China  for
    four months and returned to the UK in April 2017 to reconcile  with  Mr
    [R].  The Appellant subsequently applied for entry  clearance  to  join
    his mother in the UK. The application was refused on the basis that the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  considered  that  the  Chinese  Court
    documents showing a change of custody form the  Appellant's  father  to
    the Sponsor was undertaken only in order to facilitate the  Appellant's
    travel to  the  UK.  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    demonstrated that the Sponsor  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant or that there are serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations  that  make  the  Appellant's  exclusion  from  the   UK
    undesirable and refused the application under paragraph 297 (i) (e) and
    (f) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Paragraph 297(i)(e)  and  (f)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  as
    follows:

         "Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as
         the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or
         being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

         297. The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:

         (i)  is seeking leave to enter  to  accompany  or  join  a  parent,
         parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

             (a)  both parents  are  present  and  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom; or

             (b)  both parents are being admitted on the same occasion  for
             settlement; or

             (c)  one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
             and the other is being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
             settlement; or

             (d)  one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
             or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and  the
             other parent is dead; or

             (e)  one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
             or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and  has
             had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

             (f)  one parent or a relative is present and  settled  in  the
             United Kingdom or being admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
             settlement and there are  serious  and  compelling  family  or
             other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the   child
             undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made  for  the
             child's care; and

         ... "

 4. The Grounds of Appeal are subdivided  into  six  grounds.   These  were
    articulated by Mr  Murphy  at  the  hearing.   He  submitted  that  the
    application and  the  appeal  were  advanced  on  two  bases.   It  was
    contended that the Sponsor exercised sole responsibility in relation to
    the Appellant when she was in  the  UK  and  during  periods  when  she
    returned to China to stay with the Appellant there.

 5. I clarified with Mr Murphy whether there was evidence before the  judge
    of a visit in 2018 and whether it was  contended  that  the  judge  had
    ignored any evidence in this regard.   However  he  accepted  that  the
    reference in ground 5 to a visit in 2017 for four months was  erroneous
    and he withdrew that ground.  He accepted that the Sponsor was in China
    from January to February 2017.  He submitted that she was in China  for
    a period of seven months in total in 2018 but he said that there was no
    evidence in relation to this visit before the judge.

 6. At the hearing Mr Murphy submitted that there was  a  conflict  between
    the judge's finding at paragraph 40 that: "the witnesses were credible,
    particularly Mr [R].  He is however  not  a  person  with  much  direct
    knowledge of the situation in China or its history"  and  the  findings
    from paragraphs 41 to 64 leading to the ultimate  conclusion  that  the
    Immigration Rules were not met and that the  Appellant  had  not  shown
    that the Sponsor had any period of sole responsibility as  required  by
    297(i)(e) or that there were any particular  or  adverse  circumstances
    that reached the level of 297(i)(f) [65].

 7. Mr Tufan accepted that there appeared to be a slip at paragraph 40  but
    contended that it was clear from the rest  of  the  decision  that  the
    judge had issues in  relation  to  credibility  and  in  particular  in
    relation to the absence of documentary evidence.  He stressed  that  it
    is up to the Appellant to make his case and the  judge  had  considered
    all of the evidence and  reached  a  conclusion  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence which was not irrational that there was insufficient  evidence
    to discharge the burden of proof.

 8. I have considered the submissions in relation to paragraph 40. I accept
    that on first reading  it  appears  inconsistent  with  the  subsequent
    paragraphs. However on closer reading it is clear that, whilst he found
    Mr [R] to be credible, the  judge  found  that  Mr  [R]'s  evidence  in
    relation to circumstances in China was limited because he did not  have
    much direct knowledge of the situation there.  This was a finding  open
    to the judge on the evidence. It was also open to the judge to find the
    Sponsor credible and to consider all of the evidence and to find as  he
    did that the evidence was not capable of leading to a  conclusion  that
    the Sponsor had sole responsibility for the Appellant.

 9. Paragraph 41 is key.  There the judge said that spending some time each
    year with the Appellant in China is not proof of sole responsibility at
    any date. What it shows according to the judge is "that  there  may  be
    shared responsibility with various other people  who  spend  more  time
    with the Appellant".  The judge went on to say that evidence from those
    other people could clarify who is making the  important  decisions  all
    year round and with specific examples.  The judge also pointed out that
    the father was cooperating as  recently  as  last  year  and  he  could
    reasonably have provided a witness statement.  The  judge  pointed  out
    that there was no proof of any visit to China after  the  date  of  the
    court document and the judge found that there was no  evidence  of  any
    visits to China after the  visit  in  January  2017.   The  judge  also
    pointed out that there was no  evidence  about  the  guardian  who  was
    referred to in the application form [46].  The judge  referred  to  the
    fact that the Sponsor's sister is the main point of  contact  with  the
    school [47].  The  judge  pointed  to  that  there  was  no  supporting
    evidence in relation to the paternal grandmother or the sister  and  no
    evidence about the timeframe their responsibility covers  [48].   Again
    at paragraph 50 the judge is not saying that the Sponsor's evidence  in
    itself is not credible but saying that the Sponsor's evidence in itself
    does not point to sole  responsibility.   At  paragraph  50  the  judge
    highlighted that the possibility that responsibility for the  Appellant
    is shared have not been addressed  by  reasonably  available  evidence.
    The judge considered that  the  custody  document  from  2017  was  not
    sufficient to prove sole responsibility for  the  reasons  set  out  at
    paragraph 51.  The judge also pointed at paragraph 53 to the fact  that
    there was no major decision made after the court document was issued in
    2017 and the Sponsor then had not shown an example of a decision  which
    is clearly her sole decision.

10. The judge again pointed at paragraph 54 to the fact  that  the  Sponsor
    had not produced evidence  of  the  exercise  of  sole  responsibility.
    Again at paragraph 55 the judge acknowledged  that  the  Sponsor  sends
    financial support to China but pointed out that this  is  not  adequate
    proof as to who is the beneficiary  of  the  money.   The  judge  again
    highlighted that a statement from the  recipient  explaining  what  the
    money was used for would have been appropriate evidence.  Significantly
    at paragraph 60 the judge found that there was no proof that the school
    regards the Sponsor as the main or sole adult contact for the Appellant
    and noted that there was remarkably little evidence from the school  in
    relation to this matter.

11. In the paragraphs highlighted the judge pointed to inadequacies in  the
    documentary  evidence  which  could  have  gone  to  demonstrate   sole
    responsibility.  In making these findings the  judge  was  highlighting
    the inadequacy in the documentary evidence pointing to  evidence  which
    could reasonably have been attained. Mr Tufan submitted that this  case
    is one where TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 applies in that this is  a
    case where it would have been reasonable to expect that evidence  could
    have been produced and that this is something the judge is entitled  to
    take into account. I accept that submission.

12. In my view there is no conflict with paragraph 40 because the judge did
    not attack the Sponsor's credibility in the subsequent  paragraphs  but
    essentially found that, even accepting that she is credible,  her  oral
    evidence was insufficient to  demonstrate  sole  responsibility.   This
    conclusion was open to the judge on the evidence.

13. Mr Murphy submitted that the conclusion at paragraph 58 indicated  that
    the judge accepted that, whilst in China, the  Sponsor  exercised  sole
    responsibility of the child.  At  paragraph  58  it  states  that  "the
    Sponsor has been spending a great deal of time each year with  the  boy
    in China".  However I accept Mr Tufan's submission that this  does  not
    go to sole responsibility in that a finding that the Sponsor  spends  a
    great deal of time each year with the boy in China is not the same as a
    finding that she has sole responsibility for the child. The judge  made
    a clear finding at paragraph 41  which  references  paragraph  58  that
    spending some time each year with the Appellant in China is  not  proof
    of sole responsibility.  This was a finding open to the  judge  on  the
    evidence.

14. Mr Tufan accepted that at paragraph 59 the judge appeared to state  the
    wrong test where the judge stated that there is inadequate evidence  to
    show that the threshold in law that any sole decision was ever taken by
    the  Sponsor  and  that  there  is  "a  real  possibility  that  shared
    responsibility is exercised where the parental grandparent  and/or  the
    Sponsor's sister".  He accepted that it appeared  that  the  judge  may
    have confused this with the asylum standard.  However he submitted that
    this is not a material error looking at the decision as a whole.

15. I note that the judge did refer to the standard of proof  elsewhere.  I
    bear in mind that this was an appeal based  on  human  rights  grounds.
    Throughout the decision and reading of the decision as a  whole  it  is
    clear that the judge was aware of the burden and standard of proof  and
    that it was properly applied.   The  judge  clearly  had  in  mind  the
    appropriate case law of TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT saying at paragraph  43
    that the Sponsor was clearly well aware of what she had to prove  under
    the test in TD (Yemen).  The  judge  took  a  proper  approach  to  the
    evidence.

16. Mr Tufan also  accepted  that  at  paragraph  61  the  judge  may  have
    misstated the reasoning in Nmaju and Others [2000] EWCA Civ  505  which
    refers  to  whether  there  could  be  evidence  of  two  months   sole
    responsibility.  However again he submitted that this is not a material
    error.  I accept that this is not a material error as  the  judge  made
    clear findings that the evidence did not  show  that  the  Sponsor  had
    exercised sole responsibility for the  Appellant  over  any  period  of
    time. The judge did not simply find that the period of one month  spent
    in China in January/February 2017 not long enough. He found  that  sole
    responsibility was not shown by a period of time  in  China  (see  also
    paragraph 41) and  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  that  sole
    responsibility was exercised after the visit in January/February  2017.
    This finding was open to the judge on the evidence.

17. The judge's findings are summarised at paragraph 64 where he  concluded
    that the Immigration Rules were not met due to a lack of  corroboration
    on a number of pertinent issues. This finding was open  to  the  judge.
    This was properly a weighty factor in considering  the  proportionality
    of the decision under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 16 April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date: 16 April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

