
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12884/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 June 2021                    |On 29 June 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                            ROYAN ALBERT BURRELL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Ijewere, Solicitor, BA Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  to  which  both   parties   have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams
      (V). A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party  expressed  any
      concern, with the process.

   2. The appellant is appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Louveaux ("the judge") promulgated  on  1  October  2020
      dismissing his appeal.

   3. The appellant's immigration and relationship history is as follows:

     a. On 20 April 2002 the appellant entered the UK  as  a  visitor  with
        leave until 20 October 2002.  Thereafter  he  remained  in  the  UK
        without leave.

     b. On 29 March 2012 he is was arrested and served with notice that  he
        was liable to removal. Reporting requirements were imposed on him.

     c. The appellant failed to attend reporting appointments  in  December
        2014, January 2015 and February 2015; and on 16  February  2015  he
        was classed as an absconder. He did not report  again  and  was  an
        "absconder" for approximately two years.

     d. In 2015 he entered into a relationship  and  began  living  with  a
        British citizen who he subsequently married.

     e. On 29 November 2017 the appellant left the UK (voluntarily, and  at
        his own expense).

     f. On 27 March 2019 the appellant applied,  from  Jamaica,  for  entry
        clearance on the basis of his relationship with his wife.

   4. In a decision dated 20 June 2019 the appellant's application for entry
      clearance was refused. It was accepted  that  the  appellant  met  the
      relationship, financial and English language eligibility  requirements
      under appendix FM.  However, his application  was  refused  under  the
      Immigration Rules for the following reasons:

     a. It was said that he fell for refusal under paragraph 320(11) of the
        Immigration Rules and S-EC.1.5 of Appendix FM of the Rules  because
        he had previously contrived to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
        Immigration Rules by  overstaying  and  absconding  (which  was  an
        aggravating circumstance); and

     b. The respondent also stated that he fell for refusal under paragraph
        320(3) of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  he  used  a  different
        identity when arrested in the UK to that which he used when  making
        his application for leave to enter.

   5.  The  respondent  also  stated  that  there   were   not   exceptional
      circumstances which would render refusal of entry a breach of  article
      8 ECHR.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   6. The judge found that the appellant is married  to  a  British  citizen
      ("the sponsor"), and  that  they  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship.

   7. The judge rejected the respondent's contention that the appellant fell
      for refusal under paragraph 320(3) of the Immigration  Rules,  stating
      that this provision was not applicable.

   8. However, the judge accepted the respondent's argument  that  paragraph
      320(11) applied. The judge  found  paragraph  320(11)  was  applicable
      because there were aggravating circumstances (absconding  and  failing
      to report). The  judge  distinguished  the  case  from  PS  (paragraph
      320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440  (IAC)  on  the
      basis that in that case there were no such aggravating circumstances.

   9.  The  judge  then  proceeded  to  consider  whether  there  would   be
      unjustifiably harsh consequences if entry clearance was  refused.  The
      judge found that there would not, for the following reasons:

     a. The appellant and sponsor both have family  in  Jamaica  (including
        the sponsor's mother)

     b. Although there would be difficulties in doing  so,  over  time  the
        sponsor would be able to obtain employment in Jamaica

     c. The  appellant  and  sponsor  would  have  the  assistance  of  the
        sponsor's mother  who  has  sufficient  funds  to  travel  annually
        between Jamaica and the UK

     d.  The  appellant  and  sponsor  would  have  the   assistance   from
        appellant's brother, whose  land  and  house  the  appellant  looks
        after.

     e. There is no evidence  to  support  a  finding  that  the  sponsor's
        medical condition could not be adequately treated in Jamaica.

  10. In paragraph 41 the judge stated that:

           "Notwithstanding the  credit  (as  per  PS)  that  he  gets  for
           choosing to depart the UK voluntarily in 2017 and  serving  what
           is colloquially referred to as a 12 month re-entry ban,  I  find
           that the public interest in refusing the appellant leave remains
           strong".

  11. In paragraph 45 the judge noted that the  sponsor  provides  practical
      and financial support to her sick father and that social services  may
      have a greater role in his  care  and  support  if  she  relocated  to
      Jamaica. The  judge  stated  that  this  is  relevant  to  the  public
      interest.

  12. In paragraph 46 the judge stated that  she  gave  due  weight  to  the
      public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls
      and only little  weight  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  the
      sponsor  given  that  it  was  established  when  he  was  in  the  UK
      unlawfully.

  13. The judge concluded in paragraph 47 that the decision to refuse  entry
      was proportionate.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

  14. The grounds of appeal rely on  PS,  and  cite  paragraph  14  of  that
      decision, where it is said:

           "The Entry Clearance Officer, in making the decision of refusal,
           refers nowhere to the guidance under paragraph 320(11).   It  is
           therefore wholly unclear whether the Entry Clearance Officer has
           addressed his mind to the relevant question, namely  whether  in
           the circumstances of this case Mr S's breach of  UK  immigration
           law was sufficiently aggravating so as to justify  the  refusal.
           It seems to us that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  should  have
           specifically recognised that  Mr  S  had  voluntarily  left  the
           United  Kingdom  more  than  12  months  ago  with  a  view   to
           regularising his immigration status.  There was no question  but
           that the  marriage  was  a  genuine  one.   If  the  aggravating
           circumstances are not truly aggravating there is in this context
           a serious risk that those in the position of Mr  S  will  simply
           continue to remain in the United Kingdom unlawfully and will not
           seek to regularise their status as he has  sought  to  do.   The
           effect then is likely to be counter-productive  to  the  general
           purposes of the relevant rules  and  to  the  maintenance  of  a
           coherent system of  immigration.   However,  as  explained,  the
           Entry Clearance Officer in this case did not address the correct
           question and did not carry out an  adequate  balancing  exercise
           under the guidelines.  Furthermore, Mr S had made a claim  under
           Article 8 which, standing alone, may not have been very  strong.
           Nonetheless the family  circumstances  needed  to  be  evaluated
           carefully in the balancing exercise to which we have referred."

  15. With reference to this paragraph of PS, the  grounds  argue  that  the
      judge (a)  failed  to  address  whether  the  appellant's  breach  was
      sufficiently aggravating so as to justify refusal of entry; (b) failed
      to take into consideration the public interest in overstayers  leaving
      the UK to regularise their status; and (c) failed to attach sufficient
      weight to the length of time the appellant spent outside the UK.

  16. In his submissions, Mr Ijewere argued that the judge failed to address
      the correct question, which was whether the conduct of  the  appellant
      was sufficiently aggravating in the light of the  public  interest  in
      encouraging the stairs to leave the UK and  make  an  application  for
      entry. He also argued that the factual matrix in this case was similar
      to PS.

  17. Mr Ijewere highlighted that the appellant would not  have  fallen  for
      refusal under paragraph 320(7B), had this been applicable, because  he
      has been out of the country for over 12 months.

  18. Ms Everett submitted, in response, that the judge was entitled to find
      that a lengthy period of absconding (approximately two years)  was  an
      aggravating factor and that paragraph 320(11) applied. She argued that
      the grounds appear to be no more than  a  disagreement  as  the  judge
      considered PS and explained why he reached a different conclusion.



Analysis

  19. At the relevant time, paragraph 320(11) provided that entry  clearance
      or leave to enter the United Kingdom should normally (but not  always)
      be refused:

           where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant
           way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

           (i) overstaying; or

           (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

           (iii) being an illegal entrant; or

           (iv) using deception in an application for entry clearance,
           leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from
           the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
           the application (whether successful or not);

           and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as
           absconding, not meeting temporary admission/reporting
           restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity or
           multiple identities, switching nationality, making frivolous
           applications or not complying with the re-documentation process.

  20. There are two elements to 320(11). First, an applicant must fall  into
      one of the categories (i) - (iv). Second, there must be an aggravating
      circumstance.

  21. It is, in my view, plain that  the  appellant  falls  squarely  within
      paragraph 320(11).

     a. Firstly, he was  an  overstayer  and  therefore  sub-paragraph  (i)
        applies to him.

     b.  Secondly,  he  was  an  absconder,  and  therefore  there  was  an
        aggravating circumstance (absconding is the first example given  of
        an aggravating circumstance).

  22. It is also important to note  that  the  appellant's  overstaying  and
      absconding was serious:  having  entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor,  he
      overstayed for many years; and  he  absconded  for  approximately  two
      years.

  23. The appellant relies on PS but the circumstances of the  appellant  in
      PS were materially different. As is apparent from paragraph 13 of  PS,
      the First-tier Tribunal in that  case  found  that  paragraph  320(11)
      applied because the appellant remained in the UK without  leave  (i.e.
      was an overstayer) without engaging with the question of whether,  and
      if so to what extent, there were aggravating circumstances.

  24. However, in contrast to PS, in this case it is clear that there was an
      aggravating circumstance,  which  is  that  the  appellant  absconded.
      Moreover, the absconding was a  significant  aggravating  circumstance
      because (a) it persisted for a long time (approximately two years) and
      (b) the appellant has not (as acknowledged by Mr Ijewere) provided any
      reasons to justify or explain why he absconded.

  25. There is, as recognised in PS, a tension between  the  application  of
      paragraph 320(11) and the public interest in  encouraging  overstayers
      to leave the UK and make an application for entry (as, to some extent,
      reflected in paragraph 320(7B). It is for this reason that  the  panel
      in PS stated that great care should  be  exercised  in  assessing  the
      aggravating circumstances under paragraph 320(11).  However,  in  this
      case  there  was  plainly  a  significant   aggravating   circumstance
      (absconding for two years).

  26. In the light of the significant aggravating circumstances, it was  (a)
      not inconsistent with PS to find that paragraph 320(11)  applied;  and
      (b) open to the judge in the article 8 proportionality  assessment  to
      find  that  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
      immigration controls weighed heavily against the appellant even though
      he had been outside of the UK for over a year and there  is  a  public
      interest in incentivising overstayers to leave the UK  and  apply  for
      entry clearance.



Notice of decision

  27. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
      not involve the making of an error of law and stands.
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 23 June 2021                |

