
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12871/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th September 2018                        |On 26th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Gobir of Counsel, instructed by Syed Shaheen
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge Powell  (the
    judge) of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  FtT)  promulgated  on  21st
    September 2017.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a national of Bangladesh born 6th January 2009.  She is
    now 9 years of age.

 4. The Claimant was born in the UK.  Her father arrived in the UK in March
    2007.  His asylum claim was refused on 18th April 2007.  The Claimant's
    mother arrived in the UK in November 2007.  The Claimant has  a  sister
    born in the UK in July 2014.  None of the  family  have  any  leave  to
    remain in this country.

 5. The Claimant's father applied for leave  to  remain  on  17th  November
    2010.  The application  was  refused  but  apparently  is  still  being
    reconsidered by the Secretary of State.

 6. An application for leave to remain was made on behalf of  the  Claimant
    and refused on 6th May 2016.  An appeal was lodged and heard by the FtT
    on 7th September 2017.

 7. The judge heard evidence from the Claimant's father and noted that  the
    Claimant relied upon paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration  Rules.
    The Claimant therefore had to prove that at the date of application she
    was under 18 years of age and had lived continuously in the UK  for  at
    least seven years, and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
    leave the UK.  It is perhaps no coincidence that this  application  was
    made on 11th February 2016, approximately one month after the  Claimant
    had accrued seven years' continuous residence.

 8. The judge found that at the date of the FtT hearing, the  Claimant  had
    been living in the UK for eight years and eight months having been born
    in this country.  She had never visited Bangladesh.   The  judge  found
    that it would not be reasonable to expect  her  to  leave  the  UK  and
    therefore she satisfied paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

 9. The judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules
    with reference to section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  The judge found the Secretary of State's decision  to
    be  disproportionate,  and  therefore  the  appeal  was  allowed   with
    reference to Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.



10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the  judge  had  failed  to
    apply binding case law such as EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,
    and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.  It was submitted that the judge had failed
    to give any good reason why he had not applied the principles in  those
    cases.

11. It was also contended that the judge had made a  material  misdirection
    of law in allowing the Appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  The judge had failed to give  adequate  weight  to  the  public
    interest.  It was submitted that the judge had  only  considered  those
    factors which weigh in favour of the Appellant and ignored his duty  to
    consider the very weighty factors pointing in the  opposite  direction,
    including the public purse and the public  interest  in  maintaining  a
    firm and coherent system of immigration control.

12. It was submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  making  speculative
    findings when considering reasonability.  It  was  contended  that  the
    Claimant's family have family members in Bangladesh who could assist if
    they return, and there was no reason that would prevent the  Claimant's
    parents from finding employment in Bangladesh.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge E B Grant of the  FtT  and  I
    set out below, in part, the grant of permission;

         "Having read the decision carefully it can be seen  the  judge  has
         set out the factors he had to consider in the balancing exercise at
         paragraph 40 in virtually  all  of  the  factors  set  out  therein
         factors in favour of the Appellant.  Very little weight is given to
         the public interest in removal and higher  court  authorities  have
         not been taken into account and applied.  The Record of Proceedings
         shows that the Respondent's representative drew  the  attention  of
         the judge to case law including EV (Philippines) yet  this  is  not
         been taken into account.  The skeleton argument of the  Appellant's
         representative referred to relevant case law which has arguably not
         been taken into account by the judge."

14. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT  decision  contained  a  material
    error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Oral Submissions

15. Mr Howells relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to  appeal.   He  submitted  that  paragraphs  60-61  of  EV
    (Philippines) are particularly relevant in which it was found that  the
    desirability of being educated at public expense in  the  UK  does  not
    outweigh the benefit to the children of remaining with  their  parents,
    and just as the UK cannot provide medical treatment for the world,  the
    UK  cannot  educate  the  world.   Mr  Howells  submitted   that   when
    considering the length of residence, it was accepted that  seven  years
    from age four is more significant than the first seven years of life.

16. Mr Howells submitted that the  judge  erred  in  law  when  considering
    Article 8 outside the Rules by failing to give adequate weight  to  the
    public interest and failing to properly consider section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.

17. On behalf of the Claimant Mr Gobir relied upon his  skeleton  argument.
    In brief summary it was submitted that the judge had taken into account
    the relevant case law, had conducted a comprehensive balancing exercise
    and taken all relevant matters into account.  Mr Gobir pointed out that
    the Secretary of State had been reconsidering the application for leave
    to remain made by the Claimant's father, since at least  2012  and  had
    still not reached a decision.

18.  At  the  conclusion  of  oral  submissions  I  observed  that  neither
    representative had made any reference to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ
    705 which I thought may be relevant  in  considering  the  question  of
    reasonableness, in relation to a child with in excess of  seven  years'
    continuous residence.  I asked the representatives whether they  wished
    to make any submissions on this case, and they did not.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. The reason that I have made an anonymity order in this case is  because
    of the age of the Claimant.

20. I do not accept that the judge has materially erred in law.  In my view
    it is not the case that the judge has failed  to  consider  authorities
    from the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court.  By way of example  the
    judge at paragraph 16 makes specific reference to ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4, and EV (Philippines) reminding himself that the  welfare  of  a
    child must not trump all other considerations.

21. The case that is omitted from consideration is MA (Pakistan) which does
    not assist the Secretary of State's case.

22. I do not accept the contention in paragraph 2 of the grounds  that  the
    judge appears to have only considered factors weighing in favour of the
    Claimant, a point that  seems  to  have  been  accepted  by  the  judge
    granting permission.

23. In my view a careful reading of the decision indicates that not  to  be
    the case.  The judge at paragraphs 11 and 29 expresses  the  view  that
    the decision before him "was finely balanced".   At  paragraph  39  the
    judge correctly highlights that the key issue in the appeal is  whether
    it would be reasonable for  the  Claimant  to  go  to  Bangladesh,  and
    specifically makes the point that when considering whether it would  be
    reasonable, the judge must take into account the wider public  interest
    in the operation of immigration  control.   The  judge  also  correctly
    makes the point that the  child's  welfare  is  a  primary  but  not  a
    paramount consideration.

24. The judge considers at paragraph 40 whether it would be  reasonable  to
    expect the Claimant to relocate to Bangladesh.  It  is  this  paragraph
    that the Secretary of State contends is weighted heavily in  favour  of
    the Claimant.  I do not agree.  The judge divides  the  paragraph  into
    subparagraphs a-x.  I will now refer to factors taken into  account  by
    the judge, which in my view are not favourable to the Claimant and  her
    family.  At g the judge finds that the Claimant  has  been  exposed  to
    Bengali culture, and at h finds that she probably  understands  Bengali
    far more than her father states in evidence.  Bengali is  the  language
    used at home.

25. At i the judge finds that the Claimant is likely  to  be  developing  a
    degree of bi-lingualism and is likely to  be  able  to  communicate  in
    Bengali.

26. At j the judge finds that if removed to Bangladesh the  Claimant  would
    go with her parents and sister as a family unit and family  life  would
    be preserved and could continue in Bangladesh as well as it can in  the
    UK.

27. At k the  judge  finds  that  while  the  values,  cultural  norms  and
    opportunities in Bangladesh are different to those in the UK,  they  do
    not pose a real risk of harm to the Claimant in  the  medium  or  long-
    term.  Any short-term distress by changing her home should  be  capable
    of being mitigated by her parents.

28. At n the judge finds that there is a public interest in the maintenance
    of effective immigration control.  At o the judge finds the UK does not
    have to accept the choices made by the Claimant's parents  in  relation
    to her upbringing or in the choices they have made to try and settle in
    the UK.

29. At p the judge finds that while the Claimant cannot be held responsible
    for her parents' faults, their lack of  immigration  status  and  their
    decision to remain in the UK without leave, is relevant to the question
    of what is reasonable.  At v the judge rejects the Claimant's  father's
    continuing assertion that he and his family have a well-founded fear of
    persecution in Bangladesh.  At w the  judge  finds  that  even  if  the
    Appellant's parents have cynically manipulated the  immigration  system
    by founding a family here  and  avoiding  the  immigration  authorities
    until the Appellant has reached the age of seven  years,  the  Claimant
    cannot be punished for their fault by taking a harsher  line  with  her
    than might be taken in respect of a similar  child  with  parents  less
    culpable.

30. At x the judge gives less weight to the  private  life  formed  by  the
    Claimant because her immigration status was precarious while she formed
    it.

31. In my view the judge carried out  an  appropriate  balancing  exercise.
    What he did not do was take into  account  the  guidance  given  in  MA
    (Pakistan).  For example at paragraph 49 of that decision it is stated;

         "However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons, first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests, and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

32. The Claimant had in excess of seven years' residence and therefore  the
    approach to be followed by the judge should have been, according to  MA
    (Pakistan), that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
    reasons to the contrary.

33. The judge has considered the immigration history of the parents.   They
    have remained in the UK without leave.  The  judge  did  not  have  the
    benefit of the decision in MT and ET (Nigeria) [2018] UKUT 00088  (IAC)
    which was decided after the FtT decision.   At  paragraph  34  of  that
    decision the President of the Upper Tribunal considered the immigration
    history of a parent who had abused the immigration laws of the UK.  The
    parent in that case had received a community order for  using  a  false
    document to obtain employment, had come to the  UK  on  a  visit  visa,
    overstayed, made a claim for asylum that was found  to  be  false,  and
    thereafter pursued various legal means of remaining in the  UK.   While
    this behaviour was not to be excused or downplayed, it was found on the
    facts of that case, that the immigration history was not so bad  as  to
    constitute the kind of "powerful" reason that would  render  reasonable
    removal of a child with in excess of seven years'  residence  from  the
    UK.

34. The judge did not err in considering Article 8 outside the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge has considered section 117B and the public  interest.
    The judge has considered  the  parents'  immigration  history  and  the
    public interest in immigration control.  The judge did not err  in  law
    in finding that it would not be reasonable to expect a child with eight
    years and eight months' residence in the UK, who has been born  in  the
    UK and never visited Bangladesh, to have to leave the UK.  That  was  a
    finding open to the judge on the evidence.  The  grounds  submitted  by
    the  Secretary  of  State  display  a  strong  disagreement  with   the
    conclusion reached by the judge but do not disclose a material error of
    law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
decision is not set aside.  I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of  State.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FtT stands so does the decision not  to  make  a
fee award.


Signed                              Date 11th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
