
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/12576/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th September 2017                     |On 4th October 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                    ppellant

                                     and

                           MOHAMMED MUSTAFA WASSIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Williams of Andrew Williams Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Bradshaw made following a hearing at Bradford on 19th May 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Iraq born on 4th  June  1982.   He  has  a
    lengthy immigration history but last entered the UK in 2007.   He  made
    an application for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds  on  30th
    March 2009, and subsequently succeeded in an appeal which  was  allowed
    on 18th November 2011 on the basis of his relationship with  a  British
    citizen, Susan Edwards.  He was  granted  discretionary  leave  on  1st
    January 2012 running to 1st January 2015.

 3. He then made a further  application  for  discretionary  leave  on  8th
    December 2014 which was refused on 25th April  2016  and  it  was  this
    decision which was the subject of the appeal before  Immigration  Judge
    Bradshaw.

 4. According to the findings of  the  Immigration  Judge,  who  found  the
    claimant and Ms Edwards to be credible witnesses, they were still in  a
    relationship, as they had been for many years, although they have lived
    apart for the past five years.  The couple see each  other  about  four
    times a week and the claimant stays with her but they maintain separate
    households.

 5. The judge concluded that they were in a committed relationship,  albeit
    that they lived separately.  He  accepted  the  claimant's  explanation
    about the completion of the application form when  he  ticked  the  box
    marked "single" and not one of the other  options  such  as  "unmarried
    partner."

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had not made a proper assessment of whether the appeal  ought
    to be allowed outside the Immigration Rules in the light of the  public
    interest in maintaining an efficient  immigration  policy  and  whether
    there were compelling exceptional circumstances in the appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on 10th July 2017.

The Hearing

 8. The judge cited, at paragraph 21 of the determination:

         "The Home Office Discretionary Leave Policy document dated 18/08/15
         provides at Section 10 transitional arrangements for  extension  of
         leave applications where discretionary  leave  was  granted  before
         09/07/12 as in this case and caseworkers must consider whether  the
         circumstances prevailing at the time of the original grant of leave
         continue at the date of the decision.  If circumstances remain  the
         same (subject to exceptions which do not  apply  in  this  case)  a
         further period of 3 years' discretionary leave should  normally  be
         granted.  If there have been  significant  changes  that  mean  the
         applicant  no  longer  qualifies  for  leave  the   further   leave
         application should be refused".

 9. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the discretionary leave policy applied in this
    case and that there had been no change in the relationship between  the
    claimant and Ms Edwards since the previous grant of leave.  He believed
    that the author of the grounds had  believed  that  there  had  been  a
    change of  circumstances  because  the  claimant  had  ticked  the  box
    "single" on the application form and did not have  full  sight  of  the
    facts.  He did not challenge the finding that there had been no  change
    of circumstances.

10. The grounds make no reference to the basis upon which  the  appeal  was
    allowed,  and no challenge to the findings of fact at this hearing.  No
    arguments were made as to why the normal course should not be  followed
    in this case.

11. The judge was therefore entitled to consider that  the  fact  that  the
    claimant fell within the policy constituted an exceptional circumstance
    such that leave ought to be granted outside the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

12. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  decision  stands.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 4 October 2017
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
