
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12809/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 April 2019                              |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 LOUISON [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  who
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew given on 11 March 2019.



Background

2.   The  appellant  first  claimed  asylum  in  the  UK  in  2015  and  was
    interviewed about his claim on 13 March 2015.  His claim was based on a
    fear that if he returned to the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC)  he
    would face mistreatment due to  his  imputed  political  opinion  as  a
    family member  of  a  UDPS  member  because  of  his  membership  of  a
    particular social group and as a lone child in the DRC.

3.   The respondent refused that application for asylum and his  grounds  of
    refusal were set out in a letter dated 16 October 2016.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and that appeal came before Judge A
    J M Baldwin sitting at Hatton Cross on 11 January 2019.  Judge  Baldwin
    noted that the appellant was unrepresented but that the respondent  was
    represented by Mr Wain, I assume, a Home Office Presenting Officer, and
    I have only seen  a  full  decision  today  because  unfortunately  the
    version sent to me in advance of today had only the odd numbered  pages
    copied.  Judge Baldwin heard evidence from the  appellant  but  made  a
    number of adverse findings relating to the evidence he gave,  including
    his inability to recall certain key facts.  He decided on the  totality
    of the evidence to dismiss the appeal on all grounds argued and make no
    anonymity direction, finding that the appellant had not discharged  the
    burden of proof.

4.   The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on 6 February 2019.  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew on 11 March 2019.  Judge  Andrew  was
    satisfied there may be an arguable error of law in that  the  appellant
    was a young man  who  was  unrepresented  at  the  hearing  and  having
    considered a statement from his solicitor, Annette Elder. Having regard
    to that letter, which is on the tribunal's file, Judge  Andrew  thought
    it was at least arguable that there had been an error of law,  in  that
    Judge Baldwin had failed to either adjourn the case in order  to  allow
    an interpreter to present his evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FTT). Judge Andrew considered it  to  be  arguably  unfair  for  Judge
    Baldwin not to adjourn in the  circumstances  and  gave  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  it  was  conceded  by  the
    respondent that the appellant's appeal had raised an error of  law  and
    following a Rule 24 response on 26 March 2019, the  respondent  decided
    not to oppose the appeal.   Furthermore,  it  was  recognised  by  both
    representatives that the matter had to proceed by  way  of  a  remittal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal and that was necessary for  a  de  novo
    hearing to take place before a different judge than Judge Baldwin.

6.   After standing the matter down, I decided that it  was  appropriate  to
    accept that there had been a material error of law and remit the matter
    back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  clear  that  there  is  a
    perception of unfairness by both sides to  this  appeal.  According  to
    paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement, Immigration and Asylum  Chamber,
    First Tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, where the Upper Tribunal  finds
    a material error of law it will normally re-make  the  decision  within
    the Upper Tribunal unless it is satisfied that, inter alia:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-Tribunal of a fair hearing...".


7.   This appears to be the case here or at least that  was  the  perception
    of the judge's decision by both sides to this appeal.  Accordingly,  it
    is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

8.   In accordance with the Practice Statement, and  specifically  paragraph
    7.2 (b ) thereof, it is necessary to set out the nature and  extent  of
    any fact finding that will be necessary to remake the decision as  well
    as any specific directions which apply to the remitted hearing.

9.   The only directions that I consider necessary are:

      1) For this appeal to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  de
         novo hearing to be held at Hatton Cross.


      2) The appeal is to  be  heard  before  any  judge  other  than  Judge
         Baldwin.


      3) None of the earlier findings of fact shall stand.

      4) A Lingala interpreter is to be booked  for  the  hearing,  but  the
         appellant's representatives are to notify the FTT  if  one  is  not
         required, no later than seven days before the adjourned hearing.

      5) All further directions, including those for re-listing the  matter,
         requests for an appropriate time estimate and availability  of  the
         parties with a view to a hearing taking place, are to be issued  by
         the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  Accordingly, the decision of the Upper Tribunal is that the  appeal  is
    allowed.  The decision is set aside, and the matter is remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before a  different  Tribunal
    than Judge Baldwin.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 19 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 19 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
