
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12176/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2020                   |On 21 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MOULDER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Abdool Gaffool Gibran Auckburally
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lindsay for the Secretary of State for the Home
Department
For the Respondent:    Mr Auckburally represented himself


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of first-tier Tribunal judge
         Malcolm dated 10 September 2019. The solicitors, Asher & Tomar, are
         no longer representing the appellant who appeared in person. Leave
         was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 1 November 2019.




    Background

      2. The background to this matter in brief is that the appellant
         arrived in the UK in 2006 on a tourist Visa. On 26 May 2017 the
         appellant was sentenced to 4 years imprisonment for conspiracy to
         commit robbery. The appellant met his partner in 2008 and they have
         three children.




    Grounds

      3. The grounds relied upon by the appellant are as follows:

          1) A failure by the first-tier Tribunal judge to consider the
             best interests of the three children.

          2)  A failure to consider the article 8 rights of all affected by
             the appellant's removal including the family life rights of
             his partner of 10 years.

      4. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill stated that it was arguable that the
         judge of the first-tier Tribunal may have erred in law, by:

          1) failing to consider the impact of removal on the appellant's
             partner and reaching a finding as to whether it would be
             unduly harsh for her to enjoy family life with the appellant
             in Mauritius and whether it would be unduly harsh for her to
             remain in the United Kingdom without him

         (2)  failing to reach any findings as to whether it would be unduly
             harsh for the appellant's children to enjoy family life with
             him in Mauritius and whether it would be unduly harsh for them
             to remain in the United Kingdom without him.




    Relevant law

      5. The relevant law is set out [92] and [93] of the judgment of the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge. In particular section 117 C of the
         Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides:

          1) the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.

             (2) the more serious the offence committed by a foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3) in the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

          4) Exception 1 applies where -

               a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life

               b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

               c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported

          5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

          6) in the case of foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2.




    Submissions

      6. It was submitted by the appellant that he has made a positive
         impact on his children since his release from prison in November
         2019 and he produced a letter from the children's school in
         support. He also produced a letter from social services and
         submitted that he was working with social services and would love
         to support his family.

      7. It was submitted for the Secretary of State that the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge had not failed to make a finding on the best
         interests of the children. At [104] the judge noted the submission
         that the "crux" of the matter was the emotional impact on the
         children.

      8. Further it was submitted for the Secretary of State that the judge
         had not failed to engage with respect to family life under Article
         8, he had carefully considered the documents listed at page 3 of
         the judgement, he considered the appellant's relationship with his
         partner and concluded at [85] that whilst there may be indications
         of difficulties in the relationship, the appellant and his partner
         do have three children and "it is clear that there is family life".



      9. In his conclusion at [117] the judge stated that the decision was
         "proportionate" and it was submitted that this demonstrated that he
         had carried out the requisite balancing exercise, taking into
         account the public interest in deportation [115] and balancing this
         against the appellant's family life of which the children were key.

     10. In relation to the issue raised by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill it was
         submitted that there was no legal requirement to consider the
         exceptions in section 117(C) before assessing whether there were
         very compelling circumstances. The strength of the relationship
         with the appellant's partner was assessed as was the emotional
         impact of the children but this did not amount to "very compelling
         circumstances".




    Discussion

     11. It may be inherent in subsection (6) that, in order to determine
         whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above the
         exceptions, the court has to have regard to the exceptions but that
         does not mean that the court has to make express findings in
         relation to the exceptions. The relevant test in this case is
         whether or not there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above the exceptions and it is clear that the judge applied the
         appropriate statutory test to the evidence before him. The
         conclusion that there were not "very compelling circumstances" was
         a decision which was open to the judge on the evidence.

     12. The judge referred to the circumstances of the crime at [51]. It
         involved a vulnerable victim (70-year-old man) who was restrained
         with duct tape. In fact the sentencing remarks indicate that the
         circumstances of the offence were that the appellant threatened the
         victim with a knife and tied him up so he could not speak or see
         and then held him down while others searched the house.  Further
         the judge did not accept his remorse saying that the appellant
         pleaded guilty just before trial when the CCTV showed his face.

     13. As to the position of his family, the first instance Judge
         considered this and at [102] concluded that:

             "it seemed clear from the evidence of the appellant that if he
             is required to leave the UK that his family would not move to
             be with him."

     14. The relevant parts of the judgment read:

             "[106]   It is well recognised that removal of the parent will
             generally have an adverse impact on the well-being of a child
             with whom there is a subsisting relationship, that in itself
             does not meet the test of very compelling circumstances..."

             [107}    I have given very careful consideration to the
             information in the report from Ormiston Families. It is clear
             that the position in which their father finds himself has had
             an effect on the children, however there is support available
             to them which support has been provided and it is to be
             assumed will be able to continue to be provided...

             [109]    The effect of separation on all three children has to
             be weighed against the public interest.

             [110]    The appellant has been convicted of a serious
             crime..."

     15. The judge clearly engaged with Article 8 and the interests of the
         children but concluded that the statutory test of "very compelling
         circumstances" had not been met.

     16. As stated above, there was no need for the judge to make express
         findings in relation to the exceptions in order to reach a
         conclusion on whether the test of "very compelling circumstances"
         was met. It can properly be inferred in our view from the judgement
         that he correctly applied the relevant test and there was therefore
         no error of law.




    Conclusion

     17. For the reasons set out above, the appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 17 January 2020

Mrs Justice Moulder
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
