
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12070/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2020                            |On 7 January 2021             |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            Miss Ramandeep Saini
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jones, Counsel, instructed by Bhogal Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt
("the judge"), promulgated on 3 January 2020, by which she dismissed the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of a human rights claim
dated 1 July 2019.  Having reviewed the evidence before her and having had
regard to a previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the judge
concluded that there would be no very significant obstacles to the
Appellant returning to live in India and that outside the context of the
Rules the decision to refuse the human rights claim was proportionate and
therefore lawful.  The judge did not specifically refer to Article 3.

The grounds of appeal assert an alleged absence of reasons, relating to, in
particular, country information on the position of women in India.  The
grounds of appeal themselves do not specifically refer to Article 3.

In granting permission Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf observed
that most of the grounds of appeal were, as he described them, "poorly
focussed and inadequately worded", but nonetheless deemed it to be arguable
that the judge had failed to consider a claim based on Article 3.  Whilst
Judge Shaerf purported to limit the grant of permission, the actual
decision made was a grant without any such limitation and in light of Safi
& Ors (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) it must be
taken that permission was in fact granted on all grounds, a point that I
made when issuing a Note and Directions Notice on 14 August 2020.

At the hearing Ms Jones, in my view entirely properly, accepted that she
could not properly pursue any challenge relating to the judge's
consideration of Article 8 with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
Immigration Rules and indeed on a wider proportionality basis.  The sole
focus of the challenge related to the alleged failure of the judge to
consider Article 3.  Ms Jones's case was that Article 3 had indeed been
raised with the Respondent at the outset and that the judge was bound to
have considered it as a matter of substance.

On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr McVeety submitted that it had not
been raised at any stage and therefore the judge did not err in failing to
consider it.  Even if it had been raised, it had not in fact been
considered by the Secretary of State and would have constituted a "new
matter" requiring consent and such consent had not been forthcoming.

I have no hesitation in concluding that the judge has not committed any
errors of law.  I am quite satisfied that Article 3 was not raised by the
Appellant at any stage, whether pre-appeal or during these proceedings.
The letter from her solicitors dated 15 February 2019 makes no express
reference to Article 3, basing the entirety of fairly lengthy submissions
on Article 8 only.  The matters set out in the letter had a clear bearing
on Article 8, but did not constitute an Article 3 claim, whether express or
by necessary implication.

Further, the reasons for refusal letter is abundantly clear: the Appellant
had been invited to make a protection claim but had declined to do so and
therefore the Respondent did not accept that a protection claim had been
made.  It is clear from this that even if an Article 3 protection claim had
been made it was not the subject of a refusal.  I note that the grounds of
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal make no reference to Article 3 either.

Whilst Ms Jones has directed me to a number of paragraphs within the
judge's decision, none of these show that Article 3 was specifically being
put forward at the hearing itself.  In any event, as Mr McVeety rightly
points out, if the matter was being raised at that late stage it would
undoubtedly have constituted a "new matter" requiring the consent of the
Secretary of State.  Quite clearly, no consent had been given and the judge
would not have had jurisdiction to deal with Article 3 in any event.

For the sake of completeness, on the facts as found by the judge and in
light of the country information, any hypothetical Article 3 claim that
might have been considered would in my judgment have been bound to fail in
any event.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                Date: 16 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

