
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12379/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 August 2019                   |On 12 September 2019                |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                               DHAN KUMAR RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Malik, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. S. Jones, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Housego ('the Judge'), issued on 29 April 2019 by which the appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to grant  entry
    clearance was refused.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup by
    way of a decision sent to the parties on 18 July 2019.

Anonymity

 3. No anonymity direction was issued by the Judge and no  application  for
    such direction was made before me.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal and is presently aged 41.

 5. The appellant's sponsor, his father, served in the Brigade  of  Gurkhas
    for 7 years before his discharge in 1971 when the appellant was aged  6
    months old. His father was one of a number of  former  members  of  the
    Brigade of Gurkhas who were denied the opportunity to  settle  in  this
    country until a change of policy in 2009. By this time,  the  appellant
    was aged  over  18.  The  sponsor  was  issued  with  settlement  entry
    clearance on 30 November 2010 and entered this country in October 2011.



 6. The appellant applied for entry clearance on 25 January 2018, when aged
    40. He sought to enter this country to settle as  the  adult  dependent
    relative of his father. The respondent considered  the  application  in
    light of the Home Office's policy as outlined in Annex K,  IDI  Chapter
    15 section 2A 13.2 as amended on 5 January 2015 and refused it  by  way
    of a decision dated 22 May 2018. The respondent observed, inter alia:

         'You state that you are unemployed and emotionally and  financially
         dependent on your parents. You were 40 years, 4 months and  3  days
         old at the date of application. Your father migrated to the  UK  by
         choice nearly four years (sic)  before  the  date  of  application.
         There is no evidence of any care arrangements put in place by  your
         sponsors before they migrated to  the  United  Kingdom.  That  your
         parents were content to leave for the United  Kingdom  without  you
         and without making any obvious care arrangements are factors I have
         considered. In view of the circumstances presented I am minded that
         the decision was made by your parents that an adult you  were  able
         to care for yourself.

         You are in good health, educated and there are no  obvious  factors
         preventing you from working in Nepal. You  also  have  siblings  in
         Nepal who have not applied to settle in the  UK.  Therefore,  I  am
         satisfied that you have close family ties in your country of origin
         for social and emotional support.'

 7. I observe that the reference to the appellant's  father  relocating  to
    the United Kingdom some 4 years prior to the application appears to  be
    erroneous on the chronology presented to me, which suggests he  arrived
    some 6 or more years before his son's application for entry clearance.

Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton Cross  on  11  April
    2019. He  decided  that  no  family  life  existed  between  the  adult
    appellant and his sponsor and dismissed the appeal.

Appeal

 9. The appellant relies upon two grounds of appeal. He complains that  the
    Judge materially erred in law by misdirecting himself as to the  family
    life threshold to be met under  the  respondent's  policy.  He  further
    complains that the Judge erred in his approach to the facts arising  in
    this matter when considering 'dependence'.

10. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Pickup reasoned:

         "It is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  made  a
         material misdirection in law as to the relevant test  and  standard
         to be applied in this 'historic injustice' case involving  the  son
         of  a  former  Gurkha  soldier.  The  appellant  may  still  be  in
         difficulties given his very mature age and the  fact  that  he  has
         been separated from his sponsoring parents  for  some  four  years,
         living an arguably independent life in Nepal. Further, some of  the
         grounds are little  more  than  disagreements  with  the  findings.
         However, there is at least an arguable material error of law in the
         application of the principles elaborated in the current case law to
         the facts of this case. All grounds may be argued."

11. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

Decision on error of law

12. In Patel v. Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010]  EWCA  Civ  17,  the
    Court of Appeal considered an appeal  concerned  with  entry  clearance
    applications from  relatives  of  British  overseas  citizens  who  had
    settled in the United Kingdom after having been prevented from doing so
    by a discriminatory law. The Court observed that if, by the  time  they
    were refused entry clearance, the adult children of those citizens were
    still part of their family life,  the  history  of  the  discriminatory
    arrangements would be a  potentially  decisive  factor  in  determining
    whether the children's right to respect for  their  family  life  under
    article 8 had been breached. Sedley LJ held at [14]:

         "You can set out to compensate for  a  historical  wrong,  but  you
         cannot reverse the passage of time. Many of these children have now
         grown up and embarked  on  lives  of  their  own.  Where  this  has
         happened, the bonds which constitute family life will no longer  be
         there, and art. 8 will have no purchase. But what may constitute an
         extant family life falls well short of what constitutes dependency,
         and a good many adult children - including  children  on  whom  the
         parents themselves are now reliant - may still have a  family  life
         with parents who are now settled here not by leave or by  force  of
         circumstance but by long-delayed right.  That  is  what  gives  the
         historical wrong a potential relevance to art.  8  claims  such  as
         these. It does not make the Convention a mechanism for turning  the
         clock back, but it does make both  the  history  and  its  admitted
         injustices potentially relevant to the application of art. 8(2)."

13. As for dependents of Gurkhas who were subject  to  historic  injustice,
    the Court of Appeal held in  Rai  v.  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Delhi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320, at [36] - [37], that  the  concept  to  which  the
    decision-maker will generally need to pay attention is 'support', which
    is 'real' or 'committed' or 'effective'. The Court warned as to looking
    not just for a sufficient degree of financial and emotional  dependence
    to  constitute  family  life,  but  also  for  some  extraordinary,  or
    exceptional, feature in the appellant's dependence upon his parents  as
    a necessary determinant of the existence of his family life with  them.
    Such an approach elevates the threshold of 'support' that is 'real'  or
    'committed' or 'effective' too high. Lindblom LJ further held, at [38]:

         "Throughout his findings and conclusions  with  regard  to  article
         8(1), the Upper Tribunal  judge  concentrated  on  the  appellant's
         parents' decision to leave Nepal and settle in the United  Kingdom,
         without, I think, focusing on the practical and financial realities
         entailed in that decision. This was,  in  my  opinion,  a  mistaken
         approach."

14. The Court of Appeal conformed in Pun v. Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2106; [2018] 4 W.L.R. 80 that the policy  of
    redressing the historic injustice  which  had  prevented  Gurkhas  from
    settling in the United Kingdom  carried  far  less  weight  where  non-
    dependent adult relatives of a Gurkha applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain than it did when dependent relatives applied.

Did the Judge incorrectly apply the family life threshold?

15. It is clearly apparent upon reading the decision that the Judge  sought
    to consider the issues before him with care. He appropriately  analysed
    the policy and  relevant  judicial  precedent  over  12  pages  of  his
    decision and reasons and no criticism is made as to his precis  of  the
    relevant law. The appellant presented a copy of the judgment in Rai  to
    the First-tier Tribunal at [70] - [86] of his bundle and the record  of
    proceedings confirms that it was relied upon by the appellant's counsel
    at the hearing, Mr. Jesuram, in his submissions. It is further apparent
    that the Judge had the judgment of Rai in his mind, citing at  [15]  of
    his decision two paragraphs of the Court  of  Appeal  judgment,  namely
    [17] and [47], and later expressly referring to [34]. He further  noted
    at [14] of his decision and reasons:

         "At paragraph 20 of Rai the test in [Singh v.  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630; [2016]  Imm.  A.R.  1]
         was approved - there must be 'something more' than natural love and
         affection, but (at paragraph 36) there is no  requirement  for  the
         case to be 'exceptional'. What is required is 'real',  'committed',
         'effective'  support.  It  appears  these  are  intended  to  be  3
         different ways of stating the same thing, rather  than  a  3-limbed
         test."

16. It is appropriate to observe the Judge's reasoning at [45] - [49]:

         "Annex K is specific in its requirements,  and  the  appellant  was
         over 30 at the date of application so  does  not  fall  within  its
         remit, save that Annex K contains provision for  article  8  to  be
         considered even in such cases. It specifically applies to  children
         born after leaving the Brigade. It points out that  the  assessment
         of whether there  is  a  family  life  depends  on  the  individual
         circumstances.

         I accept  that  the  sponsor  would  have  settled  in  the  UK  on
         discharge.

         I accept that the appellant and his parents lived together, but not
         that there is a family  life  between  them  sufficient  to  engage
         article 8 rights or was when they were all  in  Nepal.  They  lived
         together, and doubtless there is the  natural  love  and  affection
         between them to be expected in a parent/child  relationship.  There
         is no evidence  of  the  'something  more'  required  by  case  law
         ('real', 'committed' or 'effective' support), even allowing for the
         lower  hurdle  this  represents  for  former  Gurkha  families   to
         establish, for the following reasons:

         Nepal

           . When in Nepal, the appellant was fit and healthy and  able  to
             work and did so, and  was  not  physically  dependent  on  his
             parents. He was working in Nepal, on his own  account  in  the
             village. The 4 shared a home, but it could not be  said  that,
             while in Nepal, this was a family life in an article 8 sense.

           . The sponsor and his wife were well themselves when  they  came
             to the UK, and so did not need care from the  appellant.  They
             still do not.

         At date of decision

           . They have not lived together for over 4 years.

           . Application was made by the appellant much later than  by  the
             sponsor and his wife.

           . The appellant is not in want in Nepal.

           . The parents of the appellant  and  he  are  doubtless  now  in
             frequent contact and have been since the  appellant's  parents
             came to the UK. That can be evidence of emotional  dependence,
             but there is nothing to indicate any dependency (either  way),
             more than a wish to keep in touch with the son who lived  with
             them in Nepal.

           . There may be some financial  support  given  but  fathers  are
             expected to support  their  children  financially,  and  'such
             support does not suggest a bond over and above that usually to
             be  expected  between  adult  parents  and  their   children.'
             [Gurung, paragraph 48)

           . If there was family life in Nepal, it ceased 4 years ago  when
             the sponsor and his wife came to the UK, and the appellant was
             between the ages of 36 and 40 for those four years. He is  not
             someone with any particular need, and nor do his parents  have
             any particular need which he was meeting. A  family  life  was
             not in existence at the date of decision (or application).

           . The appellant has lived an independent life  for  the  last  4
             years, as a subsistence farmer and local handyman.

         As there is  not  family  life  between  [the]  appellant  and  his
         parents, the article 8 right to family life is not engaged, and the
         appeal fails for this reason."

17. The reference to the judgment in Gurung is to the Master of the  Rolls'
    observation at [48]:

         "The   First-tier   Tribunal   considered   whether,    in    these
         circumstances,  the  claimants  enjoyed  family  life  with   their
         parents. The judge said, at para 27, that  there  was  very  little
         evidence of family life between the claimants and their father (who
         was their sponsor). There was, however, evidence that he  supported
         them financially, but this was expected in Nepalese culture. It did
         not, therefore, suggest a bond over and above that  usually  to  be
         expected from the relationship  between  adult  parents  and  their
         children. The judge  said:  "The  sponsor  stated  that  they  have
         regular contact with each other, but there  was  no  real  evidence
         about how the claimants related to their parents and the effect  on
         them of being  separated  from  their  parents  or  what  emotional
         sustenance they received from their parents."

18. I am in agreement with Ms. Jones that the Judge did not impose a higher
    test when assessing article 8. The core of  his  assessment  is  as  to
    support, both financial and emotional. The reference to 'dependent'  is
    in relation to physical dependency whilst the appellant's parents lived
    in Nepal and seeks to identify that he  was  not  receiving  additional
    support through ill-health. This is non-contentious as it  is  not  the
    appellant's case that  he  suffers  poor  health,  and  the  Judge  was
    entitled to place this into his assessment as  to  support.  I  further
    find  that  the  reference  to  'emotional  dependence'  is  clearly  a
    reference to emotional support and  this  is  supported  by  the  Judge
    clearly noting earlier in the paragraph that he is required to consider
    whether  the  appellant  enjoys  'real',  'committed'  or   'effective'
    support.  The  Judge  applied  the  correct  standard  of  proof   when
    undertaking his assessment and the appellant  cannot  succeed  on  this
    ground of challenge.

Did the Judge err in his approach to the facts?

19. The appellant complains by way of ground  2  that  notwithstanding  the
    absence of challenge by the  respondent  in  the  decision  letter,  or
    notice as to the point prior to the hearing, the Judge found  that  the
    appellant  was  living  independently  because  he  was  working  as  a
    subsistence farmer and a local handyman. It is asserted that this is  a
    conclusion unsupported by evidence and is speculative in nature. It  is
    further observed that the respondent was unrepresented at  the  hearing
    and  reliance  is  placed  upon  the  unchallenged  evidence   of   the
    appellant's  father  and  mother  detailed  by  way  of  their  witness
    statements, affirmed before the  Judge.  The  appellant's  father,  the
    sponsor confirms by way of a witness statement dated 21 March 2019 that
    whilst he resided in Nepal he had 'no income at all. I had to work  for
    daily wages in order to provide for my family. I used to work, day  and
    night to earn a daily living.' He further details:

         "When my youngest child was 5 years old, I started getting  charity
         pension of about 1200 NPR a month. I did not have to work  so  hard
         after that. I started work as an electrician. I was  not  qualified
         at all but because of some knowledge of wires and batteries  I  was
         able to help others how knew nothing. My son [the  appellant]  used
         to go with me at times. We tried to raise livestock for  additional
         income as well but failed.

         ...

         Since 2004 ... [the appellant] and I used to  spend  all  the  time
         together in doing different chores in and around our house. Rarely,
         we would be asked to fix someone's lightbulb, etc.  It  was  not  a
         paid job. I started sending [the appellant] for such  jobs  on  his
         own as he got older. It is more of a  social  help  than  anything.
         Rarely did we get a  request  for  help  and  even  rarer  was  the
         remuneration paid for it.

         ...

         The phone I had brought from Nepal  did  not  work  in  the  UK.  I
         contacted my neighbour in Nepal through my friend's phone in the UK
         to speak to [the appellant]. I had no money to leave  him  with.  I
         told him to borrow some from others in the town at the behest of me
         being in the UK. That helped him given assurances  to  others  that
         their money would be repaid.

         As soon as I received the pension in the UK, I bought a new  phone.
         I sent much of the money to Nepal to my son [the appellant] through
         proper money transfer remittances IME. I had many receipts of money
         transfers to Nepal to my son which I sent  to  [the  appellant]  in
         Nepal for his application.

         He used the money to pay off the loan in  Nepal  and  also  to  buy
         himself food, pay the rent and other bills.

         ...

         [The appellant] is single. He  has  never  been  in  employment  in
         Nepal. He is not highly educated. We  have  lived  in  the  village
         which has very reserved population. All the people grow  their  own
         food  and  mostly  remain  within  a  certain  vicinity.  We   have
         electricity and water supply  whereas  gas  has  to  be  bought  in
         cylinders.

         When we went to Nepal in 2013, my wife encouraged the  children  to
         raise chickens. We built a small chicken den in the house.  It  has
         been an activity for the children to take eggs from the den  daily.
         Clean the den once a week. Let the chicken out and  let  them  back
         in. It helps them relax and stay in the house."

20. The appellant's mother details by way of her witness statement dated 21
    March 2019, inter alia:

         "I have been taking care of [the appellant] since his birth until I
         departed to the UK in 2011. I was cooking for him and cleaning  for
         him. He was helping around the house doing other chores. As he  has
         not been able to find any employment. It is very  unfortunate  that
         we had to be separated. It is unfair and unjust.  Had  the  current
         policy been available at the time  of  my  husband's  discharge  we
         would never had been separated.

         At present [the appellant] lives in the same house in the town. His
         daily activities include doing household chores and  looking  after
         some chicken I had brought in the house in 2013. My husband  and  I
         are responsible for [the appellant] and Nabina. The other  children
         are making a good living on their own."

21. The appellant further relies upon a letter from the ward  secretary  of
    Khandbari Municipality dated 24 May 2017, confirming that the appellant
    is unmarried and is unemployed.

22. I observe that a reasonable Judge  could  doubt  the  veracity  of  the
    evidence  being  presented,  particularly  as  to  the  notion   of   a
    willingness to work for free in circumstances where  it  is  said  that
    finances are limited. The evidence lacks  clarity  as  to  whether  the
    family own or have access to land upon which to grow crops and also  as
    to why there is a lack of farm labouring opportunities in the  vicinity
    or as to why the appellant has not sought employment in a town or city.
    There is a lack of detail as to why there were difficulties in  raising
    livestock. The family home appears to have access to electricity so  is
    not in the most inaccessible 10%  of  Nepal  that  lacks  such  access.
    Consideration would have to be given to the weight that can be  enjoyed
    by the letter from the ward secretary.

23. However, in this instance the Judge made a finding  at  [48]  that  the
    appellant had lived an independent life for  the  last  4  years  as  a
    subsistence farmer and local handyman, without first putting this issue
    to the witnesses at the hearing or  raising  it  with  the  appellant's
    counsel and further without engaging with the written  evidence  before
    him. I  observe  from  the  record  of  proceedings  that  Mr.  Jesuram
    expressly  asserted  that  the  evidence   from   the   witnesses   was
    unchallenged and that they should have been alerted to any challenge as
    to this issue, which they were not. The Judge appears to have given  no
    notice to Mr. Jesuram at the hearing as to his concerns to the veracity
    of the evidence before him. Further, he provides no  reasons  for  this
    important finding of fact. To  proceed  without  giving  the  appellant
    notice of his concern as to the evidence of his employment or otherwise
    was procedurally unfair, as was the failure to  give  reasons  for  the
    decision reached. I accept Mr. Malik's contention that such errors were
    material in this matter as they went to the core of the Judge's article
    8 assessment. I therefore set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Remittal

24. Both Mr. Malik and Ms. Jones opined that if I were to find  a  material
    error of law, this would be a suitable matter to be remade by the Upper
    Tribunal. However, upon reflection, there are issues arising  from  the
    evidence relied upon  that  a  reasonable  judge  would  expect  to  be
    addressed, and the appellant should be properly be on notice that he is
    to address. In such circumstances, and  noting  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper  Tribunal
    concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal, the only fair step
    is to remit this appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    29 April 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

26. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross  for
    a fresh hearing before any Judge other than  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Housego.

27. No findings of fact are preserved.

Directions

28. This is not a matter that should be subjected to unwarranted delay.  In
    addition to any standard directions to  be  issued  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I direct:

    i)     The respondent is directed to  attend  the  hearing  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

    ii)    This matter is not suitable for the float list.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 7 September 2019
