
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/12793/2016
                                                               hu/12795/2016
                                                               hu/12797/2016
                                                               hu/12798/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th October 2018                          |On 9th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                 SAJEEWA [P]
                                 SUDENI [A]
                                   [S D P]
                                  [S D M P]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Aslam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He was born on 30 June 1975.

 2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  4
    May 2016.  The appeal was dismissed by Judge Lucas  (the  judge)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 26 October 2017.  He  found  the  respondent's
    decision to be proportionate.

 3. The grounds claim the judge failed to follow MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705.  In particular at [49]:

         "However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  significant   weight   (sic)   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons:   first,  because
         of its relevance to determining the  nature  and  strength  of  the
         child's best interests; and second, because  it  establishes  at  a
         starting point that  leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are
         powerful reasons to the contrary."

    The grounds claim that had the judge considered the case  properly  and
    adequately he would have reached a different conclusion.   Instead,  he
    merely asserted that it was reasonable to expect the children to  leave
    the UK without  seeking  to  explain  what  factors  made  that  course
    exceptionally reasonable.  There was no  basis  for  assuming  that  it
    would be in the children's  best  interests  to  be  uprooted  and  the
    assertion must be that consideration of the best interests  was  simply
    subordinated to consideration of  their  parents'  position  which  was
    against the concept of the cited case law.

 4. In a decision dated 11 April 2018, Judge Lambert refused permission  to
    appeal, inter alia as follows:

         "2.  The judge gave reasons for finding the appellants not to  meet
             the requirements of the Rules despite the status of the oldest
             child as a qualifying child,  and  found  no  good  reason  to
             consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  The  reasoning  in  the
             decision  is  evidence-based,  succinct  and  adequate.    The
             grounds take issue with the findings made by  the  Immigration
             Judge on the evidence, but in effect amount to  no  more  than
             disagreement with those findings and an  attempt  to  re-argue
             the appellant's case."

 5. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson granted permission to appeal  on
    7 September 2017.  She said, inter alia:

         "2.  ... the renewed grounds of appeal argue in effect that 1.  The
             judge failed to follow MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705;  2.
             The best interests of the elder child lie in remaining in  the
             UK; 3.   No  reasons  were  given  for  finding  that  it  was
             reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK;  4.   The
             parents fall within paragraph 276ADE(vi)  as  there  are  very
             significant obstacles to re-integration.







         3.   Whilst the final ground identified in  relation  to  paragraph
             276ADE(vi) is lacking in merit, the best interest  assessment,
             at [30] is arguably inadequate, including given that the elder
             child is a  qualifying  child  under  section  117B  and  that
             assessment has arguably been conflated with the  wider  public
             interest   assessment.    Although   Judge   Lucas   correctly
             identifies that the crux of the appeal is the  status  of  the
             eldest qualifying child and his younger sibling and identifies
             that neither of the adult appellants had leave to  remain  nor
             can they satisfy the Immigration Rules, it  is  just  arguable
             that there is inadequate reasoning in respect of the 'powerful
             reasons' required to justify removing a qualifying child."

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Aslam relied upon the grounds.

 8.  Ms  Kiss  conceded  that  judge's  reasoning  was  limited  but   that
    nevertheless he did not err.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The judge did not refer in terms to MA (Pakistan), but I find  that  he
    nevertheless covered the appropriate issues in his analysis.  The judge
    took into account the appellant's arguments and the  evidence  supplied
    on their behalf.  See [4] - [9] of the judge's  decision.   As  regards
    the best interests of the children, the submission made is  that  their
    best interests were best served by remaining here.  Both children  were
    integrated and were at school.  The main appellant's evidence was  that
    the  children  spoke  English  but  that  their  first   language   was
    Singhalese, although that was contradicted by the second appellant  who
    said that the children's first language was English.

10. The judge accepted the arguments that had been  put  forward  that  the
    best interests of the  children  would  be  to  remain  here.   It  was
    accepted that they were both in education and  there  was  evidence  of
    their good progress.  The children  were  fully  integrated  into  life
    here.  The judge accepted and understood the  wish  of  the  family  to
    remain but he also had  to  take  into  account  the  position  of  the
    children's parents who had no leave and whose appeal was based upon the
    status of the eldest qualifying child and his younger sibling.

11. The judge accepted the children would face temporary inconvenience  and
    short-term difficulty in  readjusting.   But  given  the  family  would
    return as a unit, the judge found the children would have  the  support
    of  their  parents  such  that  given  there  were  no  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances, he found the decision to be proportionate.

12. I find the judge covered all appropriate issues, albeit  briefly.   The
    judge did give significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  to
    the eldest child's presence here for seven years.  That was significant
    in the analysis.  Equally, the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider  the
    position of the parents and the fact that  they  were  returning  as  a
    family unit.  See KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 in particular at [51].

Decision

The decision did not contain a material error of law such that it should  be
set aside. The Tribunal's decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         2 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



