
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
hu/12214/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 November 2017                        |On 4 January 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                         Shareef Sidiq Abdul Jabbaar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, GEORGETOWN, GUYANA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore (the judge), promulgated on 19 May 2017, in  which
    he dismissed his appeal  against  the  Respondent's  refusal  of  entry
    clearance issued on 30 December 2015.

 2. The Appellant, who was a minor at the time the  application  for  entry
    clearance was made, sought leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    child of his mother, a Guyanan national with indefinite leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom (the sponsor).




The judge's decision

 3. The judge sets out his findings at paragraphs 20 to 28 of his decision.
     In essence, whilst he accepted that the sponsor had provided financial
    support to the Appellant over the course of a number of years,  he  was
    not satisfied that  she  had  exercised  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant.  In addition the judge concluded that Article 8 (insofar  as
    it relied upon matters  not  contained  within  the  framework  of  the
    Immigration Rules) could not avail the Appellant.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds assert that the judge failed to deal  adequately  with  the
    issue of financial support and the significance thereof,  the  contents
    of a letter from the Appellant's  school,  evidence  of  communications
    between the Appellant and the sponsor, a letter  from  the  Appellant's
    grandparents, and finally the approach taken in respect of Article 8.

 5.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 24 August 2017.




The hearing before me

 6. Prior to the hearing the Appellant's representatives sent a fax to  the
    Upper Tribunal (received on  27  November  2017)  confirming  that  the
    Appellant would  not  be  represented  at  the  hearing  (although  the
    solicitors continued to act for him).  A bundle submitted  under  cover
    of a letter dated 22 November 2017 was to be relied upon.   The  bundle
    contained evidence before the First-tier Judge together with additional
    materials.  I considered Rules 2 and 38 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure
    Rules and concluded that I could  fairly  proceed  in  the  Appellant's
    absence.

 7. For the Respondent Mr Walker confirmed that he continued to oppose  the
    appeal.  He referred to the various findings  made  by  the  judge  and
    submitted that given the lack of relevant evidence on material  issues,
    the findings made by the judge were open to him.  It was submitted that
    there were no material errors of law.




Decision on Error of Law

 8. I conclude that there are no material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  My reasons for this are as follows.

 9. First, it is right that the judge found that the sponsor  had  in  fact
    been providing financial support to the Appellant over  the  course  of
    time (paragraph 20).  This was clearly a relevant factor in  favour  of
    the Appellant's claim.   However  as  the  judge  rightly  points  out,
    financial responsibility does not equate to  sole  responsibility  (see
    for example TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 46).

10. Second, the judge took account of the letter from  the  college.   This
    letter did state that the Appellant's grandfather  (with  whom  he  had
    been living since 2000) had attended the school regularly,  "on  behalf
    of his mother".  On the face of it this would seem to  provide  support
    to the Appellant's case that his mother was involved in his educational
    progress.  Having said that, in my view it was open  to  the  judge  to
    take into account the lack of actual school progress reports or  indeed
    any attempts by the sponsor to have obtained such more direct  evidence
    about the Appellant's education.  It might be said that the  judge  was
    being somewhat speculative as to the processes by which  such  evidence
    could have been obtained by the sponsor. However, it was of course  for
    the Appellant to prove the issue of  sole  responsibility  by  whatever
    evidence could reasonably be obtained.  The judge did not  accept  that
    the oral explanation for the absence of such evidence was a  reasonable
    one.  The judge was also entitled to take into account the  absence  of
    any evidence from either the Appellant's teacher or headteacher  as  to
    any direct contact with the sponsor.

11. Third, in respect of paragraph  22,  I  raised  some  concerns  at  the
    hearing about the judge's findings on the payment of school fees.  When
    first considering this point it seemed to me that once  the  judge  had
    found that financial support was being  provided  by  the  sponsor,  it
    might seem strange that he then concluded that the  she  had  not  been
    paying the school fees.  On reflection however, and  in  light  of  the
    decision as a whole, I find that the judge was entitled to take account
    of the absence of any specific evidence of payment of  the  fees.   The
    judge acknowledges the potential difficulty in obtaining certain  types
    of evidence, but he was entitled to  note  that  the  letter  from  the
    school said nothing about payment of fees by any particular  person  in
    general.  This was another example of the absence of relevant  evidence
    that could reasonably have been obtained in one form or another.

12. Fourth, in respect of paragraph 23 I accept that what is  said  therein
    does not appear  to  sit  comfortably  with  the  judge's  findings  in
    paragraph 20 as regards the provision of  financial  support  over  the
    course of time.  If I thought that the reasoning contained in paragraph
    23 was of particular importance or that other aspects of the  reasoning
    were inadequate then I would regard this  aspect  of  the  decision  as
    being potentially unsustainable.  However having regard to the decision
    as a whole the contents of this  paragraph  are  not  material  to  the
    judge's overall conclusions.  I also note the fact that  there  was  no
    evidence of the payment of any medical fees, a matter which  the  judge
    was entitled to take cognisance of.

13. Fifth, as regards the alleged conversion of the Appellant from Islam to
    Christianity, the judge was fully entitled to  take  into  account  the
    absence of any evidence from  the  church  to  confirm  the  conversion
    and/or attendance, and he was also entitled to reject  the  explanation
    that the Appellant could not attend for the last two years  because  of
    his grandparents' ill-health.

14. Sixth, the issue of contact between the Appellant and the sponsor dealt
    is with in paragraph 25.  On the basis of the evidence before  him  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that the evidence of direct contact  and
    indirect  communications  was,  as  he  described   it,   "meagre   and
    insignificant".  Only two visits by the sponsor to Guyana had  occurred
    over the course of some sixteen years, and the judge  was  entitled  to
    find that one of those was  prompted  by  the  sponsor's  mother  being
    terminally ill.  In respect of communications, there was  very  limited
    evidence (contained in the Appellant's bundle, which I have seen)  with
    social media correspondence covering a period of only two months.

15. Seventh, in respect of photographs, the judge was entitled to take into
    account the absence of such evidence insofar as it might have  gone  to
    show a continuing and significant interest in the Appellant's wellbeing
    (as that in turn might have supported a claim of sole  responsibility).



16. Eighth, in respect of a letter from the grandparents (paragraph 27),  I
    accept that the judge has not grappled with its contents in a  detailed
    manner, but having read it for  myself  there  was  little  by  way  of
    detailed  evidence  contained  therein.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that taking all matters into account the Appellant had  failed
    to show that the sponsor had exercised sole responsibility for him over
    the course of time (whether that period of time was  extended,  as  had
    effectively been  claimed  throughout  the  application  and  appellate
    process) or whether  this  scenario  had  arisen  relatively  recently.
    Whilst not stated  expressly,  it  may  well  be  that  the  judge  was
    concluding that responsibility had been shared between the sponsor  and
    the grandparents.  In any event the essential conclusion  was  open  to
    the judge.

17. Ninth, the judge has dealt adequately with the Article 8 issue  insofar
    as that related to matters not covered by paragraph 297 of the Rules.

18. In light of the above the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                  Date: 21 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 21 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

