
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/12130/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Skype for Business                |On 17 December 2020           |
|On 26 November 2020                           |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                  LOIS [B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini instructed by UK Migrant Lawyers Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zambia who was born on 27 January 1985.

 2. The appellant left Zambia, with her immediate family, when she  was  11
    years old and moved to South Africa before coming to the United Kingdom
    in 1999.  She entered the United Kingdom on  27  August  1999  together
    with her father, brother and  two  sisters  as  the  dependant  of  her
    mother.  The appellant was, at  that  time,  14  years  old.   She  was
    granted leave to enter in line with her mother.  Subsequently, she  was
    granted further leave to remain In line with her mother  until  8  July
    2003.  On 4 June 2003, the appellant was granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain, again, in line with her mother.

 3. In 2005, she began a relationship with a British Citizen,  Mr  Jonathan
    [B].  On 13 December 2013, the appellant gave birth to  their  daughter
    ("H").  On 5 September 2015, the appellant married Mr [B].

 4. On 25 April  2019,  at  the  Bristol  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
    convicted of theft from her employer  and  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    twelve months' imprisonment.  As a result of that conviction, on 13 May
    2019 the appellant was served with a notice of a decision to deport her
    under s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 5. On 17 June 2019, the appellant made  submissions  relying,  in  effect,
    upon Art 8 of the ECHR.

 6. On 4 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 11 November 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judges S T O'Brien and  S
    C Clarke) (hereafter "the  Panel")  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8.  The Panel found that the appellant did  not  fall  within
    Exceptions 1 and 2 in s.117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) ("the NIA Act 2002").  Further,  there
    were not "very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2" to outweigh the public interest under  s.117C(6)
    of the NIA Act 2002.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Easterman) on 19 December 2019.  However,  on  a  renewed  application,
    permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Kamara) on 21 January
    2020.

 9. As a result of the COVID-19 crisis, directions were issued by the UT on
    30 March 2020 (UTJ Keith) indicating the provisional view that  it  was
    appropriate  to  determine  the  issues  of  whether   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved an error of law, and if  so,  whether  the
    decision should be set aside without  a  hearing.   Both  parties  were
    invited to make submissions on the merits of the appeal and also on the
    issue of whether the error of law decision  could  be  made  without  a
    hearing.

10. Following submissions made by both the appellant (dated  14  May  2020)
    and the respondent (dated 21 May 2020), the UT proceeded  to  determine
    the appeal without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as  amended).    In   a
    determination  sent  on  15  July  2020,  UTJ  Jackson  dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal concluding that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    had not involved the making of an error of law.

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal.   In
    the light of that  application,  UTJ  Jackson  decided  to  review  her
    decision under rules 45 and 46 of the UT Procedure Rules in  the  light
    of the Court of Appeal's subsequent decision in HA (Iraq) and Another v
    SSHD  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1176.   In  the  absence  of   objection,   as
    contemplated by para 4 of her directions dated 11 September  2020,  the
    decision of UTJ Jackson was set aside and the appeal  re-listed  for  a
    remote hearing.

12. That hearing took place before me on 26 November 2020.  I was based  in
    the  Cardiff  Civil  Justice  Centre  in  court  and  Mr  Bazini,   who
    represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Howells,  who  represented   the
    Secretary of State, joined the hearing remotely by Skype for  Business.



The Issues

13. Mr Howells accepted that  the  appellant  could  rely  upon  the  three
    grounds of appeal as set out in the appellant's  submissions  dated  14
    May 2020 in response to the UT's COVID-19  directions  and  which  were
    addressed in Mr Bazini's  "Additional/Supplementary  Grounds"  document
    prepared for the hearing before me and dated 18 November 2020.

14. Mr Howells did not seek to rely upon the respondent's submissions  made
    in response to the UT's initial COVID-19 directions that only grounds 1
    and 2 could be relied upon.  He accepted, as UTJ Jackson had  concluded
    in her decision, that the three grounds were properly before the  Upper
    Tribunal and could be relied upon by the appellant.

15. In fact, both representatives' submissions  focused  around  the  seven
    points made by Mr Bazini in his most  recent  "Additional/Supplementary
    Grounds" document.

16. Those points can be summarised as follows:

      1) The Panel misdirected itself in applying the "unduly harsh" test in
         s.117C(5) of the NIA Act 2002 by asking itself the question whether
         the degree of harshness involved to  the  appellant's  husband  and
         child was beyond that necessarily involved for any partner or child
         facing deportation.  That test had been disapproved by the Court of
         Appeal in HA (Iraq) at [56].

      2) The Panel failed properly to take into account,  in  assessing  the
         impact upon the appellant's child, the intrinsic importance to  the
         child of her British citizenship.  That had been emphasised  as  an
         important matter by the Court of Appeal  in  HA  (Iraq)  at  [113]-
         [114].

      3) The Panel failed adequately to assess the emotional impact upon the
         appellant's child of deportation.  The  Panel  failed  properly  to
         take into account the evidence from the Principal of H's school (at
         page 56 of the appellant's bundle) and the evidence concerning  H's
         history of "wheezing episodes" set out  in  a  "NHS  Wheezy  Action
         Plan" at pages 12-15 of the appellant's supplementary bundle.

      4) The Panel erred in assessing the impact upon  H  of  the  appellant
         being deported by improperly approaching that issue  on  the  basis
         that H and the appellant's husband could go to Zambia.  That failed
         properly to consider  the  hypothetical  question  of  whether  the
         impact upon H would be unduly harsh if she were to stay in  the  UK
         after the appellant were deported (see Patel (British citizen child
         - deportation) [2020] UKUT 45 (IAC)).

      5) The Panel erred  in  law  in  concluding  that,  if  the  appellant
         returned to Zambia, she would have wider family in Zambia to assist
         her on relocation.  In finding that the appellant's case, that  she
         would have no wider family to  support  her,  was  implausible  the
         Panel had made an assumption that she had wider  family  there  who
         were able to assist her which had not been  a  matter  explored  in
         evidence.  That was relevant both under Exception 1  (s.117C(4)(c))
         and the issue of whether there were "very significant obstacles" to
         the appellant's integration in Zambia on  return,  and  also  under
         Exception 2 (s.117C(5)) as to whether it would be unduly  harsh  if
         the appellant's husband and H returned to Zambia with her.

      6) In considering the  application  of  s.117C(6),  the  Panel  failed
         properly to consider the "seriousness" of the appellant's offending
         by looking beyond the length of  sentence  and  to  the  particular
         circumstances of the appellant's offending.  That was  improper  as
         the Court of Appeal had determined in HA (Iraq) at [148]-[149].

      7) In carrying out the assessment under s.117C(6), the Panel failed to
         give adequate reasons for its finding in  para  56:  including  not
         taking into account - what,  if  any,  future  risk  the  appellant
         presented;  her  circumstances  including  that  she   was   highly
         integrated in the UK  having  lived  here  since  the  age  of  14,
         lawfully and with Indefinite Leave to Remain since 4 June 2003  and
         that all her immediate close  family  were  either  in  the  UK  or
         abroad, but all outside Zambia.

Discussion

17. A number of the points relied upon by the appellant relate to Exception
    2 in s.117C(5) of the NIA Act 2002.

18. By virtue of s.117C(3), in the case of a "foreign criminal" such as the
    appellant  who  has  been  convicted  and  sentenced  to  a   term   of
    imprisonment of less than four years, her deportation would be  in  the
    public interest unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 in s.117C(4) and  (5)
    respectively applied.

19. However, even if one of those Exceptions does not apply, despite on its
    face being limited to "foreign criminals" who have been  convicted  and
    sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  four  years,  the
    appellant can rely upon s.117C(6) such that her deportation  would  not
    be in the public interest if there were "very compelling  circumstances
    over and  above  those  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2"  (see  NA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662).

20. Exception 2 applies where:

         "C has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying
         partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
         qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner
         or child would be unduly harsh".

21. In this appeal, it is accepted that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her partner, who is a qualifying  partner,
    and a parental relationship with H, who is a qualifying child.

22. The bulk of  the  Panel's  determination  is  directed  to  determining
    whether Exception 2 applies.  The Panel's reasons are set out at  paras
    38-55.  At para 38, the Panel recognised that there were two issues:

      a) whether it was unduly harsh for the appellant's husband  and  H  to
         live in Zambia (the "go scenario"); and

      b) whether it was unduly harsh for them to remain in  the  UK  if  the
         appellant were deported (the "stay scenario").

23. At para 51, the Panel recognised, following KO (Nigeria) & Ors  v  SSHD
    [2018] UKSC 53, that in applying the "unduly harsh" test their:

         "findings are based only with (sic) the position of the  child  and
         not with any wider public interest factors in favour of removal".

24. That correctly identifies that following KO (Nigeria) the focus of  the
    "unduly harsh" test is upon the relevant individual (whether partner or
    child) and does not involve a balancing exercise  taking  into  account
    the public interest demonstrated by the  appellant's  criminality.   Mr
    Bazini did not suggest that the Panel had misdirected  itself  in  that
    regard.

25. At paragraph 39 the Panel set out, based upon earlier case law  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, the proper approach  to  the  "unduly  harsh"  test  as
    follows:

         "In coming to our decision we have considered the unduly harsh test
         set out in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 and MAB  (USA)  [2015]
         UKUT 435 which held that 'unduly  harsh':  'does  not  equate  with
         uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or  merely   difficult.
         Rather it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.   Harsh  in
         this  context  denotes  something  severe  or  bleak.   It  is  the
         antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore the addition of
         the adverb 'unduly'  raises  an  already  elevated  standard  still
         higher'".

    Neither Mr Bazini nor Mr Howells suggested that this was a misdirection
    by the Panel.  The Court of Appeal  in  HA  (Iraq)  accepted  that  the
    Supreme Court had approved the UT decisions on this  point  (see  [51])
    and that the "unduly harsh" test encapsulated an "elevated" test  going
    beyond "reasonableness", albeit one not reaching  the  level  of  "very
    compelling circumstances" as required by s.117C(6) (see [52]-[53]).

26. The Panel, having set  out  the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    husband and H, gave the following reasons  and  reached  their  adverse
    conclusion on Exception 2 at paras 51-55 as follows:

         "51. In  coming  to  our  decision  we  have  considered  the  best
             interests of [H] and have taken into account that these are  a
             primary  consideration  but  can  be   outweighed   by   other
             factors.....

         52.  A number of documents in the appellant's bundle attest to  the
             strong bond and attachment between [H] and the  appellant  and
             the emotional trauma suffered by [H] following the appellant's
             sudden disappearance from her  life  due  to  the  appellant's
             incarceration.

         53.  It is open to the appellant, her husband and [H]  to  relocate
             to Zambia and remain together as a family unit.  In  so  going
             [H] would retain the  strong  bond  between  herself  and  the
             appellant.  [H] is aged 5 and  is  at  the  beginning  of  her
             educational journey and she would have  the  benefit  of  both
             parents to assist in settling into a new life in Zambia.

         54.  However, we also acknowledge that the appellant's husband  and
             [H] are British Citizens, who were born in the United  Kingdom
             and as a matter of choice the appellant's husband may wish  to
             continue to live in the United Kingdom with [H].  We note  the
             strong family support network around the  appellant's  husband
             and [H] from both families and that albeit with some degree of
             difficult the families were able to support each other and  in
             particular  provide  care  for  [H]  during  the   appellant's
             carceration.

         55.  We are not persuaded that it will  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             appellant's husband and [H] to  relocate  with  the  appellant
             should she be deported or for them [to] remain in  the  United
             Kingdom without the appellant.  Having considered the oral and
             documentary evidence before us at the Tribunal hearing we  are
             unable to conclude that the deportation of the appellant would
             result in a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
             necessarily  be  involved  for  any  parent  or  child  facing
             deportation".

    Point (1)

27. Mr Bazini's Point (1) is that the  final  sentence  in  para  55  is  a
    misdirection following HA  (Iraq).   Mr  Bazini  placed  reliance  upon
    Underhill LJ's view expressed at [56] as follows:

         "56. The second point focuses on what are said to be the  risks  of
         treating KO as establishing a touchstone of whether the  degree  of
         harshness goes beyond "that which is  ordinarily  expected  by  the
         deportation of a parent". Lord Carnwath does not in fact  use  that
         phrase, but a reference to "nothing out of the ordinary" appears in
         UTJ  Southern's  decision.  I  see  rather  more  force   in   this
         submission. As explained above, the test  under  section  117C  (5)
         does indeed require an appellant to establish a degree of harshness
         going beyond a threshold "acceptable" level. It is not  necessarily
         wrong to describe that as an "ordinary" level of harshness,  and  I
         note that Lord Carnwath did not jib at UTJ Southern's use  of  that
         term. However, I think the Appellants are right to point  out  that
         it may be misleading if used incautiously. There seem to me  to  be
         two  (related)  risks.  First,  "ordinary"  is  capable  of   being
         understood as meaning anything which is not exceptional, or in  any
         event rare. That is not the correct approach: see para.  52  above.
         There is no reason in principle why cases of "undue" harshness  may
         not  occur  quite  commonly.  Secondly,  if  tribunals  treat   the
         essential question as being "is this level of harshness out of  the
         ordinary?" they may be tempted to find that Exception  2  does  not
         apply simply on  the  basis  that  the  situation  fits  into  some
         commonly-encountered pattern. That would be dangerous. How a  child
         will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend on an almost
         infinitely variable range of circumstances and it is  not  possible
         to identify a baseline of "ordinariness". Simply by way of example,
         the degree of harshness of  the  impact  may  be  affected  by  the
         child's age; by whether the parent  lives  with  them  (NB  that  a
         divorced  or  separated  father  may  still  have  a  genuine   and
         subsisting relationship with a child who lives with the mother); by
         the degree of the child's emotional dependence on  the  parent;  by
         the financial consequences of his deportation; by the  availability
         of emotional and financial support  from  a  remaining  parent  and
         other family  members;  by  the  practicability  of  maintaining  a
         relationship with the deported parent; and of  course  by  all  the
         individual characteristics of the child."

28. Mr Bazini submitted, as he had done  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    HA(Iraq) and which was accepted by the court, that the "any child" test
    failed to look to the particular situation of the individual child  and
    set an impermissible test when applying the "unduly harsh" test.

29. Mr Bazini further relied upon the judgment of Peter Jackson  LJ  [157]-
    [158] where, in agreement with Underhill LJ, Peter Jackson LJ  rejected
    a "notional comparator" of the impact upon "any child".  He said this:
         "157.  In order to maintain focus on the individual child, it  will
         be helpful for  the  decision-maker  to  apply  the  words  of  the
         statutory tests themselves. By their nature,  commentaries  on  the
         tests may be illuminating, but they are not, as  Underhill  LJ  has
         shown at [56], a substitute for the statutory wording. For example,
         Lord Carnwath's reference in paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria) to  undue
         harshness to "any child" cannot have been  intended  to  set  up  a
         notional comparator, if only because it is  not  possible  to  know
         what the circumstances of such a child might be. For some  children
         the deportation of a largely absent  parent  may  be  a  matter  of
         little or no real significance. For others, the  deportation  of  a
         close caregiver parent where face to face contact  cannot  continue
         may be akin  to  a  bereavement.  A  decision  that  gives  primary
         consideration to the best interests of the child will instead focus
         on the reality of that child's actual situation and  the  decision-
         maker will be more assisted by addressing relevant factors  of  the
         kind identified by Underhill LJ at the end of [56] than  by  making
         generalised comparisons. Likewise, as explained in the footnote  to
         [48], the aphorism "That is what deportation does" is an  important
         truth, but it is not a substitute for a proper consideration of the
         individual case. The full citation from Sedley LJ in Lee makes this
         clear:
            "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as  it
            has been, will be broken up for ever because of the appellant's
            bad behaviour. That is what  deportation  does.  Sometimes  the
            balance between its justification and  its  consequences  falls
            the other way, but whether it does so  is  a  question  for  an
            immigration judge."
         158. It can be seen that the aphorism frames the question; it  does
         not provide the answer. In that case, the parent was a supplier  of
         Class A drugs who had received a seven year sentence and was facing
         deportation to Jamaica, and the balance not  surprisingly  fell  in
         favour of deportation despite the impact on the two young children.
         In the same way, I agree with Underhill LJ's observations  at  [34]
         and [35] that decision-makers should be cautious about  transposing
         statements of principle from  one  statutory  context  to  another;
         likewise his consideration at [129] of the limited value of  cross-
         checking outcomes in more or less similar cases. The  task  of  the
         decision-maker in this respect is to consider the  effect  of  this
         deportation on this child."



30. Mr Howells submitted that the Panel had applied  the  correct  approach
    following  KO  (Nigeria)  and  the  "elevated"  threshold  required  to
    establish whether the impact was "unduly  harsh".   He  submitted  that
    provided the Panel had undertaken that task, it  was  not  inconsistent
    with the Court of Appeal's approach in HA (Iraq).

31. I accept Mr Bazini's submissions.  Whilst it is  undoubtedly  the  case
    that the Panel did direct itself in accordance with KO  (Nigeria)  (and
    espoused any balancing exercise) and also  it  set  out  the  "elevated
    threshold" at para 39 of its determination.  Nevertheless,  in  finding
    under the "stay scenario" that it would not be "unduly harsh" upon  the
    appellant's partner or H, the Panel  reached  that  conclusion  on  the
    basis of the "notional comparator" of "any  partner  or  child"  of  an
    individual facing deportation.  That is the very impermissible approach
    which the Court of Appeal highlighted in HA (Iraq).

32. Having considered the circumstances of the appellant's  partner  and  H
    (and I will return to the challenges to those matters shortly), the one
    reason given for concluding that Exception 2 did not apply shifted  the
    content of the "unduly harsh" test to impermissible  territory,  namely
    espousing a "notional comparator" which does not,  in  reality,  exist.
    Further, reliance by the appellant on the impact  upon  H,  based  upon
    evidence from H's school and  in  respect  of  H's  "wheezy  episodes",
    clearly identifies that it was not being said by the appellant that the
    impact upon H was indistinguishable from the impact that would  be  had
    upon any child if their parent were deported.  It was that  case  which
    had to be assessed and evaluated and, in a reasoned way, the Panel  was
    required to determine whether the impact was both "harsh"  and,  if  it
    was, whether it was "unduly  harsh"  applying,  as  we  now  know,  the
    approach set out by the court in HA (Iraq) at [51]-[53].

33. I am, therefore, satisfied that the Panel erred in law by  misdirecting
    itself in the application of the "unduly harsh" test in para 55 of  its
    decision.

34. Mr Bazini's Points (2)-(4) raise a number of  issues  relating  to  the
    Panel's approach to the evidence and its  application  of  the  "unduly
    harsh" test.  Points (2) and (3) relate to the "go scenario" and  Point
    (4) to the "stay scenario" under s.117C(5).







    Point (2)

35. Point (2) contends that the Panel failed  properly  to  consider,  when
    dealing with the "go scenario", that H is a British Citizen (and indeed
    so is the appellant's husband).  In relation  to  H  -  and  her  "best
    interests" - Mr Bazini submitted that the Panel had simply acknowledged
    that  she  was  a  British  Citizen  at  para  54  but    had,   wholly
    inadequately,  taken  into  account  the  importance  of  her   British
    citizenship and what flowed from it.  He again relied upon HA (Iraq).

36. In HA (Iraq), Mr  Bazini  (who  had  represented  the  appellant,  RA),
    contended that in reaching  its  adverse  decision,  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to give sufficient importance to the British  citizenship  of  a
    "qualified child" (identified as "Y").  The Court of Appeal dealt  with
    this as [112]-[116].  At [112], Underhill LJ set out  the  approach  of
    the Supreme Court in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  in  the
    judgments of Lady Hale at [29]-[32]  and  Lord  Hope  at  [40]-[41]  as
    follows:
         "112. As to [a] - the importance of Y's British  citizenship  -  Mr
         Bazini referred us to well-known passages in the judgments of  Lady
         Hale and Lord Hope  in  ZH  (Tanzania).  That  case  concerned  the
         proposed removal to Tanzania  of  a  mother  who  was  not  herself
         British but who had three children who were  British  citizens  and
         who would in practice  have  had  to  accompany  her  if  she  were
         removed: it was not a deportation case,  but  Lady  Hale  noted  at
         para. 1 of her judgment  that  the  issue  of  principle  arose  in
         deportation decisions as well. The  Supreme  Court  held  that  the
         removal of the mother would constitute a disproportionate breach of
         the article 8 rights of the children, having  regard  also  to  the
         requirements of article 3.1 of the UNCRC. An important  element  in
         its reasoning was the fact that the children were British citizens.
         The importance of that factor is explained at paras. 29-32 of  Lady
         Hale's judgment. I need not set those paragraphs  out  in  full.  I
         should note, however, that at para. 30 Lady Hale says:
            "Although nationality is not a 'trump card' it is of particular
            importance in assessing the best interests of  any  child.  The
            UNCRC recognises the right of every child to be registered  and
            acquire a nationality (Article 7) and to preserve her identity,
            including her nationality (Article  8).  In Wan,  the  Federal
            Court  of  Australia,  pointed  out  at  para  30  that,   when
            considering the possibility of the children accompanying  their
            father to China, the tribunal had not  considered  any  of  the
            following  matters,  which  the  Court  clearly   regarded   as
            important:


                 '(a) the fact that the children, as citizens of  Australia,
                 would be deprived of the country of  their  own  and  their
                 mother's citizenship, "and of its protection  and  support,
                 socially, culturally and medically, and in many other  ways
                 evoked by, but  not  confined  to,  the  broad  concept  of
                 lifestyle" (Vaitaiki v Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic
                 Affairs [1998] FCA 5, (1998) 150 ALR 608, 614);


                 (b) the resultant social and linguistic disruption of their
                 childhood as well as the loss of their homeland;


                 (c) the loss of educational opportunities available to  the
                 children in Australia; and


                 (d) their resultant isolation from the normal  contacts  of
                 children with their mother and their mother's family.'"
         At para. 32, after referring  to  various  particular  consequences
         that the children in the case before the Court  would  suffer  from
         being removed, she says:
            "Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship  be  played
            down. As citizens these children have rights  which  they  will
            not be able to exercise if they move to another  country.  They
            will lose the advantages of growing up and  being  educated  in
            their own country, their own culture and  their  own  language.
            They will have lost all this when they  come  back  as  adults.
            ..."
         Likewise Lord Hope said, at paras. 40-41:
            "40. It seems to me that the Court of Appeal fell into error in
            two respects.  First,  having  concluded  that  the  children's
            British citizenship did not dispose of the issues arising under
            article 8 ... they did not appreciate the importance  that  was
            nevertheless to be attached to the factor of citizenship in the
            overall  assessment  of  what  was  in  the   children's   best
            interests. ...


            41. The first error may well have  been  due  to  the  way  the
            mother's case was presented to the  Court  of  Appeal.  It  was
            submitted that the fact that the children were British citizens
            who had never been to Tanzania trumped all other considerations
            .... That was, as the court recognised, to press the point  too
            far. But there is much more to  British  citizenship  than  the
            status it gives to the children in immigration law. It  carries
            with it a host of other benefits and advantages, all  of  which
            Lady Hale has drawn attention to and carefully  analysed.  They
            ought never to be left out of account, but  they  were  nowhere
            considered in the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment.  The  fact  of
            British citizenship does not trump everything else. But it will
            hardly ever be less than a very significant and weighty  factor
            against moving children who have that status to another country
            with a parent who has no right to remain  here,  especially  if
            the effect of doing this is  that  they  will  inevitably  lose
            those  benefits  and  advantages  for   the   rest   of   their
            childhood.""

37. Then, Underhill LJ drew together the approach in ZH (Tanzania) with the
    submissions of Mr Bazini in relation to RA's appeal at  [113]-[114]  as
    follows:
         "113.  Mr Bazini submitted that the Tribunal had failed to take any
         account of that guidance.  The  glancing  mention  of  Y's  British
         nationality in the first line of para. 54 of the Tribunal's Reasons
         was inadequate because it was not  in  the  context  of  the  undue
         harshness assessment. He acknowledged that the Tribunal does  refer
         to Y losing the opportunity of being educated in England, which  is
         mentioned in Lady Hale's judgment  as  one  of  the  advantages  of
         British nationality. But that is only one particular advantage (and
         not one which is in fact dependent on British citizenship), and  Mr
         Bazini's essential complaint is that the Tribunal made no reference
         to what Lady Hale calls "the intrinsic importance of citizenship.
         114.  I do see some force in this submission. I fully  accept  that
         this Court should not overturn the  decision  of  a  tribunal,  let
         alone as experienced a tribunal as this, merely because it has  not
         expressly mentioned a factor which it can fairly be assumed that it
         has  taken  into  account.  The  Tribunal  mentions   Y's   British
         citizenship not only in para. 54 but also at para. 51, as  part  of
         its finding that she was a qualifying child, and I see the force of
         the argument that, having taken account of her nationality at  that
         stage of its decision-making, it is unlikely to have left it out of
         account when making the assessment of undue hardship. However,  the
         degree to which a tribunal needs to spell out its thinking must  be
         sensitive  to  the  circumstances  of  the  particular  case.   The
         Tribunal's reference to having  reached  its  decision  "with  some
         degree of hesitation" shows that it regarded its decision  on  this
         issue as near the borderline. That must, with respect, be  correct.
         Y would, on this alternative, be moving to a country  with  a  very
         different culture and standard of living from the UK and  a  recent
         history of instability. The "very significant and  weighty  factor"
         of losing, at least for the rest of her childhood,  the  advantages
         of  British  citizenship  might  be  thought  to  be   particularly
         significant in the context of such a move, and I see the  force  of
         the argument that the Tribunal was obliged to show clearly that  it
         had given it full weight. As Lord Hodge makes clear in Zoumbas,  in
         any case involving the welfare of a child, a close scrutiny of  all
         the substantially relevant considerations is required."

38. Then, dealing with a submission made by Counsel for  the  Secretary  of
    State, as to  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  Y's  British  citizenship,
    Underhill LJ said this at [115]-[116]:
         "115. Mr Pilgerstorfer submitted that the fact  that  the  Tribunal
         had taken Y's British citizenship  into  account  in  finding  that
         Exception 2 was  engaged  was  enough:  that  first  stage  in  the
         structured decision-making imposed by the statute was part  of  the
         overall process of assessment under article  8.  I  do  not  accept
         that. Under the statutory scheme British  citizenship  does  indeed
         operate to open the Exception 2 gateway. But in my view it does not
         follow that it can thereafter be ignored when making the assessment
         of whether the effect of relocation would be unduly harsh:  such  a
         mechanistic approach risks artificially  restricting  the  holistic
         exercise required by article 8.
         116. Mr Pilgerstorfer also submitted that it  was  unnecessary  for
         the Tribunal to spell out in full the factors to which it  had  had
         regard in its assessment of undue harshness because its  conclusion
         was in RA's favour - that is, that it was  "plainly  not  in  [Y's]
         best interests" to live in Iraq. I do not accept that either. It is
         in truth  pretty  obvious  (as  the  Tribunal's  use  of  "plainly"
         acknowledges) that it was not in Y's  best  interests  to  move  to
         Iraq, and not just because she  would  lose  the  benefits  of  her
         British nationality; but that does not mean that  the  enquiry  can
         end there. What the Tribunal had  to  do  was  to  assess  in  what
         respects, and to what degree, moving to Iraq was  contrary  to  her
         best interests. That is indeed the exercise  that  it  performs  in
         para. 54, but without, as Mr Bazini submits, addressing one of  the
         most weighty and significant factors."

39. In my judgment, in this appeal the Panel,  although  referring  to  the
    fact that H (and also the appellant's husband) were British Citizens in
    para 54, failed to engage in a meaningful way with  the  issue  of  H's
    British citizenship in accordance with the approach  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    and in HA (Iraq).  Whilst the Panel 'touched  base'  with  H's  British
    citizenship, it failed to have regard  to  the  "very  significant  and
    weighty  factor"  that  loss  of  the  entitlements  of   her   British
    citizenship would have under  the  "go  scenario".   That  was,  in  my
    judgment, an error of law.

    Point (3)

40. Point (3) relied upon by Mr Bazini  was,  in  effect,  that  the  Panel
    failed properly to consider the impact upon H under the "go  scenario".
    He submitted that the Panel had simply identified the  documents  which
    attested to the strong  bond  between  H  and  the  appellant  and  the
    emotional trauma that had been suffered by H when the appellant was  in
    prison.  The Panel made no specific finding in  respect  of  that.   Mr
    Bazini relied upon the importance placed upon emotional impact  by  the
    Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) and he referred  me  specifically  to  the
    judgment of Peter Jackson LJ at [159].  Mr Bazini drew my attention  to
    the letter from  the  Principal  of  H's  school  at  page  56  of  the
    appellant's bundle where "serious changes" are noted in H's  "behaviour
    and attitude" since the appellant was imprisoned.  Further, the  effect
    upon H is described as "devastating" and that the effect of  separation
    (if the appellant is deported) will be "nothing short of  catastrophic,
    having a disastrous impact" on H's current and future education as well
    as her emotional and mental wellbeing.  Mr Bazini  submitted  that  the
    Panel had failed properly to have regard to this evidence.

41. In paragraph 49 of its decision, whilst  noting  the  letter  from  the
    Principal, the Panel simply remarked that it had not been provided with
    an expert report.  Likewise, its reference at para 52 to "a  number  of
    documents" in the bundle attesting  to  the  bond  between  H  and  the
    appellant and the emotional trauma which H suffered after the appellant
    was imprisoned, failed  to  make  any  finding  on  whether  the  Panel
    accepted that evidence or not.

42. Mr Howells submitted that the Panel had noted  the  evidence  that  was
    before it and, he submitted, there was little detail and had adequately
    considered H's physical and mental wellbeing.

43. In HA (Iraq) Peter Jackson LJ said this (at [159]):

         "159.  My other  general  observation  concerns  the  treatment  of
         emotional harm. Section 31(9) of the Children Act 1989 defines harm
         as ill-treatment  or  the  impairment  of  health  or   physical,
         intellectual,  emotional,  social   or   behavioural   development.
         Reflecting our contemporary  understanding  of  the  importance  of
         emotional development and mental health, there is no  hierarchy  as
         between physical and non-physical harm. It must therefore always be
         recognised that for the child the consequences of going  with  both
         parents may be experienced as far less harsh than staying with  one
         parent. Despite this, it  may  be  easier  for  decision-makers  to
         envisage the harm that  may  be  done  by  expecting  a  family  to
         experience precarious or even dangerous physical conditions than to
         factor in at full worth the lifelong emotional harm of  terminating
         the relationship between a child and  a  close  parent  during  the
         child's minority and possibly forever. Both situations are grim but
         for the child neither is  intrinsically  grimmer  than  the  other.
         Provided the decision-maker faces up to the reality of the  child's
         situation and gives it primary consideration, the  public  interest
         in deportation may prevail, but it will  not  do  to  minimise  the
         emotional impact on the child of the severing of ties by  reference
         to the doubtful prospect of  maintaining  relationships  over  many
         years by indirect means only, or by reciting the fact that this  is
         what deportation does." (my emphasis)

44.  In  my  judgment,  the  Panel  failed  to  grapple  with  the   issue,
    specifically identified by Peter Jackson LJ in the  final  sentence  of
    [159] of his judgment in HA (Iraq).  I accept  Mr  Bazini's  submission
    that the Panel (in paras 49 and 52 in  particular)  failed  to  grapple
    with, and give due weight to, the  evidence  concerning  the  emotional
    impact upon H of separation from the appellant.  H was, after all, a  5
    year old girl in respect of whom the  Panel  recognised,  although  the
    appellant's husband and she shared caring responsibilities  before  her
    imprisonment, the appellant had taken the role  of  her  primary  carer
    (see para 44 of the determination).  To this extent also, therefore,  I
    am satisfied that the Panel fell  into  error  in  assessing  H's  best
    interests and taking those best interests  into  account  in  assessing
    whether the "go scenario" would result in undue harshness to H.

    Point (4)

45. I also accept Mr Bazini's submissions under Point  (4).   The  Tribunal
    (at paras 52-54) when considering the "stay scenario", referred to  the
    documents demonstrating "emotional  trauma"  suffered  by  H  when  the
    appellant  was  in  prison,  but  wrongly  sought   to   mitigate   the
    implications of that by concluding that it was open to the  appellant's
    husband and H to accompany the appellant as a "family unit" to  Zambia.
    As the Upper Tribunal concluded in Patel, as set out in para 2  of  the
    judicial headnote, as follows:

         "In both Section 117C(5) and paragraph  399(a)(ii),  what  judicial
         decision-makers are being required  to  assess  is  a  hypothetical
         question - whether going or saying 'would' be unduly  harsh.   They
         are not being asked to undertake a predictive factual  analysis  as
         to whether such a child would in fact go or stay".

46. In para 53 of its  decision,  the  Panel  fell  into  that  error  when
    considering the implications, in particular of any  "emotional  trauma"
    that H would suffer if the appellant were deported, by not  considering
    the hypothetical situation that H would remain in the  UK  without  her
    mother, because it concluded that it was open to H and the  appellant's
    husband to accompany the appellant  to  Zambia.   Whether  or  not  the
    appellant's husband and H should accompany the appellant to Zambia  was
    an issue under the "go scenario" and whether it would be  unduly  harsh
    for them to do so.  It was irrelevant in assessing  whether  the  "stay
    scenario" would result in undue hardship to H.  In that regard also,  I
    accept Mr Bazini's submission that the Panel fell into legal error.

47. It follows, for the above reasons, that the Panel materially  erred  in
    law in reaching its finding that  Exception  2  in  s.117C(5)  did  not
    apply.

48. I turn now to Mr Bazini's Points (5)-(7).

    Point (5)

49. Point (5) relates to the Panel's reasoning in para 33.   There,  albeit
    in the context of Exception 1 in s.117C(4), the Panel said this:

         "The appellant's mother and siblings continue to live in the United
         Kingdom and the United States.  We note that the other  members  of
         the family, some now deceased continue to live in Zambia after  the
         family left, first  for  South  Africa  and  then  for  the  United
         Kingdom.  We find it implausible  that  there  would  be  no  wider
         family in Zambia  to  assist  the  Appellant  on  relocation".  (my
         emphasis)

50. Mr Bazini submitted that the Tribunal's reasoning was  unreasonable  in
    finding that the appellant would have wider family in Zambia  who  were
    able to assist her.  That was not a matter which had been  explored  at
    the hearing.  He reminded me that she had left Zambia when 11 years  of
    age and all her immediate family had left  or  had  passed  away.   Her
    immediate family was either in the UK or the USA.

51. Mr Howells relied upon the submissions previously made in  response  to
    the COVID-19 directions.  In particular, the burden of proof  was  upon
    the  appellant  to  establish  very  significant   obstacles   to   her
    integration and it was not unreasonable or perverse for the  Panel  not
    to accept her evidence given her previous dishonesty.

52. In response, Mr Bazini submitted  that  simply  because  she  had  been
    convicted of an offence of dishonesty did not mean  that  she  was  not
    telling the truth on this issue and indeed, he  submitted,  there  were
    supporting statements from others.  He submitted that  the  appellant's
    evidence had not otherwise been doubted.

53. I accept Mr Bazini's submissions.  The Panel did not  explicitly  doubt
    the appellant's evidence on the basis that she was a  dishonest  person
    whose evidence was not reliable.  Indeed, as Mr Bazini  submitted,  her
    evidence was largely (if not in total otherwise) accepted.  Of  course,
    it would have been relevant to take into account that the appellant had
    been convicted of an offence of dishonesty but that did not necessarily
    lead to  an  inference  that  she  was  dishonest  in  other  respects,
    including in evidence that she gave  in  relation  to  her  deportation
    proceedings.  In my judgment, the very brief reasons given by the Panel
    for not accepting the evidence that she had no close family  who  could
    assist her in Zambia was not an inference reasonably open to the  Panel
    without further reasoning to substantiate  it.   The  evidence  to  the
    contrary was, of course, that all her immediate family had either  left
    Zambia or had passed away.  She was also a child,  aged  11,  when  she
    left Zambia.  So far as relevant to Exception 1 (under s.117C(4)(c)) or
    in assessing her circumstances  on  return  under  Exception  2  (under
    s.117C(5)) or in applying s.117C(6), I am satisfied  that  the  Panel's
    finding was flawed and cannot stand.

    Points (6) and (7)

54. That then leaves the final two points which relate to s.117C(6).  Given
    the Panel's findings in respect of Exception  1  and  Exception  2  are
    legally flawed, necessarily means that  the  Panel's  conclusion  under
    s.117C(6) - and whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances  ...
    over and above" those Exceptions - is also flawed.  Mr Howells accepted
    that in his submissions.

55. However, even if the Panel had correctly decided that neither Exception
    applied, I accept  Mr  Bazini's  submissions  that  the  Panel's  brief
    reasons in paras 56 and 57 are not adequate.   There,  the  Panel  said
    this:

         "56. Having found that none of the conditions in  Sections  117C(4)
             or (5) apply we turn to  consider  whether  there  [are]  very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             those sub sections and we have concluded for the  reasons  set
             out above that [there] is no  persuasive  evidence  before  us
             that the very compelling circumstances test has been met.

         57.  In  all  the  circumstances  and  having  considered  all  the
             evidence before us, we find the public interest  in  deporting
             the appellant outweighs the appellant's right to  private  and
             family life and that the respondent's decision does not breach
             the UK's obligations under Article 8 ECHR".

56. I can take Point (6) and (7) together.  As Mr Bazini submitted, a  more
    nuanced approach to s.117C(6) was called for in this appeal at least in
    relation to those matters to which Mr Bazini drew  my  attention.   Not
    least amongst those was that the appellant had come to the UK  aged  14
    and since then had been here lawfully and, indeed, was granted ILR on 4
    June 2003.  She was, as Mr Bazini submitted, highly integrated  in  the
    UK.  All her close family are in the UK or USA and none in Zambia.  The
    factors weighing in the appellant's favour are simply not spelt out  by
    the Tribunal.  Likewise, the Tribunal made no specific reference,  when
    carrying out a balancing exercise in paras 56 and  57,  to  the  public
    interest that weighs against those factors.  True it is at para 25,  as
    Mr Bazini pointed  out,  the  Panel  considered  that  the  appellant's
    offending was "serious" given its circumstances.  However, that is  not
    specifically referred to when the balance is being struck.  Indeed,  as
    Mr Bazini submitted, the Panel's reasoning in para 25  -  assuming  its
    conclusion there was carried forward when it subsequently  carried  out
    the balancing exercise - potentially adopts  an  improper  approach  to
    assessing the "seriousness" of her  offending  by  looking  beyond  the
    period of imprisonment imposed (twelve months) and  looking  rather  at
    the surrounding circumstances including the sentencing judge's remarks.
     Mr Bazini submitted that that was improper following what was said  in
    HA  (Iraq)  at  [148]-[149].    I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  Panel
    necessarily fell into error in assessing the appellant's criminality as
    "serious".  It was, however,  incumbent  upon  the  Panel  to  consider
    whether, given the sentence was one of  twelve  months  and,  it  would
    appear, at the lower range of sentence for this  offence,  the  epithet
    "serious" was appropriate.  It was for the Panel to  reach  a  view  on
    this issue but, in the way  it  approached  that  in  para  25  of  its
    determination, it failed to follow  what  Underhill  LJ  said  was  the
    correct approach in [94]:

         "94. The UT did of course purport to take the seriousness  of  HA's
         offending into account: see paras. 108-9 of its  decision.  However
         those paragraphs do not acknowledge that the sentence was very near
         the bottom of the range. Instead, what they do is  to  explain  why
         offences of the kind which HA committed are serious. I do not, with
         respect, think that that was entirely satisfactory. The Tribunal is
         of course right that the offences  are  serious,  for  the  reasons
         which it gives. But their seriousness is reflected in the  sentence
         which  the  Court  imposed.  Generally,  for  the  purpose  of  the
         proportionality balance that falls to be struck  in  a  deportation
         case the seriousness of the relevant offending  is  established  by
         the level  of  sentence:  see  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department v Suckoo [2016] EWCA Civ 39, per Simon LJ at para.  43.
         It is true that this Court has since made it clear that that is not
         an absolute rule, to the extent that a tribunal may be entitled  to
         take into account aggravating or mitigating factors: see Secretary
         of State for the Home Department v Barry [2018] EWCA Civ 790,  per
         Singh  LJ  at  paras.  56-57);  but  I  do  not  think  that   that
         qualification has any relevance to the present case. HA should have
         been treated when striking the proportionality  balance  as  having
         committed  an  offence  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  attract  a
         sentence of sixteen months, no more and no less.

57. For these reasons also, I am satisfied that the Panel erred in law when
    considering the appellant's claim under Art 8 applying s.117C(6).

Decision

58. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal  under  Art  8
    involved the making of a material error of law.   The  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

59. Both representatives indicated that the  appropriate  disposal  of  the
    appeal was to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.  I agree.  Given the
    errors of law, the appeal must be reheard de novo without  any  factual
    findings preserved apart from para 27 that the elements of Exception  1
    in s.117C(4)(a) and (b) are established.

60. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judges O'Brien  and  Clarke.   Given  the  appellant's
    address in Bristol, as Mr Bazini invited me to do, I remit  the  appeal
    to the Newport Hearing Centre.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             8 December 2020
