
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:  HU/12822/2016
      HU/12070/2016
      HU/14149/2016
      HU/14176/2016
      HU/14158/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2018                            |On 27 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                          MUHAMMAD SALEEM-UR REHMAN
                              MISS ONEZA SALEEM
                              MISS FILZA SALEEM
                            MUHAMMAD BILAL SALEEM
                             MUHAMMAD ALI SALEEM
                         (No anonymity orders made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants were born on 8 October 1962,  8  May  1995,  14  January
    1997, 13 November 1997 and 19 February 1999.  They are all citizens  of
    Pakistan.  The first appellant is the father of the other appellants.

 2. The  immigration  history,  in  brief,  is  that  the  first  appellant
    (Muhammad Saleem-Ur Rehman) and  his  wife  came  with  a  student  and
    dependent wife visa in 2008.  His children came as dependents at around
    the same time.  Sadly, his wife died  in  2010.   He  subsequently  had
    leave as a Tier  1  and  then  a  Tier  2  Migrant  until  April  2017.
    Applications were made on behalf of the family  for  further  leave  on
    various  dates  between  December  2015   and   February   2016.    The
    applications were refused on various dates between 25 April and 27  May
    2016.  The respondent considered that the appellants did not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and that there were  no
    exceptional circumstances outside the Rules to justify  a  leave  under
    Article 8.

 3. They appealed.

    First tier hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 18 October  2017  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Easterman,  who  heard  evidence  from  all   the
    appellants, dismissed the appeals.

 5. His findings are at paragraph [79]ff.  In summary,  the  appellants  do
    not meet the requirements of Appendix FM, in that regard  the  youngest
    child (Muhammad Ali Saleem) although under 18 years on application  was
    now an adult.

 6. Further, the family would not be split up by return  to  Pakistan  thus
    there would not  be  interference  with  family  life.   There  was  no
    evidence of a close relationship with other family members in the UK.

 7. The FtT  Judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles (paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi))  to  reintegration  to
    Pakistan and found there would not.  The father has  an  army  pension;
    they  have  relations  in  Pakistan  who  could  help;  the  children's
    grandfather in the UK could give  financial  help  as  necessary.   The
    children, who spent their early years in  Pakistan  would  be  able  to
    speak Urdu and continue their lives in Pakistan. It is possible  to  do
    external degrees from British universities. There was  no  evidence  to
    show that their education could not continue in Pakistan. There  is  no
    specific right to individuals to enjoy the  education  in  one  country
    over such education in another.

 8. The FtT Judge gave  detailed  consideration  to  the  evidence  of  the
    children's higher education, one  is  studying  for  an  M.Res  degree,
    another a BSc, a third is studying for a degree  in  medicine  and  the
    fourth, the youngest, for a degree in law, and they  wish  to  continue
    their studies and thereafter take up  their  professional  lives  here.
    The FtT Judge concluded (at [92]) that under Article 8 "students cannot
    necessarily expect further leave either to  continue  studying  or  for
    other purposes, once that leave ended" not least when courses had  been
    commenced that were bound to finish  after  their  father's  leave  had
    expired.

 9. He concluded that any interference with private or  family  lives  were
    they to return to Pakistan was proportionate with the legitimate aim of
    effective immigration control.

10. They sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  refused.   Permission,
    however, was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on 15 August  2018
    following reapplication to the Upper Tribunal.

    Error of law hearing

11. The renewed grounds are in homemade narrative form and the only  direct
    complaint of any arguable error of law on the part  of  the  FtT  Judge
    refers to the (main)  appellant's  command  of  English  and  financial
    independence.  However, as UT Judge Freeman noted these can be no  more
    than a neutral factor in the Article 8 equation.  UT Judge Freemen went
    on to note that the appellant had never had more than limited leave  to
    remain so his status throughout for the purposes of section 117B(5)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was precarious and  he
    needed to rely on Article 8 in his application  for  further  leave  to
    remain.

12. Further, the appellant's children are now grown up and so are no longer
    "qualifying children" under section 117D.  Not even  the  youngest  had
    spent more than half his life here so, UT Judge Freeman went  on,  "the
    Judge, looking at each case through the lens of the Rules, was right in
    saying that they would need to show  'very  significant  obstacles'  to
    their reintegration in Pakistan, and  not  arguably  wrong  in  how  he
    treated that question.  On the other hand,  it  is  arguable  that  the
    judge's very careful and sympathetic decision did not take full account
    of the unusual position of this family as a whole."

13. In light of the lack of professional representation in the drafting  of
    the grounds Mr Clarke had no objection to Mr Coleman  raising  whatever
    points he considered relevant.  He had two points  relating  solely  to
    the youngest child.  First, the FtT  Judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account and give weight to the fact that the youngest  child  had  been
    residing in UK at the date of hearing for some 9 years.  In a matter of
    months  he  would  have  been  entitled  to  succeed  under   paragraph
    276ADE(i)(v).  Second, the  FtT  Judge  had  failed  to  give  powerful
    reasons for concluding that it was reasonable that the  youngest  child
    having been here for more than 7 years should be  removed.   He  was  a
    "qualifying child" at time of  application  which  was  what  paragraph
    EX.1. required.

14. Mr Clarke, in reply, disagreed.  On the first  point  a  claimed  "near
    miss" was irrelevant.  On the second, this is a  human  rights  appeal,
    thus, the appropriate date was the date of hearing  by  what  time  the
    youngest child was an adult. The decision showed detailed  and  careful
    analysis and his conclusions were open to him on the evidence.

Consideration

15. I see no material error of law in the  FtT  Judge's  decision.   As  UT
    Judge Freeman stated it is a "very careful and  sympathetic  decision."
    It is not clear what UT Judge Freeman meant by  his  comment  that  the
    decision may not have taken "full account of the  unusual  position  of
    this family as a whole"and as indicated, Mr Coleman did not  take  that
    point.  However, I do not find merit in the points he did take.

16. As Mr Coleman noted the youngest child was born in  February  1999  and
    arrived in October 2008. He had thus spent 9  years  and  8  months  in
    Pakistan. By December 2015, the date of  the  application,  he  was  16
    years and 10 months old having spent 7 years and 2 months in the UK. By
    date of hearing in October 2017 he was 18 years old  and  had  spent  9
    years in the UK.

17. Paragraph 276ADE states the requirements to be met by an applicant  for
    leave to remain on the grounds of private life. Such must  be  "at  the
    date  of  application."  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  requires  that   the
    applicant is "under the age of 18 years and has lived  continuously  in
    the UK for at least 7 years...and it would not be reasonable to  expect
    the applicant to leave the UK." Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) requires him  to
    be "aged 18 years or above and under 25 and has spent at least half  of
    his life living continuously in the UK."

18. Failure to meet the requirements of the Rules as at date of application
    means that the Rules are not satisfied. The Rules are broadly compliant
    with Article 8 for which the relevant date is date of hearing.  If  the
    Rules are satisfied at date of hearing such may have a bearing  on  the
    outcome under Article 8.

19. In this case, as the FtT Judge found,  the  youngest  child  failed  to
    satisfy the relevant sub paragraphs of 276ADE (1)  either  at  date  of
    application or decision. Under sub paragraph (iv) he gave  reasons  why
    even though the youngest child, then under 18,  had  been  here  for  7
    years it was reasonable to expect him to leave with  the  rest  of  his
    family. He did the same in his consideration of  Appendix  FM,  section
    EX.1/section 117B in respect  of  the  youngest  child  (a  "qualifying
    child" because he had lived in the UK at least the 7 years  immediately
    preceding the application). Indeed, he dealt with  it  specifically  at
    [85] where he stated: "the wish to continue living here, coupled with a
    promising career does not...make it reasonable for him to  remain  when
    he does not meet other requirements of the Immigration Rules."  Such  a
    conclusion was open to the FtT Judge on the evidence.

20. I would add that in respect of the youngest  child  being  only  a  few
    months short at date of hearing of  satisfying  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)
    and the FtT Judge failed to consider a "near  miss"  argument,  it  not
    apparent that such was raised with him. In any event, in SS (Congo) and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 it was held that the fact that a case was  a
    "near miss" in relation to satisfying the  requirements  of  the  Rules
    would not show that compelling reasons existed requiring the  grant  of
    leave outside the Rules.

21. The position, in summary, is as follows.  The appellants cannot satisfy
    the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE(1)).  The detailed
    reasons the FtT judge gave for reaching that conclusion  were  open  to
    him on the evidence before him.   As  for  Article  8,  the  family  if
    removed would not be split, there would be no interference with  family
    life.  As for private life, the appellants have throughout had  limited
    leave, thus their immigration  status  has  been  precarious  with  the
    result that little weight be  given  to  their  private  life  (section
    117B(5)).  Their knowledge of English and their financial  independence
    are neutral factors.

22. The FtT Judge did not consider that the children's desire  to  continue
    studying and  for  other  purposes  particularly,  as  indicated,  when
    courses were due to finish after the father's leave had expired without
    any  guarantee  that  it  would  be  renewed  amounted  to   compelling
    circumstance such that leave  should  be  granted  outside  the  Rules.
    Again, such were findings  open  to  the  FtT  Judge  on  the  evidence
    applying the appropriate jurisprudence.

23. It was noted that  the  appellants,  who  arrived  in  2008,  now  have
    available to them an application for leave to remain on the basis of 10
    years continuous lawful residence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shows  no  material  error  of
law and the decision dismissing the appeals shall stand.

No anonymity orders made.






Signed                                             Date 22/11/2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
