
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12164/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                           |On 29 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KJ
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have maintained the anonymity order  granted  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') because this decision refers to the  circumstances
         of the appellant's children.


      2. The appellant, a  citizen  of  the  USA,  has  appealed  against  a
         decision of FTT Judge Birrell, in which she  dismissed  his  appeal
         against a decision dated 25 May 2018 to  refuse  his  human  rights
         claim.

      3. The appellant has been in the UK since 2002 and was granted ILR  in
         2004.  On 15 February 2007 the appellant  was  sentenced  to  eight
         months imprisonment for a breach of a Sexual Harm Prevention  Order
         (SHPO) imposed upon him on 12 May 2016 when  he  was  convicted  of
         possessing indecent photographs of children and sentenced to  eight
         months suspended for two years.

Grounds of appeal

      4. Mr Holmes relied upon three grounds of appeal, in relation to which
         FTT  Judge  Scott-Baker  had  granted  permission.   These  can  be
         summarised as follows:

             Ground 1 - The FTT  failed  to  resolve  whether  or  not  the
             appellant is a foreign criminal as defined at section  117D(2)
             of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
             inserted by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 ('the  2002
             Act').


             Ground 2 - The FTT failed to address the  submission  that  if
             the appellant was not a foreign criminal, the public  interest
             could not be regarded as set out in section 117C of  the  2002
             Act.


             Ground 3 - The FTT failed to address the impact of  separation
             from the appellant upon his youngest child with autism.

      5. Mr Bates relied upon a rule 24 response, which submits that the FTT
         directed itself appropriately.

Legal framework

      6. The introduction of Part 5A into the 2002 Act imposes  a  statutory
         duty upon a court or tribunal to pay regard to  the  considerations
         listed in section  117B.   They  include  in  summary,  the  public
         interest in "the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls"
         (subsection (1)); the public interest in  those  seeking  to  enter
         being able to speak English (subsection (2)),  and  be  financially
         independent (subsection (3)); the little weight to be  accorded  to
         private life or relationships established when a person was in  the
         country unlawfully (subsection (4)), or when immigration status was
         precarious (subsection (5)); and -

             "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

      7. However, in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
         a heightened burden is placed upon those seeking to  avoid  removal
         in the form of additional considerations set out in  section  117C.
         The effect of the additional criteria in section  117C  is  to  add
         additional weight to the public interest question  and  thereby  to
         reduce the relative weight that is to be attached to any private or
         family life that the appellant has acquired.  Section  117C  states
         as follows:

             "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.


             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


             (4)  Exception 1 applies where -


                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,


                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and


                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

      8. Section 117D(2) provides as follows:

             "(2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,


                  (b)  who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and


                  (c)  who-


                      (i)  has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
                      of at least 12 months,


                      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                      serious harm, or


                      (iii)    is a persistent offender."


Discussion

      9. The FTT's decision is very detailed (running to 25 paragraphs)  and
         carefully drafted.  Contrary to the  appellant's  submissions,  the
         FTT properly directed itself  to  and  made  findings  on  all  the
         relevant evidence before her.  That evidence is comprehensively set
         out in the decision from [33] to [64].  The FTT then analysed  that
         evidence having engaged with the competing submissions and made the
         following findings entirely open to it:

          a) The appellant sought to minimise the  personal  responsibility
             he bore for his criminal offending [87, 89 and 92].


          b) The  offences  for  which  the  appellant  was  sentenced  are
             intrinsically serious because the sentencing  Judge  described
             them as such and a significant proportion of  the  photographs
             related to the most serious category A images.


          c) The offences the appellant was convicted of "cause serious and
             wide ranging harm as it perpetrates the exploitation and abuse
             of children on a global scale".  The  young  victims  of  such
             crimes often face a  lifelong  legacy  of  psychological  harm
             [90].


          d) The appellant remains at a medium risk of harm to children but
             a low risk of reoffending [93].


          e) The appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
             his three children.  They spend approximately three days  with
             their father and three days with their mother [98].


          f) The youngest child is on the autistic spectrum and any  change
             to the domestic arrangements will be harder for  him  to  cope
             with than his brothers [99].


          g) The appellant's ex-wife / the children's mother will  be  able
             to cope with caring for the children without  the  appellant's
             presence in the UK, as her life has  reached  a  more  settled
             phase, notwithstanding  the  appellant's  allegations  to  the
             contrary [101].  This includes being able  to  cope  with  the
             demands of the youngest  child  who  is  described  as  having
             "behavioural issues".

Ground 1

     10. The grounds of appeal fail to acknowledge that the respondent  made
         it clear in the decision  letter  that  the  appellant  was  to  be
         regarded as a foreign criminal  on  the  basis  that  he  has  been
         convicted of an offence which has caused serious  harm.   In  other
         words, he met the definition of foreign criminal for  the  purposes
         of section 117C, as set  out  at  section  117D(2)(c)(ii).   During
         submissions Mr Holmes accepted that the key issue for  the  FTT  to
         determine was whether the  appellant  meets  the  definition  of  a
         foreign criminal as set out in section 117D.  He  argued  that  the
         FTT merely  assumed  that  because  the  appellant  is  "liable  to
         deportation" he fell to be considered under section 117C.


     11. I entirely accept that the FTT did not directly address  the  legal
         definition of a foreign criminal  as  contained  in  section  117D,
         within her decision.  Mr Holmes accepted that the FTT did not  have
         the benefit of a skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant.

     12. The FTT's failure to refer to the section 117D definition is not  a
         material error of law.  Had the FTT judge directed herself to  this
         section, her factual findings are such that  she  inevitably  would
         have found the appellant to be a foreign criminal.  At [90] the FTT
         made an unequivocal finding  that  the  appellant's  offending  has
         caused serious harm.  The appellant clearly met the definition of a
         foreign criminal in section 117D because it was not in dispute that
         a) he is not a British citizen; (b) he has been  convicted  in  the
         United Kingdom of an offence; and the FTT made a clear finding that
         (c) he had been convicted of an offence  that  has  caused  serious
         harm.

     13. The appellant clearly met the definition of a foreign criminal  and
         the FTT was therefore correct to  consider  whether  in  accordance
         with section 117C(5) the effect of the appellant's  deportation  on
         the children, would be unduly harsh.

Ground 2

     14. Mr Holmes accepted that ground 2 was predicated upon ground 1 being
         accepted and made no additional submissions on  it.   As  ground  1
         does not give rise to any material error of law, it is  unnecessary
         to deal with ground 2.
Ground 3
     15. The FTT was well-aware that the  impact  upon  the  youngest  child
         ('F') was likely to be more severe than  the  other  two  children.
         The FTT judge expressly reminded herself of this.    I  invited  Mr
         Holmes to take me to the evidence in support of the effect  upon  F
         being particularly grave.  He relied upon the  evidence  summarised
         in ground 3.  The  child's  mother  described  the  impact  of  the
         appellant's imprisonment upon F as  immediate  sadness,  anger  and
         withdrawal.  His grandmother emphasised that he does not cope  well
         with change and this is supported by the CAMHS  assessment.   There
         was no requirement on the part of the FTT judge to refer  to  every
         item of evidence in relation to F.  When the decision is read as  a
         whole, the FTT was clearly aware of the evidence  that  F  did  not
         cope  with  well  change.   The  FTT  was  entitled  to  find  that
         notwithstanding that evidence and the behavioural issues likely  to
         arise, F's mother would be able to cope with F and any  behavioural
         issues that might arise as consequence of his separation  from  his
         father, with the support of family and friends.  It cannot be  said
         that evidence regarding F's autism was left out of account  by  the
         FTT.
Decision

     16. The FTT's decision did not involve the making of a  material  error
         of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
21 January 2019


