
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12810/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th May 2019                     |On 30 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                               Mr shahin islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh (date of birth 19th March 1979),
    appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Herlihy dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    of 4th June 2018 refusing his application to remain in  the  U.K.   The
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant met the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules.  The appeal is brought under Article  8  private
    life grounds.

 2. In summary the Appellant made his application for leave  to  remain  on
    the basis that he first entered the UK in 1992 (aged 13 years) and  has
    remained  here  continuously  ever  since.   The  Secretary  of   State
    considered  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) to (iv) because he failed  to  meet  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) as he had not shown that he had resided continuously  in
    the UK for twenty years.  Also he did not meet paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    because the Secretary of State did not find that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in Bangladesh, the country  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.   The  Secretary
    of State considered there were no exceptional circumstances in his case
    which would render refusal in breach of Article 8 of the  ECHR  because
    it would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  him.   The
    Secretary of State further considered that the Appellant did  not  fall
    for a grant of leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of compassionate factors.

Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's refusal  and  his  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy.   The  judge  heard  evidence
    from the Appellant and from one witness, Mr Hafez.  In addition,  there
    was submitted a statement from a further  witness,  Mr  Miah,  together
    with other documentary evidence which the judge considered.

 4. The judge summarised the Appellant's evidence and accepted  that  there
    was evidence to show that he had entered the UK  aged  13  years.   She
    also accepted that in 2006 the Appellant had submitted  an  application
    for ILR based on fourteen years long residence.  This  application  was
    voided in 2007 as the Appellant had  no  valid  leave  and  indeed  the
    Appellant was required to voluntarily depart.  His claim is that he did
    not do so.

 5. She noted evidence of correspondence between the Appellant and the Home
    Office in 2010 and also that  the  Appellant  was  encountered  working
    illegally in a restaurant in Norfolk in 2011.  He was  served  at  that
    time with reporting directions and there was evidence before  the  FtTJ
    to show that the Appellant reported between September  2011  and  March
    2015.

 6. Drawing those strands together, she found that she was  satisfied  that
    the Appellant was in the UK in 1992 and that it was likely that he  was
    in the UK in 2006 and possibly  2008.   She  accepted  that  there  was
    evidence that he was in the UK from 2011 to March 2015.

 7. However when considering the Appellant's oral account of his  movements
    since his claimed entry 26 years ago, she  noted  he  had  on  his  own
    account drifted from place to place [11].  She found as set out in [24]
    to [30] that she could not be satisfied that the Appellant had given  a
    credible account or  indeed  any  meaningful  account  at  all  of  his
    movements from entry in 1992 up to around 2006, such as to satisfy  the
    twenty year Rule requirement.

 8. The FtTJ then turned to the supporting evidence.  She  noted  that  the
    Appellant  had  submitted  a  witness  statement  from  Mr  Miah.   She
    discounted his evidence on the basis that Mr Miah did  not  attend  the
    hearing and submit to cross-examination.  No challenge  is  mounted  to
    that finding.  With regard to the evidence of Mr Hafez, the FtTJ set it
    out at length in [16]  to  [18].  In  summary  Mr  Hafez  recalled  the
    Appellant living at his family  home  when  he  (the  Appellant)  first
    arrived in the U.K.  After a short stay, the Appellant left Mr  Hafez's
    home but he would return to visit the house every couple of  months  or
    so.

 9. The judge compared Mr Hafez's account with the  Appellant's  and  found
    the Appellant not credible. She dismissed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

10. The Appellant appealed the decision on  three  grounds  -  the  primary
    ground being that the FtTJ had failed to make  adequate/clear  findings
    on whether or not she accepted or rejected Mr Hafez's evidence.   Since
    this evidence was crucial in terms of supporting the  Appellant's  case
    because it covered the gap in the  Appellant's  account  of  his  early
    years in the UK, a failure to properly take into account this  evidence
    amounted to a material error.

11. Permission was refused initially by the FtT but granted upon a  renewed
    application before the Upper Tribunal.  Thus, the matter  comes  before
    me to  decide  if  the  FtTJ's  decision  contained  a  material  error
    sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

12. Before me Mr Karim appeared on behalf of the Appellant and Miss Pal for
    the Respondent.  Mr Karim's submissions followed the lines of the grant
    of permission.  He drew my attention to [25] to [28] of  the  decision.
    He submitted that the FtTJ had accepted that the Appellant  arrived  in
    the UK in 1992 - there  was  credible  evidence  from  the  immigration
    service at Luton Airport to confirm this.

13. It was therefore unclear why the FtTJ had criticised the  Appellant  by
    saying he could  have  brought  further  evidence  from  relatives  and
    friends with whom he had stayed.  That criticism was materially  wrong,
    because this was the very evidence which Mr  Hafez  had  given  in  his
    statement.  Nowhere does the judge expressly make a finding on  whether
    or not she finds Mr Hafez's evidence credible.   Indeed  a  reading  of
    parts of the decision would  seem  to  imply  that  she  did  find  his
    evidence credible. As this evidence is crucial in terms  of  supporting
    the Appellant's case it is necessary that  a  clear  analysis  of  this
    evidence is carried out  and  that  clear  findings  are  made  on  the
    credibility or otherwise of this witness.

14. Miss Pal responded by saying that the judge's findings  were  adequate.
    She pointed to [25] and said that the judge had  taken  account  of  Mr
    Hafez's evidence and noted the difference between his evidence and that
    of the Appellant.  She noted that there could  have  been  considerably
    more produced in terms of evidence from other  friends  and  relatives.
    The judge was entitled to conclude in any event that there were gaps in
    the Appellant's evidence which meant  that  he  could  not  demonstrate
    continuous residence for twenty years.

Consideration of Error of Law

15. Following submissions from  both  parties,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision of FtTJ Herlihy must be set aside for material error.  This is
    a decision where the judge to her credit has expended considerable time
    and effort in setting out the evidence before her in detail.  There may
    have been no sustainable criticism of her decision if the only  witness
    before her had been the Appellant.  However, that was not the case  and
    therein lies the difficulty in this decision.  It is a narrow point but
    one which is material.

16. Whist I accept that she has fully set out Mr Hafez's evidence,  nowhere
    do I see that she has made explicit findings that she does  not  accept
    the credibility of his evidence.   The  crucial  parts  of  Mr  Hafez's
    evidence are contained in paragraphs 2 and  3  of  his  statement.   In
    paragraph 2 he says the following:

         "I confirm that Mr Islam has lived at our address when  he  arrived
         in the United Kingdom.  He then moved out  and  started  living  at
         different addresses throughout the last 24 years.  However, he  had
         a well communication with us throughout this period.   He  used  to
         come and visit us almost every two  months.   I  had  a  very  good
         bonding with him."

    He follows this up in paragraph 3 by saying the following:

         "I confirm that Mr Islam remained in the United Kingdom  for  these
         years.  He did not leave the United Kingdom at  all.   In  fact  it
         would have been impossible for him as he did not have  a  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom."

    Those are the crucial parts of Mr Hafez's evidence.  I accept that  she
    has referenced Mr Hafez's evidence when comparing it to the Appellant's
    account but I cannot find that that is sufficient for  me  to  conclude
    that his evidence is discounted.  I cannot discount therefore that were
    a proper analysis of his evidence with credibility  findings  be  made,
    this  may  possibly  result  in  a  different  interpretation  of   the
    Appellant's evidence and thus a different decision.

17. I find I have no alternative but to  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
    entirety in order for it to be  remade.  It  would  not  be  proper  to
    preserve the FtTJ's findings on the Appellant's evidence.

18. I canvassed with the representatives their views on the venue  for  the
    remaking of the decision in the event that I found an error of  law  in
    the FtTJ's decision.  Mr Karim submitted that I had sufficient evidence
    before me to remake the decision allowing the appeal.  Miss Pal's  view
    was that as this was a reasons  challenge,  it  was  right  that  there
    should be a full rehearing and that should take place in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  I agree with  Miss  Pal's  submissions.   Since  Mr  Karim's
    challenge is mounted on the basis that the judge has not carried out  a
    proper analysis of evidence before her, I find that it  is  appropriate
    that a fresh hearing takes place. Because of  the  amount  of  judicial
    fact-finding which will be necessary it is  right  that  the  rehearing
    should be before the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 25th January 2019  is
set aside for material error.   The  decision  is  set  aside  for  a  fresh
hearing. The re hearing will be made in the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge
Herlihy)

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     25 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts






