

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/12412/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |         Decision & Reasons           |
|On 7 February 2018                  |Promulgated       On 19 February 2018 |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                           SARA YASALAM A BAFAYAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Lawson of Cohesion Legal Services
For the Respondent:       Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 4 July 1984 and is a national of Saudi Arabia.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 7 March  2017  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  6  May
   2016 to refuse the Appellants application for  leave  to  remain  on  the
   basis of her relationship with her sister and nephew..
5. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   his assessment of whether the provisions  of  paragraph  117B  6  of  the
   Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied in  relation  to  the
   Appellant and her nephew; the Judge made a factual error in assessing the
   case on the basis that the sisters parents lived with them when they  had
   only been in the UK for a holiday; his assessment of the  best  interests
   of the child were contrary to the views of the professionals.
6.  On  14  September  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woodcraft  refused
   permission to appeal. The application was renewed and on 17 October  2017
   Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission to appeal.
7. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Lawson  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :
8. The Judges consideration of the relationship between  the  Appellant  and
   her nephew was flawed.
9. The evidence of all  of  the  professionals  was  that  the  person  with
   responsibility was the Appellant and that the  mother  was  incapable  of
   looking after her child.
10. The Appellants sister had been struggling prior to receiving  assistance
   from her sister.
11. The nephew needs round the clock care and the sister is prepared  to  do
   it. The child will go into care as the mother cannot cope. It was  better
   for the child for a family member to assist.

   The Appellant came to the UK to study but did not realise the seriousness
   of her sisters plight and she had sacrificed herself for her  sister  and
   nephew.



12. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr  Mc Vitie submitted that the  Judge  who
   granted permission appeared not to have read the decision  as  the  Judge
   made clear findings about the relationship  between  the  child  and  the
   Appellant

13. He found that the Appellant was trying to remain as a carer  to  someone
   who had not previously needed her help.

14. The Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  or  of
   paragraph 117B 6.

15. The state has assisted in the care of the nephew  and  the  contribution
   of the sister did not amount to a parental relationship.

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before him,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. He must weigh all of the evidence  before  him,
   and give clear reasons for his conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.

18. The Appellants argument in this case was that the Appellant was  the  de
   facto mother  of  her  nephew  and  therefore  met  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 117B6 . Mr Lawson  argued  before  me  the  childs  mother  was
   incapable of caring for him and there was a risk if  the  Appellant  were
   removed that he would go into care which would be contrary  to  his  best
   interests. He argued that this was the view of all of  the  professionals
   whose evidence formed part of the bundle before the Judge.

19. The Judge identified all  of  the  medical  and  psychological  evidence
   before him (paragraphs 12, 13, 14) and came to the  conclusion  based  on
   that evidence  that the Appellant 'spends time looking after  her  nephew
   but that did not mean that she was his mother'. There was nothing in  the
   reports of the medical professionals that would support Mr Lawsons  claim
   that the Appellant was the person responsible for the Appellant and  that
   his mother was incapable of looking after her child. There  is  no  doubt
   that the Appellant assisted with 'the day to day management  or  personal
   administration work' as Dr Farooq stated in his report of 24.11.2015  but
   that is very different from being in a  parental  relationship  with  her
   nephew as the Judge noted at paragraph 24 of the decision. It would  have
   been open to the Judge to note that those who  dealt  directly  with  the
   Appellants nephew in relation to his medical  needs  (F27-42)  manifestly
   did not regard the Appellant as his de facto mother. On any fair  reading
   of the detailed reports they regarded her as his  aunt,  an  interpreter,
   and someone who helpfully  accompanied  his  sister  and  nephew  to  the
   appointments. All of the discussion of his needs and  future  care  plans
   was directed at his mother who had brought her concerns about him to  the
   authorities attention and on an occasion when she was  unable  to  attend
   due to ill health it was clear from the report (F37) that the  Disability
   Nurse 'hoped to see A's Mother at he next appointment'.   No  where  does
   any of the professionals suggest that the Appellants sister was incapable
   of looking after her child. In relation to the  psychologists  report  it
   would have been open to the Judge to note that this was  largely  focused
   on an assessment of the Appellants sisters needs,  the  only  person  the
   psychologist met as she did not meet Abdul.  The  Psychologist  does  not
   suggest that the Appellants sister regarded her  sister  as  the  child's
   mother or unable to care for her son.  Mr Lawsons claim  that  the  child
   would go into care of the Appellant is removed is unsupported by  any  of
   the evidence, from either the professionals or his mother.

20. The Judge  noted  in  his  assessment  of  the  child's  best  interests
   (paragraphs 26-30) that the Appellants nephew is a British citizen and is
   currently supported by social services and the NHS and while it may  well
   be that the Appellants sister would prefer the assistance  to  come  from
   her sister that is not the test that the Judge was required to apply.

21. Therefore in assessing whether the Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
   section 117B 6 which the Judge set out at paragraph 54 the whole  of  the
   Judges findings about the nature of the Appellants relationship with  the
   child must be taken into account which make clear that he did not  accept
   there was a parental relationship. Thus  paragraph  24,  57  (vi),  (vii)
   (xii) (xiv) read together are adequate reasons as to why  the  Judge  did
   not  accept  that  there  was  a  parental  relationship  and  while  not
   diminishing the help, assistance and emotional support  she  provided  to
   her sister in the case of her son this was not the  same  as  a  parental
   relationship.

22. It was also argued that the Judge was in error in finding  at  paragraph
   13 that the Appellants parents and uncles lived with her sister. This was
   not a finding by the Judge but a summary of the report of Dr  Farooq.  In
   assessing the best interests of  the  child  at  paragraphs  28-30  while
   taking into account the assistance of family members the  Judge  in  fact
   found that 'such care is in fact provided at public  expense  by  various
   agencies of the local authority, social services and the NHS.'  Therefore
   any factual error relating to the presence of family members  in  the  UK
   who had since returned to Saudi Arabia made no material difference as the
   Judge found that the care they potentially offered was provided by  other
   agencies.

23. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
11.2.2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
