
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/12971/2018 (A)
                                                           HU/12966/2018 (A)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th September 2020                |On 14th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                              KULWINDER [S] (1)
                              SURINDER [K] (2)
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson of Counsel, instructed by JJ Law
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The appellants are citizens of India who are a married couple. They
         have a daughter, L, born on 8th December 1998 who is also an Indian
         citizen, and who currently has leave to remain in the UK until 17th
         February 2022. The appellants arrived in  the  UK  as  visitors  in
         2006, and L arrived as a visitor in 2007.  Their  leave  to  remain
         expired after the six  month  visit  periods,  and  they  then  all
         overstayed. They then made various applications to regularise their
         stay.

      2. Latterly the appellants' daughter L's application  was  dealt  with
         separately, and she was successful in a human rights appeal to  the
         First-tier Tribunal in a determination dated 7th October 2016,  and
         as a result she was granted leave  to  remain,  firstly  until  May
         2019, and then this was extended to February 2022.

      3. This appeal is against  the  refusal  decision  of  5th  June  2018
         refusing the appellants' human rights application. The  appeal  was
         dismissed in a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  6th
         February 2019, but that decision was  set  aside  by  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Shaerf, and so the matter was remade  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Behan  in  a  determination  dismissing  the  appeal
         promulgated on the 27th November 2019.

      4. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Foudy on the 13th April 2020 on  the  basis  that  it  was
         arguable that the First-tier  Judge  Behan  had  erred  in  law  in
         misdirecting himself as to  the  respondent's  policy  on  parental
         leave to remain where a child reaches the age of majority;  wrongly
         interpreting paragraph E-LTRPT 2.2 of Appendix FM; and  in  finding
         the second appellant had a poor immigration history  when  arguably
         she did not. Ultimately it was found to be arguable that the First-
         tier Tribunal failed  to  understand  that  the  appellants  had  a
         potential right to  remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  the
         parents of their adult child in  the  context  where  she  had  not
         formed an independent life.

      5. Directions were sent out by Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell dated the
         5th May 2020 with a view to potentially determining  the  issue  of
         whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  on  the  papers.
         Submissions were  received  from  Mr  Nicolson  on  behalf  of  the
         appellants dated 9th June, 16th June and 23rd June 2020;  and  from
         Mr S Kotas for the respondent dated 10th June 2020. The  appellants
         objected to the question as to whether the First-tier Tribunal  had
         erred in law being dealt with on the papers as it was  argued  that
         this was a complex appeal and so it would be appropriate for  there
         to be oral argument. As a result the matter was listed for a remote
         Skype for Business hearing so oral argument could be heard.

      6. The matter came before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had erred in law. The  hearing  was  held  via  Skype  for
         Business in light of the need to reduce  the  transmission  of  the
         Covid-19 virus, and in light of this being found to  be  acceptable
         by both parties and to be a just and  fair  way  to  determine  the
         issues. Unfortunately there was a delay in commencing  the  hearing
         due to the fact that the link to join the hearing was initially not
         found by Mr Nicolson as it had gone into his junk email folder; and
         due to the Upper Tribunal and Ms Cunha  not  having  amongst  their
         file  papers  the  submissions  received  as  a  result  of   Judge
         Blundell's directions. These were kindly forwarded to myself and Ms
         Cunha by Mr Nicolson. However once the hearing commenced there were
         no issues with connectivity or other practical  problems  with  the
         hearing.

  Submissions - Error of Law

    7. In grounds of appeal and  submissions  of  9th  and  23rd  June  2020
       drafted by Mr Nicolson for the appellants and oral submissions it  is
       argued, in summary, as follows.

    8. The following relevant background  information  is  set  out  in  the
       grounds. The appellants daughter, L, succeeded in her  appeal  before
       the First-tier Tribunal on 12th October 2016 because it was found she
       had lived in the UK for more than 7 years as a child and it was found
       that it was not reasonable to expect  her  to  leave  the  UK.  As  a
       result, on 31st November 2016, she was granted leave to remain in the
       UK until 13th May 2019. The appellants made  an  application  on  1st
       December 2016, 7 days prior to L's eighteenth birthday, for leave  to
       remain as the parents of a child who had lived in  the  UK  for  more
       than 7 years and who could not reasonably be expected to  leave.  The
       application was refused  on  the  basis  that  by  the  time  of  the
       decision, namely 5th June 2018, L was 19 years old and so EX1 (a)  of
       the Immigration  Rules  did  not  apply.  L  was  granted  a  further
       extension  of  her  leave  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(v) because she was aged between 18 years and 25  years  and
       had lived more than half of her life in the UK.

    9. It is argued firstly  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
       determination of this appeal because it was found by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal at paragraphs 31 to 33 that the appellants have family  life
       protected by Article 8 ECHR  with  their  daughter  L  but  that  the
       Immigration Rules and the  respondent's  policy  do  not  permit  the
       appellants to remain as the parents of a child once  that  child  has
       reached the age of 18 years. However this is incorrect, as  paragraph
       E-LTRPT 2.2 (a) states that the child applicant must be under the age
       of 18 years at the date of application, or where the child has turned
       18 years since the applicant was first granted leave to remain  as  a
       parent the child must not have formed an independent family  unit  or
       be leading an independent life.  It  is  argued  therefore  that  the
       policy of the respondent, as set out in the Immigration Rules, is not
       to refuse to grant parents of a  child  over  the  age  of  18  years
       permission to remain if they remain dependent, and  that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal fell into a material error by finding this. It is  also
       argued that an independent life is defined in the  Immigration  Rules
       at Gen 1.2 of Appendix FM in a way which means that L is clearly  not
       leading this as she is not financially independent,  lives  with  her
       parents  as  part  of  their  household  and  is  mainly  emotionally
       dependent on them.

   10. It is argued secondly that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing
       to take into account the fact that if the respondent had not denied L
       a right of appeal in her initial decision refusing her  human  rights
       claim, which then had to be challenged by way of a  judicial  review,
       and that if the respondent had not refused her application she  could
       have been granted leave as a child who had lived in the UK  for  more
       than 7 years and who it would not be reasonable to expect to leave at
       the age of 15 years, and her parents  would  clearly  have  qualified
       under s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. It  is  argued  therefore  that  the
       delays and errors by the  respondent  in  2014  to  2016  caused  the
       appellants to overstay from this time so it was wrong  to  find  that
       the appellants had a bad immigration history and been responsible for
       overstaying for a decade, and that this was  a  factor  which  should
       have diminished the public interest in the appellants'  removal  when
       considering the proportionality of the interference with  her  family
       life given that it is acknowledged by the First-tier Tribunal to be a
       very painful rupture if the appellants are removed. It is also relied
       upon that there was clearly a period of time from  the  12th  October
       2016 when the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  qualified
       to remain until her 18th birthday  on  8th  December  2016  when  the
       appellants did qualify to remain under s.117B(6) of the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  that  weight  should  have  been
       given to that fact in the appellants' favour.

   11. It is further argued that there was  failure to apply GEN  3.2(2)  of
       the Immigration Rules when looking at  this  appeal  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules as there was  a  failure  to  explicitly  look  for
       "unjustifiably harsh consequences" when assessing the proportionality
       of the interference with family life, and that it is argued that this
       proportionality exercise was also skewed by the failure  to  consider
       that the respondent did indeed permit over 18  year  olds  to  remain
       under their policy as encapsulated in the Immigration Rules  and  the
       above points regarding the  respondent's  delay  and  the  period  of
       qualification under s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

   12. The respondent argues in written submissions from Mr Kotas  and  oral
       ones from Ms Cunha that the appellant conceded that this appeal could
       not succeed under the Immigration Rules as set out at paragraph 10 of
       the decision, and this is  unarguably  correct.  In  so  far  as  the
       Immigration Rules permit parents of children over the age of 18 years
       to remain it is only in the case of where a parent was "first granted
       entry clearance or leave to remain as a parent  under  the  Appendix"
       and this is not the case for these  appellants.  It  is  argued  that
       there is no wider policy of the respondent, for  instance  in  Family
       Policy Family Life Version 8.0 2nd June 2020, not to break up  family
       units  which  goes  beyond  the  provisions   of   the   parent/child
       Immigration Rules beyond the duty to act proportionately to Article 8
       ECHR in cases where there would be unjustifiably harsh consequences.

   13. It is also not arguable that the respondent  has  delayed  in  a  way
       which ought to have been balanced in the appellants' favour  or  that
       there is any element of a historic injustice  in  this  case.  An  18
       month delay in decision-making is nowhere near exceptional enough  to
       make this a material matter. The First-tier Tribunal  had  unarguably
       shown itself to be fair in  not  considering  the  first  appellant's
       minor convictions as matters which weighed against him. As  a  result
       the conclusion that the  interference  with  family  life  would  not
       result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  was  unarguably  lawfully
       reasoned and open to the First-tier Tribunal.

  Conclusions - Error of Law

   14. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that there was Article 8 ECHR family
       life between the appellants and their daughter, L, at paragraph 25 of
       the decision, and that removal of them from the  UK  would  interfere
       with that family life.

   15. It is recorded by the First-tier Tribunal, at  paragraph  10  of  the
       decision, as being accepted  by  the  appellants  representative,  Mr
       Nicholson, that the appellants could not meet the requirements of the
       Immigration Rules and that they argued  the  case  on  the  basis  of
       family life outside of the Rules  alone.  Although  my  attention  is
       drawn in the submissions to  GEN  3.2(2)  and  the  decision  of  the
       Supreme Court in  Agyarko,  and  the  test  of  "unjustifiably  harsh
       consequences" and the fact that this test is not cited explicitly  in
       the decision, I find that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  apply  a
       more onerous test in the conduct of the proportionality exercise. The
       decision considers  the  proportionality  of  the  interference  with
       family  life  which  the  appellants  removal  would   represent   at
       paragraphs  28  to  46  of  the  decision.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       conducted a nuanced fact sensitive consideration of the impact of the
       appellant's removal on their daughter L, and weighed this against the
       public interest in an entirely lawful and proper  balancing  exercise
       for the reasons I set out below.

   16. There is no evidence that any material matter  was  not  included  in
       this exercise. It  is  not  the  case  that  there  is  a  matter  of
       significant delay in this case which ought to have been  balanced  in
       the appellants' favour. The appellants' daughter, L, won  her  appeal
       in October 2016 due to the particular proximity of her appeal to  her
       A level examinations, as set out at paragraph 45 of the decision, and
       on the submissions before me I have no reason  to  believe  it  would
       have succeeded if it had been heard at an earlier time if she had not
       had to conduct a judicial review etc. There was  no  excessive  delay
       between the application made by the appellants in December  2016  and
       the decision which gave rise to this appeal made 18 months  later  in
       June 2018. It is of no relevance whatsoever that for a  period  of  7
       days from the making of their application on 1st December  2016  that
       the appellants fulfilled all of the requirements of s.117B(6) of  the
       2002 Act. The respondent and  First-tier  Tribunal  must  make  their
       Article 8 ECHR decision on the facts at the time of  those  decision,
       and not on the basis of facts that had  existed  18  months  or  more
       prior to that time.

   17. I do not therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding
       and balancing the fact that the appellants have  a  poor  immigration
       record at paragraph 37: it is undoubtedly the case that they remained
       in the UK after their visit visas  expired;  that  they  made  asylum
       claims when served with removal papers; that they have overstayed for
       more than a decade and supported  themselves  through  illegal  work.
       None of these matters is inaccurately recorded. I find  that  it  was
       lawfully open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  find  that  their  poor
       immigration history weighed against them.

   18. Mr Nicolson argues that a provision of the Immigration  Rules  at  E-
       LTRPT which permits an extension of leave to remain as a parent  when
       granted initially when a child is a minor in the  circumstances  when
       the child becomes an 18 year old, so long as the child has not formed
       an independent life or family ought to have been seen as an indicator
       that the policy of the respondent was to keep families together  even
       when children ceased to be minors. There  are  two  problems  arising
       when trying to apply this  provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by
       analogy to this appeal as an indicator of  the  respondent's  policy.
       The appellants were not  granted  permission  to  remain  as  parents
       whilst L was a child, and she had not turned 18 years at the time  of
       decision, but was 19 years old. I do not  find  therefore  that  this
       provision of the Immigration Rules, or indeed any other policy of the
       respondent, supports these appellants in showing that there is no  or
       a lesser public interest in their removal.

   19. I accept that at paragraph 41 of the  decision  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal states that all of the Immigration Rules which  Mr  Nicolson
       had highlighted related to minor  children,  which  is  not  entirely
       accurate, however at paragraph 43 of the decision it  is  clear  that
       the wider picture  of  the  Rules  is  understood  as  it  said  that
       "provision is made in guidance for children who turn 18  between  the
       date of the application and the date of the decision". Thus,  I  find
       that the First-tier Tribunal acknowledges that there is a possibility
       of a grant of leave to a parent for reason of being  a  parent  to  a
       child who is 18 years old in the provisions of the Immigration  Rules
       that Mr Nicolson had cited. For the reasons in paragraph 18  of  this
       decision any minor misstatement of the Immigration Rules at paragraph
       41 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is in any case entirely
       immaterial.

   20. Ultimately I find that the First-tier Tribunal conducted an  entirely
       lawful  proportionality  exercise  in  which   L's  abilities  to  be
       independent, as set out at paragraphs 33 - 35 of the decision,  which
       include findings that she is capable of independence in  the  way  of
       travel, friendships, part-time work and doing university studies  and
       the fact that there would be other ways for her to  remain  in  touch
       with her parents if they were not to live together,  were  considered
       alongside acknowledging that there would be at least short term  pain
       in rupturing  the  current  close  physical  family  unit;  and  then
       considering this in the context of the appellants'  poor  immigration
       history and lack of any right to remain in the UK  and  factoring  in
       their inability to meet any of the provision of the Immigration Rules
       and thus applying s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002  that  their  removal  must  be  considered  in  the  public
       interest as the maintenance  of  immigration  control,  and  removing
       those who do not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  is
       in the public interest.



    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I uphold the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
         appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date:  10th September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
