







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12522/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 12 August 2019                   | On: 02 September 2019               |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                              Mr Luftar Idrizi
                        anonymity direction NOT made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr F Farhat, Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting   Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born  on  14  March  1973.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge promulgated on 20  March  2019  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent dated 30 May 2018 to refuse his
      human rights application made on 3 November 2017 for leave  to  remain
      in the UK.

   2. The appellant entered the UK clandestinely on  29  December  1998  and
      claimed asylum in his own name as a national of Kosovo.  He  used  his
      correct name and date of birth. His asylum claim was refused in August
      2000. His appeal against that decision was  dismissed  on  26  January
      2004.

   3. On 10 February 2005, his appeal was allowed on  human  rights  grounds
      only. He was granted indefinite leave to remain  on  8  October  2008.
      Throughout his dealings with the Home Office  he  continued  to  state
      that he was a Kosovan national.

   4. On 30 June 2015, he applied for naturalisation, stating that he was  a
      Kosovan national. In January 2016, the Albanian authorities  confirmed
      that the appellant was  an  Albanian  national.  His  application  for
      naturalisation was refused on the grounds of  deception  on  19  April
      2016.

   5. On 5 June 2017 he was detained by the enforcement authorities. He  was
      served with a notice as a person who has obtained leave to  remain  by
      deception, thereby  revoking  his  indefinite  leave  to  remain  with
      immediate effect pursuant to s.76(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002.

   6. On 2 November 2017 he made an application for leave  to  remain  under
      paragraph 276ADE on the grounds of private life. His  application  was
      refused on 30 May 2018 under paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i) on the grounds
      of suitability under section S-LTR, as he had  previously  made  false
      representations by claiming to be a national of  Kosovo  who  obtained
      leave to remain in the UK. Due consideration was given to  whether  he
      should nevertheless be granted leave,  but  the  respondent  contended
      that the exercise of discretion was not appropriate on this occasion.

   7. His application was also dismissed under paragraph 276ADE (1)  on  the
      grounds of suitability relating to the  false  representation  he  had
      previously made to obtain leave to remain in the UK, by claiming to be
      a national of Kosovo.

   8. He had lived in the UK for 18 years and ten  months  and  it  was  not
      accepted that he had lived here for 20 years.  Nor  did  he  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276DE(1)(vi) as it  was  not  accepted  that
      there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
      Albania  if  required   to   leave.   Nor   were   there   exceptional
      circumstances.

   9. It was contended on his behalf before the First-tier Tribunal that his
      indefinite leave to remain should not have been  revoked  pursuant  to
      s.76(2) of the 2002 Act as it was not obtained by  deception.  He  was
      granted leave outside the Immigration Rules.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected that submission. She found that
      his leave outside the Rules was still on  the  basis  that  he  was  a
      Kosovan national [68-69]. She also rejected his contention that  there
      would be very significant obstacles to his integration into Albania in
      the light of the time he has spent in the UK.

  11. She accepted that he is in a new relationship. The couple met in  2017
      but started their relationship  in  2018.  They  only  started  living
      together in February 2019, about  a  month  before  the  hearing.  The
      appellant did not satisfy the Rules as they have  not  lived  together
      for a period of two years.

  12. She was not satisfied that the appellant could meet  the  Rules  under
      paragraph 276ADE  [86].   Nor  were  there  exceptional  circumstances
      rendering the refusal of his application a breach of Article 8 because
      it would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences for him [87].

  13. Having considered his Article 8 rights she found that the decision was
      not disproportionate [95].

      Home Office Case Notes

  14. During the course of her submissions before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Ms
      Jones produced two printouts of the relevant Home  Office  Case  Notes
      relating to the appellant, created on 2 October 2008  by  the  "Legacy
      CRT Unit."

  15. In the first document created on 2 October 2008, it was noted that the
      legacy questionnaire was received on 9 June 2008.  An  MP  letter  was
      received in September 2008 requesting expedition to "his constituent's
      claim." The appellant is referred to as  a  national  of  the  Federal
      Republic of Yugoslavia.

  16. In the second printout, also dated 2 October 2008, it  is  noted  that
      the appellant is a 35 year old  failed  asylum  seeker  who  has  been
      resident in the UK for nine years and ten months. During this time, he
      has been working as a construction foreman  and  has  been  supporting
      himself with no recourse to public funds. He  has  no  known  criminal
      involvement and would have no doubt established a private life in  the
      last nine years with work colleagues and acquaintances made in the UK.
      This, together with information above,  namely  that  his  appeal  was
      allowed on 10 February 2005, and the undue delay through no  fault  of
      his own to have his appeal heard, led to the  decision  to  grant  him
      leave to remain outside the Rules.

      Submissions

  17. Mr Farhat, who did not represent the appellant before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, submitted that on the facts of  the  appellant's  case,  the
      Judge erred in her approach to the statutory construction of the words
      "by deception".

  18. On 10 February 2005 the appellant's appeal was allowed on human rights
      grounds. On 8 October 2008 he was granted indefinite leave to  remain.
      Whilst it is correct that he held himself out to be a Kosovan national
      at the time, that did not  mean  that  such  leave  was  obtained  "by
      deception".

  19. The appellant's solicitors had sent a letter to the  respondent  dated
      15 November 2018 in anticipation of the appeal hearing on 13  December
      2018. They noted that one of the  key  issues  to  be  determined  was
      whether the appellant acquired ILR as a  direct  result  of  making  a
      false representation or whether it was granted to him based  on  other
      considerations. A request was thus made for the respondent to  furnish
      details of the grounds on which the appellant was  granted  ILR  on  8
      October 2008.

  20. Following that request, the senior case worker informed his solicitors
      that the Tribunal had directed the respondent to provide the details.

  21. The letter from UKVI, dated 22 November 2011,  in  response  to  those
      directions stated that the appellant was granted indefinite  leave  to
      remain exceptionally outside of the Immigration Rules - p31.

  22. The letter from the Home Office to the appellant dated 8 October  2008
      was produced at pages 33-34 of the respondent's bundle. In that letter
      it was stated that  his  case  had  been  reviewed  and  having  fully
      considered the information he provided, and because of the  individual
      circumstances in his case, it has been decided to grant him indefinite
      leave to remain in the UK. This leave has been  granted  exceptionally
      outside the Immigration Rules.  This  is  due  to  "your  strength  of
      connections and length of residence in the UK."

  23. Mr Farhat submitted that his connection and length  of  stay  was  the
      operative  basis  upon  which  the  appellant  was  granted  ILR.  His
      nationality did not have any bearing on  the  decision  to  grant  him
      indefinite leave to remain.

  24. Mr Farhat contended that the appellant's  ILR  should  not  have  been
      revoked under s.76(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  act
      2002, as it had not been obtained by deception, but by virtue  of  his
      family and private life.

  25. He relied on the decision of R (on the application of  Abbas)  v  SSHD
      [2017] EWHC 78 (Admin) at [34], where the High Court held  that  there
      needs to be implicit reliance upon the  deception  which  led  to  the
      grant of ILR for it to be justified that it could be revoked  pursuant
      to s.76(2).

  26. He submitted that no aspect of the appellant's  successful  appeal  on
      the basis of human rights grounds on 10 February 2005  could  said  to
      have been tainted by deception.

  27. He referred to the respondent's guidance on revocation  of  indefinite
      leave to remain entitled "Home Office: Revocation of Indefinite Leave,
      Version 4.0, 19 October 2015" at page 11.

  28. Paragraph 4.1 of the guidance - headed "Passage of Time" - notes  that
      the length of time spent in the UK may constitute  a  reason  for  not
      revoking indefinite leave.

  29. The guidance states that it could only  be  relevant  to  cases  under
      s.76(2) and 76(3). Cases under s.76(1), length of time  spent  in  the
      UK, will not constitute  a  bar  to  revocation  of  indefinite  leave
      because it, and any other Article 8  considerations,  will  have  been
      taken into account in deciding whether the person should be  deported.
      Section 76(1) provides that  the  respondent  may  revoke  a  person's
      indefinite leave to remain if that person is liable to deportation but
      cannot be deported for legal reasons.

  30. It states that what is of more relevance is the length  of  time  that
      has passed since the incident(s) which is/are causing  the  review  of
      the person's continuing entitlement to indefinite leave. For  example,
      indefinite leave would not normally be revoked where the deception  in
      question or where the person's travel to their home  country  occurred
      more than five years ago. Each case must be considered on its  merits.
      The longer the person has been in the UK, or more crucially, the  more
      time it has been since the  incident,  the  less  likely  it  will  be
      appropriate to revoke ILR.

  31. Mr Farhat submitted that the Judge did not have proper regard  to  the
      fact that the appellant had spent many  years  in  the  UK  since  the
      making of the initial false representation that he was a  national  of
      Kosovo. That in itself did not lead to a grant of ILR.

  32. He referred to the reported decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
      in Sleiman (Deprivation of Citizenship;  Conduct)  [2017]  UKUT  00367
      (IAC). That appeal considered the decision to deprive  the  appellant,
      Mr Sleiman, of his British  citizenship  under  s.40  of  the  British
      Nationality Act 1981.

  33. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek held after a consideration of  relevant
      IDIs and case law that in an appeal against a decision  to  deprive  a
      person of a citizenship status, in  assessing  whether  the  appellant
      obtained registration or naturalisation "by  means  of"  fraud,  false
      representation  or  concealment  of  a  material  fact,  the  impugned
      behaviour  must  be  directly  material  to  the  decision  to   grant
      citizenship. The fraud must be operative or contributing to the  grant
      of citizenship.

  34. Mr Farhat noted that the wording in s.76(2)(a) of the 2002 Act  refers
      to leave being revoked if it was "obtained by deception." He submitted
      that the word "deception" is used instead of "fraud" which is used  in
      the 1981 Act. He submitted that the  decision  in  Sleiman  "has  some
      transferable principles".

  35. In Sleiman, the Tribunal held that the deception regarding the date of
      birth  of  that  appellant,  which  enabled  him  to  obtain  DLR  and
      subsequently ILR, and which underpinned the grant of citizenship,  had
      to have had a material and direct bearing.

  36. Mr Farhat submitted that his  untruthful  particulars  in  the  asylum
      claim had no bearing on the criteria for a grant of  leave  under  the
      Legacy programme. The "but for"  approach  was  rejected  in  Sleiman.
      Direct causation is required. Indirect causation is not relevant.  The
      Tribunal referred to submissions on behalf of the appellant at [27-29]
      in respect of the "but for"  approach  as  well  as  the  "foreseeable
      consequences" approach.

  37. Mr Farhat referred to [57] where the Tribunal held that there must  be
      some causative link between the action or omission  of  the  appellant
      and the obtaining of citizenship. At [50]  in  Sleiman,  the  Tribunal
      referred to an earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal in the  decision
      of Deliallisi (British Citizen: Appeal: Scope) [2013] UKUT 439.  There
      the appellant had obtained refugee status on the  basis  that  he  was
      Kosovan, whereas he  was  in  fact  from  Albania.  He  then  obtained
      indefinite leave to remain and following that British citizenship.  In
      his citizenship application he maintained that he was from Kosovo. The
      Tribunal decided that the secretary of state's discretion  should  not
      have been decided differently and that it was appropriate  to  deprive
      that appellant of his citizenship.

  38. Mr Farhat referred to [53] where Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek stated
      that in cases of obvious fraud, such as in  relation  to  identity  or
      nationality, it is much easier to see the causative link  between  the
      conduct of the appellant and the granting  of  citizenship.  In  other
      cases, the link may be less clear.

  39. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek held at [60] that  the  phrase  "direct
      bearing" suggests that in cases where the fraud etc. has  an  indirect
      bearing on the grant of citizenship, deprivation action would  not  be
      appropriate. That he found to be consistent with the phrase "by  means
      of" in s.40(3). He therefore agreed that the impugned  behaviour  must
      be directly material to the decision to grant citizenship.

  40. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  also  noted  that  the  appellant,  Mr
      Sleiman, was granted ILR on 4 May 2010 under  the  Legacy  scheme.  He
      accepted that there was some validity to the argument on behalf of the
      appellant to the effect that grants of leave  under  the  Legacy  were
      made in cases where individuals had no right (otherwise) to be in  the
      UK and no doubt included many whose asylum claims were false [63].

  41. Judge Kopieczek  found  at  [68]  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      entitled to find as he did in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  the
      appellant's evidence about his intention to inform the  respondent  as
      to  his  correct  date  of  birth  and  in  relation  to  his   having
      deliberately sought to portray himself as  a  minor  when  he  claimed
      asylum, and that he had perpetrated that deception in the  process  of
      applying for citizenship.

  42. However, having concluded that the behaviour  (fraud,  etc.)  must  be
      directly  material  to  the  decision  to  grant  citizenship,   Judge
      Kopieczek did not consider that the evidence in  this  case  justified
      the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that the appellant's deception as
      to his date of birth was directly material to the  decision  to  grant
      citizenship, namely that it was obtained "by means  of"  fraud,  false
      representations or concealment of a material fact.  That  resulted  in
      the decision being set aside.

  43. Mr Farhat submitted that the wording under the 2002  Act,  namely  "by
      deception" and the wording in the British Nationality Act, namely, "by
      means of fraud, etc." are in effect synonymous. There is  no  material
      difference between those phrases. The principle in Sleiman applies  to
      the revocation context.

  44. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Jones referred to [27] in Sleiman. She
      sought to rely on the "but for" approach referred to. She  noted  that
      the appellant in Sleiman was already a British national.

  45. She referred  to  [28]  in  Sleiman  where  it  was  argued  that  the
      respondent's delay broke the chain of  causation.  In  this  case  the
      appellant's application for naturalisation was refused on that point.

  46. She referred to the legacy grant at page 33. The  respondent  did  not
      accept that there had been a delay. Moreover,  at  no  stage  did  the
      appellant say that he was a national of Albania. He still applied  for
      naturalisation on the basis that he was a Kosovan. If he had said that
      he was an Albanian, he would be expected to be refused as he was.

  47. She referred to [44] and [50]  in  Sleiman,  where  the  appellant  in
      Deliallisi had obtained refugee status on the  basis  that  he  was  a
      Kosovan, whereas  he  was  from  Albania.  Similarly,  this  appellant
      obtained indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  that  he  was  from
      Kosovo, whereas he was  not.  She  too  referred  to  [53]  where  the
      Tribunal noted that in cases of obvious fraud, such as in relation  to
      identity or nationality, it is much easier to see the  causative  link
      between the conduct of the appellant and the granting of  citizenship.
      In other cases, it may be less clear.

  48. She submitted with regard to the dismissal  of  his  appeal  on  human
      rights grounds, that from  the  findings  in  [67-69]  the  Judge  was
      entitled to come to the decision arrived at.

  49. In reply, Mr Farhat again referred to the 'applicability'  of  Sleiman
      to the facts relevant to the appellant's revocation of his  ILR  under
      the 2002 Act. He submitted that the "but for" argument is against  the
      authority. The appellant in Sleiman obtained ELR for a period followed
      by a grant of discretionary leave to remain  prior  to  the  grant  of
      indefinite leave to remain. In Deliallisi, the appellant had  obtained
      refugee status on the basis of deception as to his nationality.

  50. He emphasised that the appellant in Sleiman sought to portray  himself
      as a minor when he claimed asylum and that  he  had  perpetrated  that
      deception in the process of applying for citizenship. The  appellant's
      deception  was  not  directly  material  to  the  decision  to   grant
      citizenship.

  51. He submitted that it was up to Parliament to decide whether or not the
      relevant statutes should be amended and clarified.

      Assessment

  52. Section 76(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      provides that the secretary of state may revoke a person's  indefinite
      leave to remain in the UK  if  the  person's  leave  was  obtained  by
      deception.

  53. The respondent sought to revoke the appellant's  indefinite  leave  to
      remain in the UK, granted on 8 October 2008. The appellant entered the
      UK on 29 December 1998 illegally.  In  claiming  asylum  he  used  his
      correct name and date of birth;  however  he  stated  that  he  was  a
      national of Kosovo.

  54. His appeal against the respondent's refusal of his  asylum  claim  was
      dismissed on 26 January 2004. On 10  February  2005,  his  appeal  was
      allowed on human rights grounds only. Following that, he  was  granted
      indefinite leave to remain in the UK on 8 October 2008. Throughout his
      dealings with the Home Office he continued to  state  that  he  was  a
      Kosovan national.

  55. When he applied for naturalisation on 30 June 2015, he stated that  he
      was a Kosovan national. However, the  Albanian  authorities  confirmed
      that he is Albanian. As a result, his application  for  naturalisation
      was  refused  on  the  basis  of  deception,  on  19  April  2016.  He
      subsequently made an application for leave to remain  under  paragraph
      276ADE of the Rules on the grounds of private life on 2 November 2017.



  56.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rejected  the  contention  on   the
      appellant's behalf that the appeal should be allowed on the basis that
      his ILR should not have been revoked pursuant to s.76(2),  as  it  was
      not obtained by deception. Whilst acknowledging that  the  application
      for asylum was refused and that  he  was  granted  leave  outside  the
      Immigration Rules, she stated that this was still on the basis that he
      was a Kosovan national.

  57. I have referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Sleiman  in
      some detail. That was an appeal against  the  decision  to  deprive  a
      person of citizenship status. As noted, the Upper Tribunal  held  that
      in  assessing  whether  the   appellant   obtained   registration   or
      naturalisation  "by  means  of"  fraud,   false   representations   or
      concealment of  a  material  fact,  the  impugned  behaviour  must  be
      directly material to the decision to grant citizenship.

  58. The Upper Tribunal interpreted the phrase "by means  of"  fraud  under
      s.40(3) of the 1981 British Nationality Act. The  secretary  of  state
      had to be  satisfied  that  the  registration  or  naturalisation  was
      obtained "by means of fraud."

  59. In the appellant's case the Tribunal considered s.76(2)  of  the  2002
      Act, under  which  the  secretary  of  state  may  revoke  a  person's
      indefinite leave to remain in the UK if the  leave  was  obtained  "by
      deception." That phrase connotes a dishonest and  deceitful  state  of
      mind.

  60. I do not find that there is any material difference between the phrase
      used in s.76 of the 2002 Act from that used in the British Nationality
      Act 1981.

  61. The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain outside the Rules
      under the "legacy scheme." The basis was that he would no  doubt  have
      established a private life in the last nine years with work colleagues
      and acquaintances in the UK. Following  the  undue  delay  through  no
      fault of his own to have his appeal heard, it was decided to grant the
      appellant leave to remain outside the Rules.

  62. He was accordingly granted leave to remain outside the  Rules  on  the
      basis of human rights grounds owing to the length of his residence and
      ties to the UK.

  63. As in the case of Sleiman, the appellant was granted leave  to  remain
      outside the Rules under the legacy provisions owing to his  length  of
      residence and ties to the UK.  There  must  accordingly  be  behaviour
      which is directly material to the decision to revoke indefinite leave.

  64. The Home Office guidance on revocation of indefinite leave  to  remain
      notes that indefinite leave would not normally be  revoked  where  the
      deception in question occurred more than five years ago. The longer  a
      person has been in the UK, or crucially, the more  time  it  has  been
      since the incident, the less likely it will be appropriate  to  revoke
      ILR.

  65. In the appeal in Deliallisi, the appellant had obtained refugee status
      on the basis that he was Kosovan, whereas he was in fact from Albania.
      He  obtained  indefinite  leave  to   remain   followed   by   British
      citizenship. He continued to maintain that he was from Kosovo as  part
      of his citizenship application. His impugned  behaviour  was  directly
      material to the decision  to  deprive  him  of  his  citizenship.  The
      respondent's decision was accordingly upheld.

  66. In the appellant's case, his asylum claim was refused. He was  granted
      indefinite leave  to  remain  on  8  October  2008  under  the  legacy
      provisions. His application for  naturalisation  was  refused  on  the
      grounds of deception. His current application, which was  the  subject
      of the appeal, was for leave to remain under the Rules on the  grounds
      of private life.

  67. In the circumstances I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
      finding  that  the  appellant  was  granted  leave  outside   of   the
      Immigration Rules on the basis that he was a Kosovan national.

  68. I have had regard to Ms Jones' contention that the "but for  approach"
      referred to in Sleiman is appropriate. However, that was a  submission
      made on behalf of the respondent. The Tribunal in Sleiman went  on  to
      hold that his conduct had to be directly material to the  decision  to
      grant him citizenship.

  69. Having concluded that  the  appellant's  behaviour  must  be  directly
      material to the decision granting indefinite leave to remain,  I  find
      that the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did not  justify  the
      conclusion that his deception was directly material to  the  grant  of
      indefinite leave to remain pursuant to  s.76(2)(a),  namely  that  the
      leave was obtained "by deception."

  70. In the circumstances, I find that there has been an error on the point
      of law, such as to require the decision to be set aside.

  71. In the light of my conclusion I re-make the  decision  and  allow  the
      appeal on the basis that the appellant's indefinite  leave  to  remain
      was not shown to have been obtained by deception.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. Having set aside the decision, I  re-make  it
      allowing the appeal.


      No anonymity direction is made.






           Signed                             Date 31 August 2019


                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

