
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12784/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2020                 |On 29 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MS
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ball instructed by Mordi & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. MS is a male citizen of South Africa born on 14 November 1988 who  is
       the subject of an order for his deportation from the  United  Kingdom
       pursuant to the UK Borders Act 2007.
    2. By a decision dated 30 June 2020 the Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  listed  the  matter  for  a
       further hearing to enable it to substitute a decision to either allow
       or dismiss the appeal.

Background

    3. On 14 February 2017, at Ipswich Crown Court, MS pleaded guilty to and
       was sentenced on two counts as follows:

           Count 1: Taking a child without lawful  authority,  contrary  to
           section 2(1)(a) of the Child  Abduction  Act  1984:  32  months'
           imprisonment.


           Count 2: Assault by bearing,  contrary  to  section  39  of  the
           Criminal Justice Act 1988: 4 months imprisonment, concurrent.

    4. In February 2017 MS was notified of a decision to deport him from the
       United Kingdom.
    5. On 30 July 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan  dismissed  his
       appeal against the refusal of his human rights claim relied  upon  as
       an exception to deportation.
    6. On 27 December 2018 MS submitted further representations showing  how
       he had addressed his alcohol misuse.
    7. On 25  July  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  further
       submissions amounted to a Fresh Claim pursuant to  paragraph  353  of
       the Immigration Rules but refused the application  against  which  MS
       appealed. It is this appeal which is  'at  large'  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal.
    8. Preserved findings from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal are:

        i. Immigration history - The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
           on 4 August 2004 as a dependent child (aged 15) of  his  mother,
           [VM]. The appelanst was granted indefinite leave to remain on 21
           July 2006.


       ii.    Criminal history -  as  above.  The  appellant  has  no  other
           convictions or cautions according in the copy PNC record in  the
           appeal papers.


       iii.   Composition of family unit - The appellant married  a  British
           citizen, [AS] on 10 April 2012. They have two children [NS] born
           24 April 2012 and [SS] born 21 November 2015. MS also has a son,
           [OM-W] born 12 December 2007, from a previous  relationship  who
           resides with his mother.


       iv.    Findings regarding attendance at alcohol counselling  sessions
           -


           i. "[S]ince the previous decision was promulgated on  23/07/2018
                the appellant has taken positive steps to tackle his alcohol
                misuse." FTT decision at [44].


           ii.    "In the period between August 2018 and to the present day
                the appellant has been attending monthly  sessions  with  Ms
                Hunter." FTT decision at [52].


           iii.   The Judge noted the  evidence  of  Paul  Moyse  of  Foyer
                Hostel that  [MS]  was  "hard  working  and  dedicated"  FTT
                decision at [45].


           iv.    The Judge accepted that the Appellant had  attended  four
                Alcoholics Anonymous sessions, but that he preferred the one
                to one sessions offered by Anna Hunter to the group sessions
                at Alcoholics Anonymous. FTT decision at [47].


Discussion

    9. Although the pleadings the submissions made prior to today's  hearing
       indicated the appellant's approach to this matter was that  as  Judge
       O'Callaghan had found it to be a borderline matter and that the  only
       reason the appeal had been dismissed was as a result of the  lack  of
       evidence that the appellant had sought to address his alcohol misuse,
       and that he had now done so, the appeal  should  be  allowed  without
       more, Mr Ball confirmed this was not how the appellant was presenting
       his case.
   10. The earlier suggestion that as the appellant had resolved  one  issue
       of concern to Judge O'Callaghan should have succeeded  in  accordance
       with the Devaseelan principle is a submission without arguable merit,
       per se. The Court of Appeal have recently considered  the  Devaseelan
       principle in AL(Albania) [2019] EWCA Civ  950  and  BK  (Afghanistan)
       [2019] EWCA Civ 1358.
   11. In BK (Afghanistan) the Court of Appeal stressed  the  importance  of
       not allowing the guidance to place unacceptable restrictions  on  the
       second judge's ability to determine the appeal in front of him.
   12. What is it important is the need to assess the  factual  matrix  that
       exists at the date of the hearing  and  to  consider  relevant  legal
       provisions, especially in light of recent decisions of the  Court  of
       Appeal in this area. The key question in an appeal of this nature  is
       whether the appellant's  circumstances  engage  article  8  ECHR  and
       whether the consequences of any interference with a  protected  right
       is sufficient to outweigh the  strength  given  to  the  respondent's
       right to deport a foreign criminal from the United Kingdom.
   13. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules  are  A398-399A.  In
       this case they provide that for someone  sentenced  to  less  than  4
       years but at least 12 months (as  MS  was)  the  public  interest  in
       deportation will be outweighed if one of two  relevant  criteria  are
       met:

        a. it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  a  British  child  or  British
           partner to go to South Africa with their father,  or  remain  in
           the UK without him (399(a) and (b)): or


        b. he has been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of  his  life;
           and he is socially and culturally integrated; and there would be
           "very significant obstacles to his integration" in South  Africa
           (399A).

   14. Section 117C of the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       provides that  the  public  interest  does  not  require  a  person's
       deportation ('C') if they have been sentenced to less  than  4  years
       and:

        a. Exception 1: lawfully resident 'most of C's life'; 'socially and
           culturally  integrated';  and   'very   significant   obstacles'
           (s117C(4)).


        b. Exception 2: 'the effect of C's deportation on  the  partner  or
           child would be unduly harsh.' (s117C(5))

   15. In relation to  the  question  whether  there  would  there  be  very
       significant obstacles to  MS's  integration  in  South  Africa,  both
       parties referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Kamara  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  in
       which Sales LJ commented on the "very  significant  obstacles"  test,
       for the purposes of the third limb of the private life  exception  to
       deportation at paragraph 14 as follows:

           "In my view, the concept of a foreign  criminal's  "integration"
           into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as
           set out in section 117C(4)(c) ... is a  broad  one.  It  is  not
           confined to the mere ability to find a job or  to  sustain  life
           while living in the other country.  It  is  not  appropriate  to
           treat the statutory language as subject to  some  gloss  and  it
           will usually be sufficient for a court  or  tribunal  simply  to
           direct itself in the terms that Parliament has  chosen  to  use.
           The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative  judgment
           to be made as to whether the individual will  be  enough  of  an
           insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
           that other country is carried on and a capacity  to  participate
           in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted
           there, to be able to operate  on  a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
           society and to build up within a reasonable time  a  variety  of
           human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the  individual's
           private or family life."

   16. Whilst the appellant claims he is  unfamiliar  with  modern  life  in
       South Africa, 'culture shock' does not amount to a  very  significant
       obstacle: see SSHD v Olarewaju [2018] EWCA Civ 557.
   17. Whilst there are some cultural differences between the UK  and  South
       Africa it is relevant that that country formed part  of  the  British
       Empire from 1910 to 1961 meaning that many aspects of life  in  South
       Africa will be familiar to MS.
   18. It was not made out MS will be unable to obtain work in light of this
       previous experience, educational and vocational qualifications.   The
       cost of his needs if paid for in the local currency will  be  similar
       to those in the UK or, if he receives any remittances form the UK  in
       � (Stirling), prices will be much lower and he will be able to  enjoy
       a higher-quality lifestyle. It was not  made  out  he  would  not  be
       accepted in either employment or society in general or that he  lacks
       the capacity and ability to participate and operate on  a  day-to-day
       basis.
   19. South Africa is similar to the UK in that  is  does  offer  state-run
       healthcare, with small fees charged related to income and  number  of
       dependents.
   20. Although not conceding the point Mr Ball accepted this  was  not  the
       strongest ground of challenge, a sentiment I completely  agree  with.
       Whilst accepting that any transition will be difficult, I do not find
       on evidence made available to the Upper Tribunal that  the  appellant
       has established very significant obstacles to his reintegration  into
       South Africa.
   21. The real issue  in  this  appeal  is  the  question  of  whether  the
       appellant's deportation from the United Kingdom will result in unduly
       harsh consequences for either his wife or their children.
   22. The Court of Appeal has recently examined this issue in AA  (Nigeria)
       v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296  in
       which it was found  that  it  would  usually  be  unnecessary  for  a
       tribunal to refer to anything other than the  leading  Supreme  Court
       and Court of Appeal authorities.  They  are  confirmed  as  being  KO
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53;  R  (Kiarie  and  Byndloss)  v  SSHD
       [2017] UKSC 42; NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662;  and  HA
       (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.
   23. In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
       UKSC 53, the Supreme Court considered the test for and factors to  be
       taken into account when assessing the meaning of  'unduly  harsh'  in
       paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules and section  117C(5)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In paragraph 23,  Lord
       Carnwath held as follows:

           "On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh"  seems  clearly
           intended  to  introduce   a   higher   hurdle   than   that   of
           "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking  account  of  the
           public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign   criminals.
           Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison.   It
           assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness",  that  is  a
           level which may be acceptable or  justifiable  in  the  relevant
           context.  "Unduly" implies something going  beyond  that  level.
           The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1), that is the
           public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  One is
           looking for a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
           necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation
           of a parent.  What it does not require in my view  (and  subject
           to the discussion of  the  cases  in  the  next  section)  is  a
           balancing of the relative levels of  severity  of  the  parent's
           offence, other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by  the
           section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of  sentence.    Nor
           (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT  (Jamaica)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,
           [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64)  can  it  be  equated  with  the
           requirement to show "very compelling reasons".  That would be in
           effect to replicate  the  additional  test  applied  by  section
           117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more."

   24. In HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA
       Civ 1176, Lord Justice Underhill cautioned against a literal  reading
       of paragraph 23 in KO (Nigeria) due to the difficulty in defining the
       level of harshness that would  "necessarily"  be  suffered  by  "any"
       child and emphasises that the underlying concept is  of  an  enhanced
       degree of harshness sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest  in
       deportation of foreign criminals in  the  medium  offender  category.
       Further guidance is given in paragraphs 50 to 53 below follows:

           "50     What light do those passages  shed  on  the  meaning  of
           "unduly  harsh"  (beyond  the   conclusion   on   the   relative
           seriousness issue)?


           51.     The  essential  point   is   that   the   criterion   of
           undue harshness sets a bar which is "elevated" and  carries  a
           "much stronger emphasis" than mere undesirability: see para.  27
           of Lord Carnwath's judgment, approving the  UT's  self-direction
           in MK (Sierra Leone), and para. 35. The UT's self-direction uses
           a battery of synonyms and antonyms: although these should not be
           allowed to become  a  substitute  for  the  statutory  language,
           tribunals may find them of some assistance as a reminder of  the
           elevated nature of the test.  The  reason  why  some  degree  of
           harshness is  acceptable  is  that  there  is  a  strong  public
           interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  (including
           medium offenders): see para. 23.  The  underlying  question  for
           tribunals is whether the harshness which  the  deportation  will
           cause for the partner and/or child is of a sufficiently elevated
           degree to outweigh that public interest.


           52.    However, while recognising the "elevated" nature  of  the
           statutory test, it is important not to lose sight  of  the  fact
           that the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by  the
           test of "very compelling circumstances" in section 117C (6).  As
           Lord Carnwath points out in the second part of para. 23  of  his
           judgment,  disapproving IT  (Jamaica),  if  that  were  so  the
           position of medium offenders and  their  families  would  be  no
           better than that of  serious  offenders.  It  follows  that  the
           observations in the case-law to the effect that it will be  rare
           for the test of "very compelling circumstances" to be  satisfied
           have no application in this context (I have already made  this
           point  -  see  para.  34  above).  The  statutory  intention  is
           evidently that the hurdle representing the  unacceptable  impact
           on a partner or child should be set somewhere between the  (low)
           level applying in the case of persons who are liable to ordinary
           immigration removal (see Lord Carnwath's  reference  to  section
           117B (6) at the start of para. 23) and  the  (very  high)  level
           applying to serious offenders.


           53.    Observations of that kind are, I hope, helpful, but  they
           cannot  identify  an  objectively  measurable  standard.  It  is
           inherent in the nature of an exercise of the  kind  required  by
           section 117C (5) that Parliament intended that tribunals  should
           in each case make an informed evaluative assessment  of  whether
           the effect of the deportation of the parent or partner on  their
           child or partner would be "unduly harsh" in the context  of  the
           strong public interest in the deportation of foreign  criminals;
           and further exposition of that phrase will never be of more than
           limited value."


           ...


           "Peter Jackson LJ:


           ...


           152.   Parliament has enacted two important public interests  in
           cases involving children. Section 117C of  the  Immigration  Act
           2014 enshrines the public interest in the deportation of foreign
           criminals.  Section  55  of   the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
           Immigration Act 2009 requires the Secretary  of  State  to  make
           arrangements to ensure that in her immigration functions she has
           regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
           children,  which  translates  into  a  duty  to  make  the  best
           interests of the child a primary  consideration.  The  decision-
           maker must bring both of these elements into play in  accordance
           with  the  complete  statutory  code,  applying   (as   may   be
           appropriate  in  the  individual  case)  the  fulcrum  of  undue
           harshness,  or  of   very   compelling   circumstances   or   of
           proportionality. A resulting decision to  deport  a  parent  may
           produce  hugely  detrimental  consequences  for  a  child   but,
           provided  his  or  her  best  interests  have  been   adequately
           identified  and  weighed   in   the   balance   as   a   primary
           consideration, the decision will be lawful. But a decision  that
           does not give  primary  consideration  to  the  children's  best
           interests will be liable to be set aside."

   25. In relation to the question of whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
       the family to relocate to South Africa with the  appellant,  I  agree
       with the findings of Judge O'Callaghan in the  earlier  determination
       that [MS] has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  wife,
       that the relationship was formed when his immigration status was  not
       precarious, and that it would be unduly harsh for  [AS]  to  live  in
       South Africa because  of  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
       Appendix FM. This is because she  is  British,  suffering  "long-term
       from a chronic relapsing and remitting disease that has on  a  number
       of occasions lead to flare-ups.", that  relocating  to  South  Africa
       would increase anxiety such that hospitalisation was likely, that her
       medication also led to a heightened risk of  skin  cancer,  and  that
       there would be an adverse impact on her day to day life were  she  in
       South Africa.
   26. The next factor to consider is whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
       AS and their children to remain in the  United  Kingdom  if  he  were
       deported to South Africa.
   27. In relation the impact on the children: in HA  (Iraq)  the  Court  of
       Appeal remind us that in  evaluating  undue  harshness  for  a  child
       decision makers should take into account the Zoumbas principles  [55,
       84, 114, 153], the best interests of the  child  [55],  emotional  as
       well as physical harm [159], relationships with other family  members
       in the UK [120]  and  where  applicable  "the  very  significant  and
       weighty" benefits of British citizenship.
   28. The  matter  must  be  evaluated  only  by  reference  to  the  child
       themselves. To weigh the impact of deportation on the  child  against
       the criminality  of  MS  would  be  to  offend  against  the  seventh
       principle in Zoumbas v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2013] UKSC 74 that a child cannot be blamed for matters for which he
       is not responsible: KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.
   29. In her witness statement dated 20 July 2020 AS writes:

           "3.    When my husband was in prison, it  was  terrible  for  my
                children because of the way  they  are  so  close  to  their
                father. They were so confused, especially  [NS]  our  eldest
                daughter. She was always asked and talking about her  father
                all the time because they are  very  close.  They  are  very
                happy since he was released from prison and like  to  follow
                him everywhere. Since the COVID- 19 lockdown,  we  are  much
                more bonded together. They are more bonded with him  because
                they are girls and as the saying goes, 'girls are closer  to
                their fathers and  boys  to  their  mothers'.  Another  good
                reason for their unique bond is because he has  more  energy
                than me and he is able to run around with them because  they
                are very active.


           4.     If my husband is deported it will be a  disaster  for  me
                and my children because there is no way I can raise them  on
                my own and my mother and siblings will not be able to assist
                me because they have their own  issues.  Especially  in  the
                wake of the  new  normal  caused  by  the  ongoing  COVID-19
                pandemic.


           ...


           7.     [NA] is still suffering from separation anxiety  and  the
                likely effect it will have on her at adulthood if my husband
                is  deported   has   been   carefully   explained   in   the
                psychologist's report from the Private Therapy Clinic. I  am
                quite sure the same thing will  happen  to  [SS]  if  he  is
                deported because she is more mature now than when my husband
                was serving the  prison  term  and  their  bond  has  gotten
                stronger as a result of the COVID 19 lockdown.


           ...


           11.    Our eldest daughter, [NA]  is  suffering  from  bronchial
                asthma and she is currently on  preventative  inhalers.  She
                experienced speech delay  which  her  doctor  attributed  to
                stress and I believe that it will happen again if she has to
                goes through the stress of separation from her father again,
                because her condition deteriorated when my  husband  was  in
                prison but has improved since we started living together  as
                a family unit."

   30. The report referred to by AS, dated 20 October 2019,  is  written  by
       Tamara Licht of Private Therapy. Tamara Licht states  her  specialist
       field is HCPC Registered Psychologist and  Counselling  Psychologist.
       There was no challenge to the suitability of the  author  to  prepare
       the report.
   31. At section 4 of the report Tamara Licht writes:

           "4 My opinion


                According to the American Psychiatry Association,  "distress
                or impairment in social,  academic,  occupational  or  other
                important areas of functioning" (2013) may be  an  indicator
                of mental health disturbance. In  my  professional  opinion,
                [NS] change in behaviour  (anxious  mood),  avoidance  going
                into  school  ('push  time  to  go  to  school')  and   lack
                friendships, signals impairment in her family, academic  and
                social functioning.


                It is my opinion that such impairment and moderate  symptoms
                such  as   stomach   pain   (somatic),   eczema   (somatic),
                depression,   anger,   anxiety,   inattention   and    sleep
                disturbance is  derived  from  separation  anxiety  disorder
                associated to the time [MS] served in  prison  and  moderate
                levels of anxiety as a  consequence  of  [MS]  (her  father)
                facing possible deportation to South Africa.


                The  American   Psychiatric   Association   indicates   that
                "individuals with separation anxiety  disorder  often  limit
                independent activities away from home or attachment  figures
                (e.g., in children avoiding school)" (2013).   For  example,
                [NS] mentioned  that  she  doesn't  like  her  father  'keep
                leaving the house to go to the gym'. She also  avoids  going
                to school.


                Furthermore,  American  Psychiatry  Association   indicates,
                "separation  anxiety  disorder  often  develops  after  life
                stress, especially a loss" (2013). In [NS] case, the loss of
                her father during the time he was in prison and currently  a
                perceived  loss   such   as   "immigration"   (APA,   2013).
                Additionally, in a short space of time, [NS] is  also  faced
                the loss of a sibling (her mother had a miscarriage  earlier
                this  year),  the   loss   of   her   paternal   grandfather
                (approximately a month ago), the  loss  of  regular  contact
                with her half-brother (11-year-old child from [MS]  previous
                relationship) and the loss of her  best  friend  (who  lived
                close to her) when the [S] family moved homes.


                In my opinion, if [NS] was to be  separated  from  [MS],  at
                this  point,  her  overall  quality   of   life   would   be
                significantly affected. Furthermore, since [AS] is currently
                undergoing a  period  of  bereavement  and  given  that  she
                indicated  that  she  finds  it  'hard  to  play'  with  her
                daughters due to a medical condition, she may not be able to
                take part in some activities that a girl of [NS]  age  would
                enjoy and benefit from (emotionally and  socially).  Due  to
                [MS] not being present (if he were to be deported)  to  take
                [NS] to such activities,  she  would  be  deprived  of  such
                activities;  thus  emotional  and  social  growth   may   be
                jeopardised.


                It is my professional opinion that [NS] difficulty  to  make
                friends is related to the fear of loosing them.  Given  that
                [NS] has undergone a period of intense  loss  (as  described
                above), her fear of losing her  friends  prevents  her  from
                forming close relationships.


                In my opinion, it is likely that [NS] ability to  learn  and
                concentrate has  been  and  is  currently  impaired  due  to
                moderate anxiety  levels.  Separation  anxiety  disorder  in
                children leads to school refusal, which in turn may lead  to
                academic difficulties (APA.2013).


                The aforementioned in part may explain  why  a  professional
                assessment that I have reviewed as part of  this  assessment
                suggest that [NS} presents with symptoms similar to those of
                someone with dyslexia.   I  suggest  monitoring  any  traits
                suggestive of dyslexia; however, it is recommended to  first
                assist [NS] with managing her  anxiety  and,  once  this  is
                settled, notice if dyslexia symptoms are present and  assess
                accordingly.  It is also my professional  opinion  that  the
                suggestion of a potential Asperger's diagnosis (included  in
                the autism spectrum  is  unlikely.  Symptoms  of  separation
                anxiety disorder, anxiety and low mood  may  better  explain
                behaviours that sometimes may also be  seen  in  individuals
                diagnosed with autism.


           4.01   Diagnosis


                [NS] symptoms  meet  the  criteria  for  Separation  Anxiety
                Disorder, 309.21 (F93.0), as defined by the  Diagnostic  and
                Statistics  manual  of  Mental   Disorder,   fifth   edition
                (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).


           4.02   Causation


                It appears that [NS] current mental health state (separation
                anxiety disorder and moderate anxiety and low mood)  may  be
                triggered by the perception that she may lose her father, if
                he were to be deported from  the  United  Kingdom  to  South
                Africa.


           4.03   Risk:


                From a  diagnostic  perspective,  the  American  Psychiatric
                Association indicates that "separation anxiety  in  children
                may be associated with increased risk of suicide" (2013).


                I am also concerned that due to [AW] currently undergoing  a
                period of bereavement and given that she indicates that  she
                finds it 'hard to play' with her daughters due to a  medical
                condition she may  not  be  able  to  cope  with  additional
                parenting responsibilities that could arise from [MS]  being
                deported to South Africa  and  how  this  could  affect  her
                parenting skills if left on her  own  and  to  navigate  the
                challenges that come with parenting without a partner.


           4.04   [NS] anxious behaviour could likely improve in  the  long
                term if she were given space  to  further  explore  ways  of
                expressing  and  managing  her  thoughts  and  emotions.   I
                understand she hasn't taken part in  psychological  therapy.
                Literature suggest that the  following  psychotherapies  are
                effective in reducing anxiety and mood problems in children:
                CBT;   interpersonal   psychotherapy    (IPT);    supportive
                interventions;   and   behavioural   family    interventions
                (Bradley, 2001).


                I want to stress that therapy may be  helpful  in  assisting
                [NS]  with  separation  anxiety  symptoms;  however,   since
                therapeutic intervention  hasn't  been  offered  before  the
                symptoms exacerbated (e.g. at the time [MS] started to serve
                time in prison), it may take a long time before [NS] is able
                to learn how to regulate her emotions.


                Furthermore, if [NS] is not  able  to  manage  thoughts  and
                emotions that trigger separation anxiety, there is a risk of
                her suffering from generalised anxiety which  she  may  also
                carry on  to  her  adult  years.  Literature  suggests  that
                anxiety and mood disorders in children and  adolescents  are
                prevalent conditions that my become chronic and may carry  a
                risk of current and later  functional  impairment  (Bradley,
                2001).  In my opinion, if [NS] separation  anxiety  is  left
                untreated, her personal, family, social  and  academic  life
                could likely become severely affected."

   32. The best interests of [NS] lie in favour of her remaining in  the  UK
       and to continue receiving the treatment she requires to  improve  her
       mental health, although it is not clear if she has in  fact  received
       any treatment to date. Tamara Licht's report is also dated 20 October
       2019, nearly two years ago with no update or  indication  of  whether
       treatment has been undertaken and how  successful  or  otherwise  the
       same has been.
   33. The best interests of any child are be brought up  in  a  loving  and
       stable relationship with two caring parents. In that regard the  best
       interests of MS's children who he lives with are best served  by  his
       remaining in the UK.
   34. But that is not the determinative factor as best interests may favour
       a parent remaining in the UK per se, yet the removal of the offending
       parent does not give rise to unduly harsh  consequences  or  tip  the
       balancing exercise in favour of the deportee.
   35. During the time MS was in prison, [AM]  was  able  to  care  for  and
       provide the required day-to-day support the family needed and  access
       support from outside groups. There  are  a  large  number  of  single
       parent families in the UK, some with  health  needs  far  worse  than
       those suffered by [AM]  who  manage  to  parent  their  children  and
       maintain the family unit.
   36. It is accepted that [AW] may not be able to do all she would want  to
       do for the children but that does not mean her standard of  care  and
       parenting will  fall  below  an  acceptable  standard.  There  is  no
       suggestion of any need for the intervention of Social Services if the
       appellant is deported, based upon child protection/neglect concerns.
   37. Although as a result of COVID-19, [AM] has come to depend on  MS  for
       support with regards to the school runs I find the evidence fails  to
       support a finding that the degree of dependency from  MS's  wife  and
       children, and the consequences so his not being able to assist as  he
       has  to  date,  is  such  that  it  will  result  in  'unduly  harsh'
       consequences if MS was no longer able to provide that support.
   38. I accept that deportation will result in harsh consequences for  this
       family unit and that the children will not have  the  same  level  of
       contact with MS and will be limited to contact through indirect means
       such as Skype, telephone, email and letters.
   39. The children currently reside with  their  mother  and  there  is  no
       suggestion this will change.  It  is  not  made  out  assistance  and
       interventions will not be available if  required  for  both  [NS]  in
       helping her deal with her emotional needs or [AS] in relation to  any
       personal or parenting issues. The report of Tamara Licht to  a  large
       extent sets out references to texts  from  the  American  Psychiatric
       Association  and  pontificates  on  what  might  happen  rather  that
       providing a clear indication of what will happen and the consequences
       of the same.
   40. There is also an issue for which Tamara Licht has been criticised  by
       a judge of this Tribunal before, of referring  to  issues  that  have
       never been at large in an appeal. In this case the reference to  risk
       of suicide is a further example of  this  as  there  is  no  credible
       suggestion this was a live issue in this appeal.
   41. A more recent development is that [AS] is pregnant with  MS's  child.
       It is accepted that the current Covid-19 pandemic is likely to pose a
       greater risk to her and place her in the vulnerable category, but  it
       is not acceptance that a real risk actually  exists.  The  Government
       Covid-19 website confirms that  pregnant  women  were  said  to  fall
       within the vulnerable group as a precaution,  not  because  there  is
       scientific evidence that as a group, they  face  a  greater  risk  of
       infection.
   42. I do not find the appellant has made out that if he is  removed  from
       the United Kingdom, when considering all the evidence  in  the  round
       and whilst accepting it will result in harsh  consequences  for  this
       family unit, will result in what can properly be found on an holistic
       assessment to be 'unduly harsh' consequences such  as  to  warrant  a
       finding  that  the  appellant  is  able  to  succeed   in   resisting
       deportation on the basis of either of  the  exceptions  contained  in
       section 117C or the Immigration Rules.
   43. Moving on to consider Article 8 ECHR, the above findings are relevant
       to considering the proportionality of the respondent's  decision.  It
       is accepted the appellant has family life with his wife and  children
       as well as a private life in the United Kingdom with his  home,  work
       when undertaken, his church, and friendship groups, and that the same
       were formed at the time he was legally  entitled  to  reside  in  the
       United Kingdom with settled status.
   44. It is accepted that the respondent's decision will have  consequences
       such as to engage article 8 in relation to the interference  in  both
       the appellant's private and family life and those of the other family
       members with him.
   45. It is accepted the appellant's sentence  of  32  months  imprisonment
       places him in the medium category  of  offenders  which  engaged  the
       question of whether any of the exceptions applied. The appellant,  in
       failing to establish that he can rely on  either  exception  has  not
       able to show that those matters the respondent considers  demonstrate
       the deportation decision is not proportionate in statute,  have  been
       made out.
   46. It is not in dispute that it is never pleasant for a child or partner
       in a close family unit for the offending parent or adult  partner  to
       be deported. It is accepted that at this time there may be heightened
       concerns as a result of the Covid 19 pandemic which is prevalent both
       in the United Kingdom and in South Africa, but  as  submitted  by  Mr
       Deller this is a transient issue whilst the virus is  currently  with
       us.
   47. Post HA (Iraq) it is necessary for the appellant  to  establish  that
       the best interests  of  the  child  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
       appellant's case to be determinative.  Having  undertaken  the  fresh
       holistic examination of this case, I do not find it  has  been  shown
       that the best interests of any of the children are the  determinative
       point.
   48. Whilst the appellant has taken up steps  to  deal  with  his  alcohol
       problems, demonstrated an improvement since  the  commission  of  the
       index  offence,  and  I  have  noted   the   emotional   difficulties
       highlighted in the evidence and lack of any intervention having  been
       sought by the parents to deal with the same to assist  [NS],  I  also
       note the availability the same as the child will be  staying  in  the
       United Kingdom. I find the case relied upon by the appellant  is  not
       sufficient to show that the strong public interest in his deportation
       from  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  facts  of  this  case  has  been
       outweighed.
   49. I find that the family's circumstances do  not  establish  there  are
       very compelling circumstances outside the  exceptions  sufficient  to
       make the appellant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom  an  unlawful
       interference with any of the protected rights relied upon pursuant to
       article 8 ECHR.




Decision

   50. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity.

   51. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 October 2020

