

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12480/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2016                            |On 24 October 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                             samia bushra malik
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Samia Bushra Malik (in person) and Mr Abdullah
                    Malik (husband)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Raikes that was promulgated
    on 16 February 2016.

 2. Judge Raikes dismissed the appeal against the immigration  decision  of
    24 November 2015 because the appellant had not  satisfied  the  partner
    provisions set out in appendix FM to the immigration rules and  because
    the decision was not contrary to s.6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998
    because the decision was proportionate  in  terms  of  article  8  ECHR
    private and family life rights.     At  the  heart  of  Judge  Raikes's
    decision is the finding  that  the  appellant  failed  to  provide  the
    specified financial evidence with her application.   It  is  immaterial
    that evidence was available at the date of  hearing  and  currently  to
    show that the financial requirements were and are met.  The immigration
    rules required the  evidence  to  accompany  the  application  and  the
    appellant acknowledges that did not happen.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on what is in essence  a  "near  miss"
    argument.  The Court of Appeal has made it clear that such an  approach
    is not permissible because article 8 cannot be used to  circumvent  the
    immigration rules (see for example the decision in SSHD  v  KG  (India)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 477).  I cannot, therefore, find  legal  error  in  the
    decision and reasoning of Judge Raikes.

 4. Because the appellant does not have a legal representative, in reaching
    my decision I have had regard to the decision and reasons as  a  whole.
    I find no obvious legal error in  Judge  Raikes's  decision.   All  the
    evidence was considered both within and outside the immigration  rules.
    The  judicial  findings  are  properly  reasoned,  particularly   those
    relating to the issue of insurmountable obstacles.

 5. Of course, I recognise the difficulties  this  outcome  places  on  the
    appellant and her family.  Ms Aboni advised that the appellant would be
    entitled to make a fresh application whilst staying in the UK  as  long
    as the application is made to the Home Office within  28  days  of  the
    conclusion of the appeal process (which  is  likely  to  be  when  this
    decision is issued).  Otherwise, she will be treated as  an  overstayer
    and any application will have to be made from outside the UK.  I cannot
    comment on  such  matters;  it  will  be  for  the  appellant  to  find
    independent legal advice to examine her options.

Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons statement of  FtT  Judge
Raikes and her decision is upheld.



                               Signed                 Date 24 October 2016


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
