

                                      [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12087/2015
     HU/12088/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2017                            |On 23 October 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          master kelvin edward prah
                           miss kelsey yeboah prah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Sharma of Counsel instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the
    respondents are Master Prah and his sister Miss Prah, citizens of Ghana
    born on 21 June 2002 and 14 January 2004.  However for the purposes  of
    this decision and reasons I refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal where  Master  Prah  and  Miss  Prah  were  the
    appellants.

Background

 2. The appellants before the First-tier Tribunal appealed the decision  of
    the respondent dated 20 October 2015 to refuse their  applications  for
    entry clearance to join their mother in the UK  pursuant  to  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended).   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 April 2017 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet
    allowed the appellants' appeals.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer appealed on the basis that the judge failed
    to give adequate findings on a material matter; it was argued the judge
    allowed the appeal on the basis of serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations under paragraph 297(i)(f)  but  that  the  reasons
    given, on the basis of the sponsor's earnings and her life with her son
    Karl could not be regarded as serious and compelling;  it  was  further
    submitted that the judge had found at paragraph  18  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellants' grandmother was  sufficiently  unwell  to
    look after them and there was no  other  evidence  or  updated  medical
    evidence stating that the grandmother cannot continue to look after the
    children as she has done to date.  In light of those findings there was
    no basis for the judge finding that paragraph 297(i)(f) is met; it  was
    further submitted that the appellants' grounds were restricted to human
    rights grounds whereas the judge had made findings in relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules only.

Error of Law Hearing

 4. Mr Wilding did not rely  on  the  final  ground  as  he  conceded  that
    paragraph 297 was one of the paragraphs  where  the  Immigration  Rules
    were a complete code and any error the judge made was not material  and
    the judge did not allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  (which
    would have been an error) but rather allowed the appeal.

 5. However Mr Wilding submitted that there were  material  errors  in  the
    judge's decision.  Whilst he considered that a brief decision in itself
    did not amount to a material error of law the judge's findings at  [19]
    did not explain why or how there were serious and compelling family  or
    other considerations which made the appellants' exclusion  undesirable.
    It was submitted that this conclusion was particularly  perverse  given
    that at paragraph [18] the judge had found that there was no reason why
    the appellants' grandmother  could  not  continue  to  look  after  the
    children as she  had  done  to  date.   Ms  Sharma  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent  submitted  that  if  the  medical  report  which  had  been
    submitted with the Rule 24 Notice had been considered then  the  appeal
    would have been allowed under paragraph 297(i)(e).  She submitted  that
    the appellants' grandmother was illiterate, that she was unwell and not
    in a position to look after them.  However she conceded that there were
    matters that should have been considered by the judge in the decision.

Error of Law

 6. I am not satisfied that Judge Sweet gave adequate reasons  for  finding
    that the appellants met the requirements of paragraph  297(i)(e)  which
    provides as follows:

    Requirements for indefinite leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled  or  being
    admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

         "297.  The requirements to be met by a  person  seeking  indefinite
                leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a  parent,
                parents or a relative present and settled or being  admitted
                for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

                (i)    is seeking leave to enter  to  accompany  or  join  a
                    parent, parents or a relative in one  of  the  following
                    circumstances:

                    (a)    both parents  are  present  and  settled  in  the
                        United Kingdom; or

                    (b)    both parents  are  being  admitted  on  the  same
                        occasion for settlement; or

                    (c)    one parent is present and settled in  the  United
                        Kingdom and the other is being admitted on the same
                        occasion for settlement; or

                    (d)    one parent is present and settled in  the  United
                        Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion  for
                        settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                    (e)    one parent is present and settled in  the  United
                        Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion  for
                        settlement and has had sole responsibility for  the
                        child's upbringing; or

                    (f)    one parent or a relative is present  and  settled
                        in the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same
                        occasion for settlement and there are  serious  and
                        compelling family  or  other  considerations  which
                        make  exclusion  of  the  child   undesirable   and
                        suitable  arrangements  have  been  made  for   the
                        child's care;

                    ...".

 7. The judge made findings of fact at [17] of  the  decision  and  reasons
    that the children both attend school with the first appellant currently
    living at school preparing for his final exams.  The judge  also  found
    that the sponsor came to the UK in 2008 leaving  the  children  in  the
    care of her mother who at the date of the hearing  was  aged  66.   The
    sponsor entered the UK  with  an  EEA  family  visa  on  the  basis  of
    marriage.  Her two children are the first and second  appellants.   The
    judge took into consideration the witness statement evidence  from  the
    appellants' father that he had lost touch and  had  no  direct  contact
    with the children although  he  had  provided  some  limited  financial
    support following their divorce but had never visited the  children  in
    Ghana and had left them in the care of their  mother  and  grandmother.
    However the judge noted that this was conflicted with  the  grounds  of
    appeal where it stated that  both  the  appellants'  parents  had  been
    responsible  for  their  upbringing.   The   judge   also   took   into
    consideration  that  although  the  sponsor  claimed   to   have   sole
    responsibility for the children she had help from her  mother  who  had
    looked after the children.  Significantly the judge did not accept that
    the appellants' mother was sufficiently unwell to  be  unable  to  look
    after the children as she had done so since 2008 and that  the  medical
    report  that  was  provided,  dated  3  July  2015,  showing  that  the
    grandmother  suffered  hypertension  and  diabetes,  together  with   a
    photograph which purported to show that the appellants' grandmother had
    an injury to her hand, did not amount to evidence that the  grandmother
    could not continue to look after the children as she had done to date

 8. It is a matter of settled law that sole responsibility is not  confined
    to just financial support but also  relates  to  matters  of  emotional
    support and an abiding interest in a child's welfare and wellbeing over
    the period of separation.  The appellants have resided in  Ghana  since
    their mother came to the UK in 2008.  The sponsor  has  a  further  son
    living with her in the UK who is 7 years of age.

 9. The judge noted the conflict in the evidence between what was  said  by
    the appellants' father and what was said in the grounds of appeal as to
    both appellants' parents having been responsible for their  upbringing.



10. In terms of the judge's reasoning at [19], that he  took  into  account
    the evidence from the sponsor as to  her  current  situation  "both  in
    respect of her earnings and her life with her 7 year old son Karl"  and
    noted that the sponsor explained that she had been unable to visit  her
    children on a regular basis until recently but had made money  transfer
    receipts and provided evidence of her  interest  in  their  school  and
    church, the judge has failed  to provide adequate reasons or indeed any
    reasons at all as to why this amounts to serious and compelling  family
    or other considerations which make exclusion undesirable; it is unclear
    how or why the sponsor's earnings and her life with  her  third  child,
    Karl  would  amount  to  serious  and  compelling  family   and   other
    considerations which would make exclusion undesirable.  I am  satisfied
    therefore that there is an error of law such that the decision to allow
    the appeal should be set aside.

Re-Making

11. Both parties indicated that there was  sufficient  evidence  and  fact-
    finding in the decision before me to allow me to  remake  the  decision
    taking into  account  the  additional  evidence  in  the  form  of  the
    additional  medical  report  and  photographs  provided.    Ms   Sharma
    submitted that the Tribunal did not need to hear from the sponsor.

12. Mr Wilding submitted that given the findings of fact  in  the  decision
    the appeal must fall to be dismissed and that the medical report, dated
    15 September 2017 took the appellants no further.  Mr Wilding submitted
    that the medical report indicated that the appellants' grandmother  had
    attended the facility on 23 September 2014 which was  three  years  ago
    and submitted that it did not address how the  appellants'  grandmother
    was incapable of looking after her grandchildren now.

13. Ms Sharma submitted that if the medical report  referred  to  had  been
    before the judge he would have found that the  appellants'  mother  had
    sole responsibility.  It was further submitted by Ms  Sharma  that  the
    evidence was that the mother was the only person  who  can  assist  the
    children and that the son has moved to boarding school and  that  there
    are difficulties with the grandmother's care.

Findings and Reasons

14. I must consider this appeal as a human rights appeal as the appellants'
    right of appeal under section 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 to human rights only.  However I note the concession of
    Mr Wilding that paragraph 297 is considered a complete code in relation
    to Article 8 and where the provisions of paragraph 297  are  met  there
    would be a breach of Article 8 if an applicant is refused entry.

15. I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that  family  life  exists
    between the minor appellants and their mother  despite  the  long  term
    separation and that the decision arguably interferes with  that  family
    life.  I am satisfied that the decision is in accordance with  the  law
    and for the purposes of maintenance of effective immigration control  I
    therefore go on to consider whether that decision is proportionate.

16. In so doing I rely on the findings of  fact  of  Judge  Sweet  which  I
    preserve.  These include the lack of adequate medical evidence that the
    appellants' grandmother cannot continue to look after the  children  as
    she has done to date.  I have considered  the  evidence  in  the  round
    including in light of the  additional  photograph  of  the  appellants'
    grandmother, which I considered takes their case  no  further  and  the
    medical report of 15 September 2017.  This report  indicates  that  the
    appellants' grandmother reported to the clinic for the first time on 23
    September 2014 with complaints of weakness on  the  left  side  of  her
    body, headache, palpitation, dizziness and fainting.  The  report  goes
    on to state that she was diagnosed with a stroke  secondary  to  severe
    hypertension and diabetes and that she was  admitted  and  subsequently
    managed on medication and physiotherapy.  The report goes on  to  state
    that the appellants' grandmother's blood pressure and  sugar  have  not
    been controlled and it has "major incapacity to perform on her own  and
    therefore all assistance to relief her is welcome" (sic).

17. I note that as referred to in the decision  of  Judge  Sweet  the  same
    clinic provided a letter dated 3 July 2015, which made no reference  to
    a stroke  instead  simply  stating  that  the  appellants'  grandmother
    suffers from hypertension and diabetes and listing the medication  that
    she is in receipt of.  I have considered the new evidence in the  round
    but can give it limited weight as there is no adequate evidence  as  to
    how  the  condition  of  the  appellants'  grandmother  has  made   her
    incapacitated to perform on her own or indeed why this was not detailed
    in the previous  report  from  the  same  clinic  dated  3  July  2015.
    Although the report is dated  15  September  2017  and  refers  to  the
    appellants'  grandmother  attending  in  September  2014  there  is  no
    adequate information or evidence as to any subsequent visits and it  is
    unclear whether the report is referring to  her  condition  now  or  in
    2014.

18. The findings of fact of  Judge  Sweet,  including  that  he  took  into
    account the sponsor's circumstances and that she was  unable  to  visit
    the children until recently but had made money  transfer  receipts  and
    provided evidence of her interest in the school and church  which  they
    attend, stand.  I take into account that the appellants were  currently
    separated from their brother who is resident in the UK.

19. I have considered the best interests of the children in this  case.   I
    have taken into consideration that the children  have  resided  all  of
    their lives in Ghana and the majority of which they have been cared for
    by their grandmother.   However  I  have  considered  and  applied  the
    relevant case law in TD (paragraph 297(i)(e) sole responsibility) Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049 which reminds that sole responsibility is a  factual
    matter to be decided upon all the evidence and that where one parent is
    not involved in the child's upbringing the issue may arise between  the
    remaining parent and others who  have  day-to-day  care  of  the  child
    abroad.  The test is whether the  parent  has  continuing  control  and
    direction  over  the  child's  upbringing  including  making  all   the
    important decisions in the child's life.

20. It was set out in the witness statement of the  sponsor  that  she  had
    left the children under the day to day care  of  her  mother  as  their
    father was not around and that she had come  to  the  UK  including  to
    provide a better life for her children.  It was stated that she was not
    previously able to sponsor her children and that her  mother  was  then
    fit and well but she is now in a more  secure  environment.   She  also
    noted that the children's biological father did not visit them in Ghana
    but her ex-husband  Mr  Sammy  Amponsah  Davis  initially  visited  her
    children and the sponsor had been able to visit them in  the  past  few
    years and evidence of this was provided.  I am not satisfied  therefore
    that there was any material conflict in the sponsor's evidence.

21. The appellants' mother provided evidence, which I accept, that she  had
    taken on sole responsibility for her  children  and  had  continued  to
    transfer monies to her mother for  their  benefit  and  provided  money
    transfer receipts as well as her then husband supporting  her  to  look
    after the children.   The  sponsor  provided  evidence  that  she  made
    decisions in relation to her children's studies and was "in touch  with
    the school and she was responsible for payment of  school  fees".   Her
    elder child, her son is currently at boarding school.  It was also  the
    sponsor's evidence which is not disputed that she made  a  decision  in
    relation to the  church  they  attended  and  communicates  with  their
    pastor.  This  was  supported  by  additional  letters  from  both  the
    appellants' school and church confirming  their  ongoing  contact  with
    their mother who has been in regular contact both about their education
    and pastoral wellbeing.

22. Taking all this into account, although the judge found that  there  was
    insufficient  evidence   that   the   appellants'   mother   has   sole
    responsibility for their upbringing primarily it would  appear  because
    there was no medical evidence stating that the  grandmother  could  not
    continue to look after the children as she had done to date this failed
    to engage with the requirements of 297(i)(e) and the  jurisprudence  in
    relation to the meaning of sole responsibility.  The fact that there is
    limited evidence to show that the  appellants'  grandmother  could  not
    continue in the circumstances that she has  done  does  not  mean  that
    responsibility has been shared with her.

23. On the basis of the consistent evidence I am satisfied that the sponsor
    has  had  sole  responsibility.   This  included  evidence   from   the
    appellants' mother, the sponsor and the supporting  evidence  from  the
    appellants' father and their grandmother who confirmed that the sponsor
    has taken all the major  decisions  concerning  the  appellants'  lives
    together with evidence  from  the  school  and  church,  the  financial
    evidence and the photographic evidence of the sponsor's visits together
    with the evidence from the first  appellant  who  provided  the  letter
    dated 13 January 2017 to his mother setting out what he  was  doing  at
    school and that he wished  to  join  his  mother.   There  was  also  a
    handwritten statement dated 4 April 2017 from  the  appellants'  father
    confirming that he was in a relationship with their mother from 2000 to
    2004 and that he left Ghana in 2003 when the sponsor was pregnant  with
    the second appellant and he came to the UK on the basis of marriage  to
    a Dutch national.  He confirmed that  he  was  unable  to  provide  any
    financial support to the sponsor or the children  and  that  they  lost
    touch.   He  further  confirmed  that  "from  birth  Diana   has   been
    responsible for caring for the children.  I have had no direct  contact
    with them.  I had provided some  financial  support  following  Diana's
    divorce, when I have been in a position to do so".  He  also  confirmed
    that he had never visited the children in Ghana and they  continued  to
    be cared for by their mother.

24. On the basis of all the evidence before me  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellants' sponsor has continued to have sole responsibility  for  the
    care of her children and that their grandmother has merely provided day-
    to-day care and has not been responsible for making any other decisions
    in relation to the welfare of her grandchildren who have been  provided
    for both emotionally and  financially,  by  their  mother.   I  am  not
    satisfied that any limited assistance that the appellants'  mother  had
    from the children's father for a short period and from  her  ex-husband
    amounts to shared responsibility.

25. Applying those findings of fact to Article 8, I am satisfied  that  the
    appellants have in fact demonstrated that their  mother  has  had  sole
    responsibility  for  their  upbringing  and  therefore  they  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  This  is  a  significant  factor  therefore
    given that these Rules are a complete code in considering Article 8.  I
    have taken into consideration Section 117 of the 2002 Act.  However the
    evidence indicates  that  the  appellants  who  are  minors  will  have
    financial assistance from their mother and such was not  disputed.   It
    was also not disputed that the appellants speak  English  and  this  is
    evidence including by the supporting letters before me.

26. I have taken into account that  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest.  However in  light  of  my  findings
    that the appellants meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules this
    public interest has limited weight.  I have taken into account that the
    best interests of all the children are to be  reunited.   I  also  take
    into account  as  one  of  the  factors  that  although  there  may  be
    inadequate evidence that the appellants' grandmother could not continue
    circumstances as she has done, she is 67 and there is evidence of  some
    difficulties with her  health  which  I  accept  has  precipitated  the
    decision of the sponsor to bring her children to the UK.

27. I am satisfied  therefore  that  the  decision  is  a  disproportionate
    interference with the family life of the appellants,  the  sponsor  and
    the sponsor's third child.

Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of  law.
    I remake the decision allowing the appellants' appeals on human  rights
    grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 19 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was sought and  no  fee  award  is  made  given  that  adequate
evidence of sole responsibility was not produced until the appeal.


Signed                                  Date:  19 October 201

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

