
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/12111/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 December 2018                     |On 14 January 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mr Md Mohiuddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Zahra & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley in which she allowed the  appeal  of
    the Respondent  (who  I  shall  call  "the  Claimant"),  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh, against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The application under appeal was refused on  26  September  2017.   The
    Claimant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appeal came before Judge O'Malley on 2 October 2018 and was allowed  on
    human rights grounds. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was  granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge L Murray on 31 October 2018 in the following terms

       The grounds assert that the Judge erred  in  failing  adequately  to
       address why the explanation offered by the Appellant in relation  to
       the Respondent's evidence that he had used a proxy in his TOIEC test
       was an innocent one. It is asserted that the Tribunal failed to give
       adequate reasons for  holding  that  a  person  who  clearly  speaks
       English would have  no  reason  to  secure  a  test  certificate  by
       deception.


       It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  give  adequate
       reasons for finding that the  appellant  had  provided  an  innocent
       explanation for his  score  of  200  out  of  200  in  October  2011
       particularly in view of the fact that he had failed the  test  twice
       in the months before the test of October 2011 in  respect  of  which
       fraud was alleged.


       SM and Qadir (ETS-Evidence-Burden of Proof) [2016].


 Background


 3. The history of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Claimant  (the
    Appellant in the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal)  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh born on 10 October 1975. He arrived in the United Kingdom on
    19 April 2007 as a student and his leave  to  remain  was  subsequently
    extended until 21 September 2017 as an entrepreneur. On  1  April  2017
    the Claimant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence. This application was refused on 26 September 2017 and is the
    subject of this appeal.


 4. The basis of the  refusal  was,  essentially,  two-fold.  Firstly,  the
    Secretary of State considered that the Claimant had fraudulently used a
    proxy during a TOEIC speaking test on 18  October  2011  in  connection
    with a previous application to extend leave to remain. As a result, the
    Secretary of State considered  that  the  Claimant's  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good because his conduct
    made it undesirable for him to be allowed to stay in the  UK.  Secondly
    the Secretary of State considered that  as  a  result  of  his  use  of
    deception his application  under  paragraph  276  ADE  (1)  failed  the
    suitability requirement of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appeal came before Judge O'Malley and was allowed. The Judge  found
    firstly that the Claimant did  not  use  a  proxy  during  the  English
    language test and did take and pass all the TOEIC tests. Secondly,  she
    found that the Claimant had been living in the United Kingdom for  more
    than 10 years, that he has a number of business in the  United  Kingdom
    and that he has a family life in the United Kingdom with his  wife  and
    children.  The  Claimant's  wife  and  children  are  all   Bangladeshi
    citizens. The Judge found that as the Appellant met the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules and further that as his daughter was a qualifying
    child under the terms of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 it would be disproportionate to expect the Claimant to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

Submissions


 6. At the hearing before me Mrs Holmes appeared on behalf of the Secretary
    of State and Mr Jesurum represented the Claimant. Mr Jesurum applied to
    submit a Rule 24 response out of time. Ms Holmes  raised  no  objection
    and, the rule  24  response  being  no  more  than  a  set  of  written
    submissions, I granted the application.


 7. Mrs Holmes relied on the grounds and said  that  whereas  the  Tribunal
    accepted that the evidential burden fell upon the Claimant to offer  an
    innocent explanation the Judge had not  adequately  addressed  why  she
    found that he had done so.  It  was  not  clear  why  the  evidence  he
    presented excluded the use of a proxy test taker. Mrs  Holmes  accepted
    that a supplementary bundle has been filed by the Claimant at the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing which included  a  detailed  explanation  of  the
    circumstances under which the Claimant took the test and  a  photograph
    of the test location.


 8. I did not ask Mr Jesurum to address me. I said  that  I  was  satisfied
    that the Judge had taken account of all  relevant  evidence,  including
    the public interest, and had reached a sustainable  conclusion  on  the
    facts before her and  I  gave  an  extempore  decision  dismissing  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.


Decision

 9. This is a TOEIC case where it is suggested by the  Secretary  of  State
    that  the  Claimant  used  a  proxy  test  taker  at   the   Portsmouth
    International College.  An interesting feature of this case is that  it
    is common ground between the Secretary of State and the  Claimant  that
    the voice on the voice recordings of the test taken is not the voice of
    the Claimant.  At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
    accepted by the Judge that the Secretary  of  State  passed  the  first
    evidential burden and therefore that it turned to the Claimant to offer
    an  innocent  explanation.   The  Claimant  did   offer   an   innocent
    explanation.  His innocent explanation is very clear, that was that  he
    at no time went  to  Portsmouth  or  to  the  Portsmouth  International
    College.  He did not need to because he took the test at  Opal  College
    in London.  He gave details as  to  when  he  took  the  test  and  the
    location in which he  took  the  test.   He  provided  a  supplementary
    witness statement giving those details that included  a  photograph  of
    the location of where the test took place and he gave oral evidence  to
    support  that  supplementary  witness  statement.   Having  heard   the
    Appellant's evidence the Judge was  satisfied  that  he  had  given  an
    innocent explanation and that he had taken the  test  himself  at  Opal
    College.




10. The Secretary of State was not represented at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing. In seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal it  does
    not appear that the Secretary of State took any note  of  the  evidence
    presented  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  the  Claimant.  This   is
    unfortunate. Where the Secretary  of  State  chooses  not  to  field  a
    representative before the First-tier Tribunal but then seeks  to  argue
    that the First-tier Tribunal did not take account of the evidence  that
    was before it the Secretary of State should at the  very  least  review
    the evidence that was before the Tribunal. If the  Secretary  of  State
    had done so in this case it is unlikely that he would have pursued this
    appeal.




11. In conclusion the Judge gives more than adequate reasons  for  reaching
    her decision and in those circumstances, I find no error of law in  the
    Judge's decision.  The appeal of the Secretary of  State  is  therefore
    dismissed.

Summary




12. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.






Signed                                  Date 2 January 2019
[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


