
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/12128/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2018                            |On 30 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                             SANDRIA MARIA KERR
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Price, instructed by Morgan Mark solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brokelsby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hanley, promulgated on 10 March 2017.  The appellant is  a  Jamaican
       national born in 1968 and her immigration history is recited in  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


    2.   The judge carried out a full summary of  the  background  and  the
       evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  others  and  came  to  the
       conclusion at paragraph 44 that, on the face3 of it,  the  appellant
       and his sponsor met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  which
       would entitle her to a spousal visa in the event that  she  were  to
       return to Jamaica and make that application from  overseas.  However
       the concluded that there were no exceptional circumstance such  that
       the appeal could be determined in the appellant's favour.


    3.   This is by any account a detailed and careful  decision,  but  the
       subsequent decision of the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11
       has redefined the landscape when considering public interest factors
       and the possibility of  an  out-of-country  visa  application  being
       granted.  Paragraph 51 of Agyarko reads as follows:

           "Whether the applicant is in the United Kingdom  unlawfully,  or
           is entitled to remain in the United  Kingdom  only  temporarily,
           however, the significance of this consideration depends on  what
           the outcome of immigration  control  might  otherwise  be.   For
           example,  if  an  applicant  would  otherwise  be  automatically
           deported as a foreign criminal, then the weight  of  the  public
           interest  in  his  or  her  removal  will  generally   be   very
           considerable.  If, on the other hand, an  applicant  -  even  if
           residing in the UK unlawfully -  was  otherwise  certain  to  be
           granted leave to enter, at least if  an  application  were  made
           from outside the United Kingdom, then there might be  no  public
           interest in his or her removal.  The point is illustrated by the
           decision  in  Chikwamba  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department."


    4.   In the light of the guidance now available from the Supreme Court,
       I cannot be satisfied that  the  issue  received  the  detailed  and
       focussed scrutiny required, nor that the delicate balance of  public
       interest  considerations  was  properly  and  fairly  conducted   in
       accordance with the relevant principles. My  preliminary  view  that
       this matter required to be looked at  afresh  was  not  resisted  on
       behalf of the Home Secretary, which was entirely  realistic  in  the
       circumstances.


    5.   Ms Price, who appears for the appellant, urges me  to  retain  the
       matter in the Upper Tribunal and to remake the decision.  I  do  not
       consider that to  be  appropriate.   The  proportionality  balancing
       exercise is a careful  one  which  is  fact-sensitive.   It  is  not
       appropriate to make preserve the judge's findings of fact  or  those
       as to credibility.


    6.   There is a flaw in this decision which can  only  be  remedied  by
       remitting the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision  to
       be remade by a judge other Judge Hanley.


Notice of Decision

   1) Having found a material error of law, the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal herein is set aside.

   2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
      by a judge other that Judge Hanley. No findings of fact are preserved.

   3) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         29 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



