
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12818/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 25 November 2020                        |On 3 December 2020              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr J Reynolds, counsel, instructed by Daniel Aramide
Solicitors


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("the  appellant")
         has been granted permission to appeal against the decision of Judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal Monson ("the judge"), promulgated  on  4
         June  2020,  allowing  the  human  rights  appeal  of   OOO   ("the
         respondent") against the appellant's decision dated  15  July  2019
         refusing the respondent's human rights claim.

      2. The respondent is a national of Nigeria born in 1991.  She  entered
         the UK on 21 January 2011 as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  and  was
         granted further periods of leave in  the  same  capacity  until  15
         October 2014. A human rights application based on the  respondent's
         relationships with her mother, siblings and cousins,  all  of  whom
         are British citizens, was refused on 12 December 2014. Although  an
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was initially  allowed  by  Judge
         Malins, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Black found that judge  Malins'
         decision was vitiated by legal errors and the  respondent's  appeal
         was  ultimately  dismissed.  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Black
         observed however that there had been no challenge to Judge  Malins'
         findings of fact as regards the respondent's  circumstances.  These
         included findings that the respondent had no  immediate  family  in
         Nigeria and that her immediate family was living in the UK.  Deputy
         Upper Tribunal Black also found that the respondent had  lived  the
         majority of her life in Nigeria, that she had not lost ties to  the
         country, and that she would be able to rekindle  her  social  ties,
         contacts and cultural links. The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  found
         that the respondent was highly educated and motivated and would  be
         able to find work in Nigeria using the  skills  and  education  she
         obtained in the UK. The respondent became appeal  rights  exhausted
         on 20 April 2017.

      3. On 29 February 2019 the respondent made  a  fresh  application  for
         leave to remain on family/private  life  grounds.  The  application
         form  FLR(FP)  submitted  by  the  respondent  indicated  that  her
         application was based on private  life  rights  and  made  fleeting
         reference to J, a child living in the  same  property  as  her.  In
         completing the application form the respondent stated, in  response
         to  questions  enquiring  about   individuals   affected   if   her
         application was refused "[J] will be affected negatively",  and  "I
         am a carer of [J] and he will be negatively". The application  form
         gave no further details of J or  the  nature  of  the  respondent's
         relationship with him.

      4. A covering letter from Daniel Aramide Solicitors dated 4 March 2019
         asserted in general terms that the respondent had  close  relations
         in the UK but made no reference to J. It does not appear  that  the
         human rights claim was supported by any other evidence relating  to
         J. This is confirmed  by  reference  to  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter. In summarising  the  respondent's  human  rights  claim  no
         reference was made to J. This suggests that no further evidence  or
         representations were made on the respondent's behalf  with  respect
         to her relationship  with  J.  The  appellant  concluded  that  the
         respondent did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  of
         the  immigration  rules,  or  that  there   were   exceptional   or
         compassionate circumstances outside of the immigration  rules  such
         that  the  refusal  of  leave  to   remain   would   constitute   a
         disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR. The respondent  appealed
         the appellant's decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to
         s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The appeal was initially listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Shaerf on 16 December 2019. The appeal was on a float list
         which was unfortunate given that the respondent wanted  to  call  6
         additional witnesses. Neither party had the judicial  decisions  in
         respect of the respondent's earlier appeals.  Although  an  initial
         bundle had been prepared by  the  respondent  for  the  hearing  it
         became apparent to both the presenting officer and Mr Reynolds, who
         represented the respondent  (and  who  continues  to  do  so),  and
         eventually to Judge Shaerf, that  there  was  limited  evidence  in
         respect of  one  of  the  central  issues  being  advanced  by  the
         respondent, namely, her relationship with J, her 2nd cousin. J, who
         was 4 � years old at the time, had been diagnosed on  the  autistic
         spectrum and the  respondent  was  said  to  have  a  strong  carer
         relationship with him. It was claimed that J's best interests would
         be deleteriously affected if the respondent was removed from the UK
         and that there would be a breach of his Article 8 human rights. The
         hearing was therefore adjourned to enable further  evidence  to  be
         provided. It is important to note that Judge Shaerf's short  record
         of proceedings makes no reference to  any  "new  matter"  issue  as
         understood in s.85 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         2002, and there is no reference to the appellant giving her consent
         to have the respondent's relationship with  J  treated  as  a  "new
         matter".

      6. The appellant was unfortunately not represented at the new hearing.
         The judge made it clear in his decision that the central  issue  in
         the appeal was  the  impact  of  the  appellant's  decision  on  an
         Autistic Spectrum Disorder child for whom the respondent acted as a
         carer [1]. The judge  summarised  the  earlier  decision  of  Judge
         Malins and the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Black,  and
         the Reasons for Refusal Letter. The judge summarised  the  evidence
         before  him,  which  focused  on  the  relationship   between   the
         respondent and J and his particular needs.  The  judge  heard  oral
         evidence from the respondent  and  her  witnesses,  most  of  which
         related to the negative impact that the respondent's removal  would
         have on J.

      7. In the section of his decision headed "Discussion and Findings" the
         judge found that the respondent exercised delegated  responsibility
         for J's day-to-day care, particularly when J's mother was  working,
         that J slept in the same bed as the  respondent  most  nights,  and
         that J was  likely  to  have  acquired  a  "very  strong  emotional
         attachment" to the respondent such that it would  be  in  his  best
         interests for the current care arrangements to  continue.  At  [57]
         the judge satisfied himself that the  respondent  had  built  up  a
         private life "of a special and  compelling  character  through  her
         role  as  a  carer-giver  to  her  autistic  cousin,  and  this,  I
         combination with a  due  recognition  of  what  is  in  [J's]  best
         interests, tips the scales in the  [respondent's]  favour."  Having
         satisfied  himself  that   there   were   sufficiently   compelling
         circumstances to justify the respondent  being  granted  Article  8
         relief outside the immigration rules, the appeal was allowed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

      8. The grounds of appeal contend, firstly,  that  the  judge  was  not
         entitled to conclude that the respondent's  Article  8  rights  had
         been breached on the evidence before him and for the reasons given.
         The second  ground  of  appeal  contends  that  the  issue  of  the
         respondent's relationship with J constituted a "new  matter"  under
         s.85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  that
         the appellant had not given her consent for the "new matter" to  be
         considered by the judge. Permission was granted on both grounds.

      9.  At  the  remotely  conducted  'error  of  law'  hearing  I   heard
         submissions from  both  representatives  in  respect  of  the  "new
         matter" ground since this affected the jurisdiction of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal. Ms Isherwood relied on the written grounds  and  the
         decision in Mahmud (S. 85 NIAA 2002 - 'new  matters')  [2017]  UKUT
         00488  (IAC)  ("Mahmud")  and  submitted  that   the   respondent's
         relationship with J had never been considered by the appellant  and
         that the appellant had  never  given  her  consent  for  it  to  be
         considered as a "new matter".

     10. Mr Reynolds accepted that there had never been actual  consent  but
         submitted  firstly,  that  mention  had  been  made  of  J  in  the
         respondent's application form, and  secondly,  that  the  appellant
         would have been aware, at the latest by the time of  the  adjourned
         hearing on 16 December 2019, that the respondent  was  placing  her
         relationship with J at the forefront of her human rights appeal. Mr
         Reynolds submitted that the  appellant  had  implicitly  given  her
         consent to the "new matter" being considered given her knowledge of
         the basis of the respondent's appeal when the hearing was adjourned
         so as to obtain further detailed evidence.

     11.  I  indicated  to  the  parties  that  I  was  satisfied  that  the
         respondent's relationship with J constituted  a  "new  matter"  and
         that the respondent had not given any consent to  this  new  matter
         being considered by the judge.

Discussion

     12. Section 85 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
         reads, in material part:

             '85. Matters to be considered

             (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against the decision shall
             be treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any
             decision in respect of which the appellant has a right of
             appeal under section 82(1).

             (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement
             under section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter
             raised in a statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of
             a kind listed in section 84 the decision appealed against.

             (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under section
             120 whether the statement was made before or after the appeal
             was commenced.

             (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) ... against a decision
             the Tribunal may consider... any matter which it thinks
             relevant to the substance of the decision, including... a
             matter arising after the date of decision.

             (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless
             the Secretary of Status has given the Tribunal consent to do
             so.

             (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if -

                  (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
                  section 84, and

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered
                  the matter in the context of -

                      (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

                      (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section
                      120.'

     13. The Upper Tribunal considered the issue of "new matters" in Mahmud,
         the headnote of which reads:

             "1.  Whether something is or is not a 'new matter' goes to the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and  the
             First-tier Tribunal must therefore determine  for  itself  the
             issue.

             2.   A 'new matter' is a matter which constitutes a ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal. A matter is  the  factual
             substance of a claim. A ground of appeal is the legal basis on
             which the facts in any given matter could form the basis of  a
             challenge to the decision under appeal.

             3.   In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has
             not previously been considered by the Secretary  of  State  in
             the context of the decision in section 82(1)  or  a  statement
             made by the appellant under section  120.  This  requires  the
             matter to be factually distinct from that previously raised by
             an appellant, as opposed to further or better evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.  The  assessment   will   always   be   fact
             sensitive."

     14. The ground of appeal concerning the application of  section  85  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  goes  to  whether
         the First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction to  determine  the  issues
         arising from the respondent's relationship with J for  itself  (see
         headnote 1 of Mahmud).

     15. Although the  respondent  made  fleeting  reference  to  J  in  her
         application form, there was no exposition of her relationship  with
         him, no details of his circumstances (or even how he was related to
         the respondent), no explanation as to how he would be  affected  by
         the respondent's removal from the UK, and  no probative evidence in
         support of any  of  the  above  elements.  The  solicitor's  letter
         accompanying the application  did  not  refer  to  J  and  gave  no
         indication that the respondent was acting as a carer  for  a  young
         child diagnosed with Autistic Spectrum Disorder.  It  is  therefore
         not  surprising  that  the  respondent  did   not   consider   what
         subsequently became the  core  of  the  respondent's  human  rights
         appeal.

     16. Mr Reynolds did not submit that the respondent's relationship  with
         J was incapable of constituting a "new matter." He was right not to
         do so. With reference to headnote  3  of  Mahmud,  the  nature  and
         extent of the respondent's care-giving relationship  with  J  is  a
         distinct factual matrix that has not been previously considered  by
         the appellant either in the context  of  her  decision  in  section
         82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  or  in
         respect of  a  statement  made  under  s.120  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     17. Mr Reynolds  submitted  that  the  appellant  was  aware  that  the
         respondent was relying on her relationship with J at  the  time  of
         the adjourned hearing and thereafter. I accept that this is  likely
         to be so. But the fact remains that the appellant did  not  make  a
         decision giving her consent for what is undoubtedly a "new  matter"
         to be considered by the First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Reynolds  argued
         that the appellant gave her consent by way of  implication  as  she
         was aware that the respondent was relying on her relationship  with
         J when the hearing on 16 December 2019 was adjourned  and  made  no
         objection at that stage. This is similar to an argument advanced on
         behalf of the appellant in Mahmud that  consent  could  be  implied
         through omission, albeit in the particular context of the  relevant
         procedure rules, in respect of a new matter. This was  rejected  by
         the Tribunal at [35] & [36]. The Tribunal held:

             "... it would be contrary to the  clear  language  in  section
             85(5) requiring the Secretary of State to have given  consent,
             to find that by means of procedural rules, deemed consent  can
             be inferred  by  inaction.  Section  85(5)  of  the  2002  Act
             requires actual consent by  the  Respondent  which  cannot  be
             deemed or implied."

     18. I agree with and endorse the finding by  the  Tribunal.  The  plain
         meaning of the language used in section 85(5) of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is clear; the appellant  must  give
         her actual consent.

     19. I have sympathy with the First-tier Tribunal judge given that there
         was no Presenting Officer and given that the relevance  of  section
         85 had not previously been  raised.  He  nevertheless  should  have
         considered for himself whether the principal basis upon  which  the
         respondent now put her case was  a  "new  matter"  and,  having  so
         concluded, he should either  have  determined  the  appeal  without
         consideration  of  the  evidence  relating  to   the   respondent's
         relationship with J or adjourned the hearing (once again) to enable
         the respondent to decide whether to give her consent  (see  Quaidoo
         (new matter: procedure/process) [2018] UKUT 00087 (IAC)).

     20. As there was no consent to the "new matter" being  considered,  the
         judge was not entitled to consider the evidence  relating  to,  and
         determine the issues arising from,  the  respondent's  relationship
         with J. The judge materially erred in law and his decision must  be
         set aside.  Having  satisfied  myself  that  the  decision  is  not
         sustainable, no purpose would be  served  in  considering  the  1st
         ground of appeal.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     21. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

     22. The effect of the error has been that the judge determined an issue
         that it was not open to him to determine, and in so doing  he  made
         factual findings that must be, until consent is  given,  discarded.
         In these circumstances it was agreed by both parties  that  it  was
         appropriate for the case to be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

     23. Whilst it is ultimately a matter  for  the  appellant  whether  she
         consents to the  "new  matter",  and  any  refusal  would  only  be
         amenable to a judicial review challenge, one would  hope  that  the
         appellant would bear in mind the 'one stop' principle as applied in
         immigration appeals, and that the use of funds  and  resources  may
         best be served by having all relevant  issues  in  a  human  rights
         appeal determined at the same time.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an
error on a point of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
(de novo) by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monson.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal (OOO) is granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify OOO or any  member  of  OOO's  family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum   25 November 2020

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

