
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/12307/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19th June 2019                         |On 4th July 2019               |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                             mrs vimiaben patel
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nadeem
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st  June  1944  is  a  citizen  of  India.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Nadeem.  The Respondent was represented
    by Mr Walker a Senior Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had been issued with visit visas between 2003 and 2015 to
    visit her family in the UK.  On 21st January 2016 she made  application
    for settlement based on  compassionate  grounds.   The  Respondent  had
    refused that application.  The  Appellant  appealed  that  refusal  and
    following a hearing promulgated on 2nd  February  2017  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed her appeal.  Permission to appeal against the decision
    of the First-tier was granted by another Judge of the First-tier and at
    a hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 3rd November 2017 the Upper Tribunal
    remitted the appeal for a rehearing by the First-tier  Tribunal.   That
    rehearing took place at Manchester on 9th January 2016 before Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Chambers.  The judge found that  the  Appellant
    did not come within the Immigration Rules and dismissed the appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal  that  decision  was  applied  for  and  initially
    refused on 12th March 2019.  The application was renewed and permission
    to appeal was granted by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  it  was
    arguable that the judge had not used a properly structured approach and
    had erred in consideration of the case under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Directions were issued to the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide  whether
    an error of law had been made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  the
    matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Decision

 4. Mr Walker on behalf of the Home Office fairly  and  properly  agreed  a
    material error of law had been made by  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by  failing  to  consider  Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules
    particularly given the circumstances of this case.

 5. A material error of law was made by the judge in this  case  such  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and  remade
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Chambers.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




