
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/12285/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |          Decision and Reasons       |
|On 5th September 2017                 |Promulgated                          |
|                                      |On 7th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                              MRS HASEENA ULLAH
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     MR Z Raza, Counsel instructed by Marks and Marks
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. This is an appeal from the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  O'  Keefe,
   promulgated on the 30th May 2017,  in  which  she  dismissed  the  appeal
   against the respondent's refusal of her application for  entry  clearance
   to the United Kingdom to join her husband, Mr Sana Ullah, who has limited
   leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. There  has  not  been
   any application for an anonymity direction and I consider that no  useful
   purpose would be served by making one.

2. The respondent refused the application  because  the  appellant  had  not
   proved that her marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting  as  required  by
   paragraph 319 of the Immigration Rules. The judge,  however,  found  that
   the appellant's marriage was in fact genuine  and  subsisting.  Moreover,
   absent any contra-indication  in  the  respondent's  stated  reasons  for
   refusal, she assumed  that  the  appellant  had  met  all  the  remaining
   requirements for entry clearance under paragraph 319 of  the  Immigration
   Rules.  She  nevertheless  concluded  that  whilst  compliance  with  the
   requirements of the Rules was a  relevant  "factor"  in  determining  the
   appeal, it was not determinative of it. This was because, "the  appellant
   is limited to arguing her appeal on human  rights"  [paragraph  15].  The
   judge accordingly conducted a full assessment of the  appellant's  rights
   under Article 8 before concluding that  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant
   could be reasonably  be  expected  to  enjoy  married  life  together  in
   Pakistan.

3. Mr Raza submitted, in the alternative, that the judge had  erred  in  law
   by (a) not treating fulfilment of the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
   Rules as decisive under the Immigration  Rules,  (b)  failing  to  attach
   sufficient weight to the fact that the appellant met those  requirements,
   (c) failing to have sufficient regard to the impact of refusal  upon  the
   appellant's relationship with the sponsor. I consider  these  submissions
   in turn.

4. Mr Raza submitted that a grant of entry clearance  was  (as  he  put  it)
   "mandatory" where the applicant met  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
   Immigration Rules. That, however, does not  accurately  state  the  legal
   position. Albeit subject to parliamentary scrutiny under procedures  laid
   down by the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the  Immigration  Rules  ultimately
   represent nothing more than a declaration by the Secretary  of  State  of
   her policy in relation to the control of immigration.   A  decision  that
   fails to abide by that policy will thus be subject to challenge by way of
   Judicial  Review.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  however,  did   not   have
   jurisdiction to entertain such a challenge by way of  an  appeal  brought
   under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Moreover, it does
   not follow from the fact that the  Tribunal  subsequently  arrived  at  a
   different  conclusion  concerning  the  subsistence  of  the  appellant's
   marriage that the Secretary of State's original  decision  was  factually
   perverse within the context of the evidence that was available to her  at
   the time when it was made. In short, were this submission to succeed,  it
   would be tantamount to reintroducing grounds of appeal - that is to  say,
   that the decision "is not in accordance with  immigration  rules"  or  is
   otherwise "not in accordance with the law" - that  Parliament  legislated
   to remove by the Immigration Act 2014.

5.  Turning  to  the  weight  to  be  accorded  to  the  fulfilment  of  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules when  assessing  the  merits  of  a
   claim made under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, there is in my
   judgement a  distinction  to  be  drawn  between  those  Rules  that  are
   expressly stated to represent  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  of  the
   operation of Article 8 and those which are not.

6. Appendix FM declares that "... it reflects how, under Article  8  of  the
   Human Rights Convention, the balance will be struck between the right  to
   respect for private and family life and the  legitimate  aims  [contained
   within Article 8(2)] and, in doing so, also reflects the relevant  public
   interest considerations  as  set  out  in  Part  5  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002" [see paragraph GEN.1.1]. The  fulfilment
   of its requirements will therefore usually result in a human-rights claim
   and/or an appeal from  its  refusal  being  decided  in  the  appellant's
   favour. In the latter case, this will not be because the  Tribunal  holds
   that the original decision is not in accordance  with  immigration  rules
   and/or the law, but because it holds  it  to  be  incompatible  with  the
   Secretary of State's own view of the operation of Article 8 as  expressed
   through the medium of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. For the  same
   reason, fulfilment of the requirements of paragraph 276ADE ("requirements
   to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds  of  private
   life") is also likely to result in an appeal being allowed on the  ground
   that the original decision is incompatible with  the  appellant's  rights
   under Article 8. This is the basis upon which the judgement of  Sales  LJ
   in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 appears to me to have been predicated.

7. The position is however quite different in the case of other Rules,  many
   of which (including paragraph 319) pre-date the changes made to the Rules
   in July 2012. Those Rules do not purport to give  effect  to  the  United
   Kingdom's obligations under the Human Rights Convention. Indeed, many  of
   them provide for migration upon purely economic  grounds  in  respect  of
   which the Convention imposes no  obligation  at  all.  It  is  into  this
   category that the present application fell.

8. There is very little authority concerning the  weight  attaching  to  the
   fulfilment of requirements of the Rules falling within this category when
   making an assessment under Article 8. Indeed,  other  than  a  series  of
   Upper Tribunal decisions reported (but not 'starred') shortly  after  the
   right of appeal against refusal of applications for  entry  clearance  by
   family visitors was restricted, I am unaware of any authority at all.  Mr
   Raza relied heavily upon one of the reported family visitor decisions  of
   the Upper Tribunal, namely, Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]
   UKUT 00112 (IAC). The headnote to this decision reads:


    In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry clearance under
    Article 8 ECHR, the claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules
    is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of
    being a weighty, though not determinative, factor when deciding whether
    such refusal is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing
    immigration control.

   It should be noted that this was precisely the approach that was in  fact
   adopted by the judge in this appeal (see, in  particular,  the  last  two
   sentences of paragraph 15 as summarised at paragraph  2  above).  As  she
   correctly observed, absent her finding that the appellant's marriage  was
   subsisting, there would have been no basis  for  the  engagement  of  the
   potential operation of Article 8 at all.

9. More specifically, however, Mr Razar relied upon what he claimed was  the
   judge's failure to consider the impact of refusal of entry clearance upon
   the appellant's relationship with her husband.  However,  the  very  fact
   that the judge considered whether  the  appellant's  married  life  could
   reasonably be expected to be  enjoyed  in  Pakistan  (rather  the  United
   Kingdom) is sufficient to demonstrate that  this  is  not  the  case.  In
   asking herself this question, the judge was adopting an approach that  is
   supported by a long line of distinguished and high  authority,  including
   Abdulaziz,  Cabales  and  Balkandali  v  United  Kingdom  [1985]  ECHR  7
   (paragraph 67},  Huang v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2007] UKHL 11 (paragraph 20), E B Kosovo v Secretary of  State  for  the
   Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 (paragraph 12), and SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA
   Civ 387 (paragraph 39(v)). It is an approach  that  necessarily  involves
   consideration of the impact of refusal upon the marital relationship.

10. Mr Razar also argued that the inevitability of the  appellant  making  a
   further application, which would likely succeed, was a relevant factor in
   considering this question. However,  the  principles  considered  in  the
   decision of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 are only engaged  where  the  reason
   for refusal is that an in-country application is more appropriately  made
   from abroad. That is obviously not the case here. It is  true  that  this
   principle was to some extent extended by the  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko
   [2017] UKSC 11  to  situations  where  an  applicant  has  been  residing
   unlawfully in the UK but would have been certain  to  have  been  granted
   lawful residence had he applied for it. However, that  is  not  the  case
   here either.

11. Finally, Mr Raza submitted that given the  appellant's  compliance  with
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules, there was no  public  interest
   in the exclusion of the appellant from the United Kingdom. However,  that
   submission is predicated upon an assumption that Article 8 is engaged  in
   the first place. Whilst the judge appears to have decided  this  case  on
   the basis of the proportionality of the decision to exclude the appellant
   from the UK, it would have been equally open to  her  to  find  that  the
   potential operation of Article 8 was not engaged in the first place. This
   is because a State has the right to control the  entry  of  non-nationals
   into its territory, and the duty imposed by Article 8 cannot therefore be
   considered to extend to a general obligation on the part of a Contracting
   State to respect the choice by family members of  the  country  of  their
   family  residence  and  to  accept  a  non-national  family  member   for
   settlement in that county. This principle was established by the European
   Court of Human Rights in  Abdulaziz,  Cabales  and  Balkandali  v  United
   Kingdom (above). It was reiterated by the Supreme  Court  in  MM  Lebanon
   [2017] UKSC 10, to which the judge made express reference at paragraph 21
   of her decision.

12. I therefore hold that the appellant did not make any material  error  of
   law in the determination of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed


Signed                              Date: 6th September 2017


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
