
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12751/2019

                                                               HU/12755/2019

                                                               HU/12756/2019

                                                               HU/12760/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2020                  |On 19 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                           MRS AMA HAMED ALHAJJAR

                          MR NASSER FAHED ALHAJJAR

                              MR GALAL ALNAGAR

                             MRS RAWAN ALSHABAN

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent





Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     McGlashan MacKay Solicitors

For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


         Background

      1.  These  joint  appeals  come  before  me  following  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal to  the  appellant  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Kopieczek on 24 July 220 (served with directions on 13 August 2020)
         against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Handley,
         promulgated on 9 April 2020 following a hearing at  Glasgow  on  12
         March 2020.

      2. The appellants are Syrian nationals born respectively on 1 February
         1969, 10 August 1960, 13 November 1989 and 8 March 1995.  They  are
         the mother, father, brother and sister-in-law of the sponsor, Talal
         Nassar Alnajjar and seek to join him  on  family  reunion  grounds.
         They are currently residing in Lebanon where they have  been  since
         2013. They are not in a refugee camp and the  third  appellant  has
         permission to work. The first appellant has  severe  asthma  and  a
         bone condition and the second  appellant  has  a  heart  condition.
         Their applications were made on 17 April 2019 and refused on 1 July
         2019 under paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules and on article 8
         grounds. The decision was reviewed by the EC Manager but maintained
         on 2 October 2019.  It was considered that they did  not  meet  the
         requirements of the  rules  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
         circumstances which  warranted  leave  to  enter  on  discretionary
         grounds.

      3. The appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley. He heard
         oral evidence from the sponsor and his wife. He found  that  whilst
         the second appellant had a heart condition, he had  been  receiving
         treatment in Lebanon. With respect to the first appellant he  found
         that little evidence of her condition or how it impacted  upon  her
         had been provided and that there was no suggestion that  she  would
         be unable to receive medical treatment either. He  noted  that  the
         third appellant was entitled to work, that he did so and  supported
         the family. The judge noted that the sponsor  had  left  Syria  for
         Lebanon in July 2013  and  that  the  appellants  had  followed  in
         December 2013. the sponsor then came to the UK  in  May  2018.  the
         judge accepted that conditions were difficult for the appellant but
         noted  that  they  did  not  live  in  a  refugee  camp   and   had
         accommodation which included a toilet, a kitchen and  bedrooms.  He
         considered that the appellants were all adults and that the sponsor
         had no more than the usual emotional  ties  with  his  family.  He,
         therefore, concluded that there were no  exceptional  circumstances
         identified.  It  was  conceded  that  the   requirements   of   the
         Immigration Rules could not be met. Accordingly, he  dismissed  the
         appeals.

      4. The appellant successfully sought permission  to  appeal.  Although
         this was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 2020, it  was
         granted upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      5. The appeal would then have normally been listed for hearing but due
         to the pandemic this could not be done and  instead  the  grant  of
         permission, sent out on 13  August  2020,  included  directions  in
         which Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek expressed the  view  that  the
         appeal could be decided on the papers. The parties were invited  to
         put forward any objections they may have to that  proposal  and  to
         make further submissions within certain time limits.

      6. Both parties have responded to directions and both have agreed to a
         paper determination.  I am satisfied that that is  the  appropriate
         way to dispose of these appeals. In reaching that decision, I  have
         had regard to the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
         (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v The  Parole  Board  [2013]
         UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1  2020:  Arrangements
         during the Covid-19 pandemic (PGN) and the Senior President's Pilot
         Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to the overriding objective
         which is defined  in  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal
         with cases fairly and justly". To this end I have  considered  that
         dealing with a case fairly and justly includes: dealing with it  in
         ways that are proportionate to the  importance  of  the  case,  the
         complexity of the issues, etc; avoiding unnecessary  formality  and
         seeking  flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,  so  far  as
         practicable, that the parties are able to participate fully in  the
         proceedings; using any special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible  with  proper
         consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      7. I have had careful regard to all  the  evidence  before  me  before
         deciding how to proceed. I take the view that a full account of the
         facts are set out in those papers and that the  arguments  for  and
         against the appellants have been clearly set out. Neither party has
         raised any objections to a paper  determination.   I  am  satisfied
         that I am able to fairly and justly deal with the  matter  in  that
         manner and now proceed to do so.

         Discussion and conclusions

      8. I have considered the evidence, the determination, the grounds  for
         permission, the grant of permission and the submissions  from  both
         sides.

      9. The appellant relies on his original grounds of permission  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal which  are  better  presented  in  the  renewed
         grounds which are put forward in lieu of  the  further  submissions
         sought in the directions.

     10. Three grounds are put forward. The first is that the  judge  failed
         to have regard to all the relevant  considerations  in  determining
         whether article 8 was engaged. It  is  submitted  that  he  had  no
         regard to the fact  that  the  sponsor  financially  supported  the
         appellants or that he had left them after several years in  Lebanon
         with the intention that they would be reunited in the near  future.
         It is argued that those factors are relevant to  the  consideration
         of whether family life exists and that it cannot be said that there
         is no conceivable basis on which a different conclusion could  have
         been reached had the judge taken these matters into account.

     11. The second ground is that the judge  erred  in  assuming  that  the
         appellants were  all  registered  in  Lebanon  because  the  second
         appellant had received medical treatment and  the  third  appellant
         was allowed to work. It is argued that there was no evidence before
         the judge that registration  was  necessary  in  order  to  receive
         medical treatment.  Moreover  the  sponsor  had  explained  in  his
         statement that public health care could not be  accessed  and  that
         they had to pay for private care although this was  partly  covered
         by the Red Cross. It is argued that by way of his assumptions,  the
         judge had been led to consider that the situation  in  Lebanon  was
         better than it was.

     12. The third ground is that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the
         factors  identified  in  the  respondent's  policy  in  determining
         whether  the  refusal  of   entry   clearance   would   result   in
         unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the  appellants  and   the
         sponsor. These factors included the ability to lawfully  remain  in
         or enter another country, the  nature  and  extent  of  the  family
         relationships, the circumstances which led to the separation of the
         sponsor from his family, the impact upon them  if  the  application
         was refused and the absence of governance or  security  in  another
         country. It is argued that the judge had no regard to any of  these
         factors.

     13. When taken together, it is clear that the thrust of the appellants'
         grounds is that the judge did not have regard to all  the  evidence
         and the factors that were before him. If it is found that he  erred
         even in one of the respects argued,  then  this  would  render  the
         entire determination unsustainable  and  it  would  mean  that  the
         balancing exercise had not been properly carried out.

     14. I have had regard to Ms Aboni's submissions which  argue  that  the
         judge properly directed himself and reached a  conclusion  open  to
         him but I cannot concur with that view. For the following  reasons,
         I find that the judge erred in law  such  that  his  assessment  of
         article 8 is flawed and the decision must be set aside.

     15.  The  judge's  determination  is  extremely  brief.  His   findings
         essentially only cover one page. Whilst this is not  necessarily  a
         problem in itself, in this case, given the  substantial  amount  of
         documentary and oral evidence before him, a  deeper  and  lengthier
         analysis of the evidence was warranted. The  judge's  consideration
         of family life, for example, consists of two sentences at paragraph
         15 where he finds that the appellants are all adults and  that  the
         emotional ties between them and the sponsor are no more than  would
         normally be expected. There is absolutely no consideration  of  the
         evidence put forward to  support  the  claim  of  family  life,  no
         reference to the evidence of communication between the parties,  of
         the sponsor's financial support, of the intentions of  reunion,  of
         the circumstances in which the family came to be in Lebanon and  in
         which they were separated or of the precarious existence they lead.
          Indeed, no reasons at all are given for why the judge reached  the
         conclusion that he did as to family  life.  His  findings  are  not
         findings  at  all  but  mere  statements  of  his  conclusion.  The
         appellants are entitled to know why their family life  claims  were
         rejected and the judge's reasoning on  the  matter  is  regrettably
         missing from the determination.

     16. The respondent's policy on  family  reunion  was  included  in  the
         appellants' bundle before the judge but he does not even appear  to
         have considered it. The many  factors  that  were  required  to  be
         considered  in  the  article  8  assessment  have  apparently  been
         completely disregarded and the only matter that the  judge  appears
         to have focused on is the  availability  of  medical  treatment  in
         Lebanon. As can be seen from the evidence, however, the  judge  did
         not have any regard to the difficulties in that respect as set  out
         in the sponsor's  witness  statement  and  as  highlighted  in  the
         grounds.

     17. The decision making is entirely inadequate given the nature of  the
         appeal  and  the  wealth  of  documentary  evidence  adduced.   The
         appellants are entitled to a better consideration and  analysis  of
         their case and for this reason I consider that they have not had  a
         fair hearing. The decision is set aside in  its  entirety  and  the
         matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
         hearing.

         Decision

     18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and
         it is set  aside.  The  appeals  are  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal in Glasgow where a fresh decision shall be made by another
         judge.

         Anonymity

     19. No request has been made at any time for an anonymity order  and  I
         see no reason to make one.




         Directions

     20. Further directions for the hearing shall be issued by the  relevant
         Tribunal in due course.




    Signed


    R. Keki?
    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 11 November 2020
