
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/12442/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 16 February 2021                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  ASHIM RAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision, dated 6 June 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge O'Keefe, promulgated on 21 October 2020.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 19 November 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Ford, dated 9 December 2020.

     vi) Directions of the UT, dated 16 and issued on 17 December 2020, with
         a view to deciding without a hearing (a) whether the FtT  erred  in
         law and (b) if so, whether its decision should be  set  aside;  and
         giving parties the opportunity to submit on whether there should be
         an oral hearing.

    vii) The respondent's response under rule 24, dated 18 December 2020.

 2. There is no response on file from the appellant.

 3. Neither party has sought an oral hearing.

 4. Taking account of the issues in the case, of all materials provided  by
    the parties, and of the  judgement  in  JCWI  v  UT  [2020]  EWHC  3103
    (Admin), the UT may now proceed in terms of rules 2 and  34  to  decide
    issues (a) and (b) above without a hearing.

 5. Ground 1 is that the FtT erred in its approach to the evidence  by  not
    putting matters to the sponsor, and by not  giving  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to respond to its concerns.

 6. This is a complaint of unfairness, without any  substance.   Judges  do
    not have to put every point of their analysis to  parties  for  comment
    (which might become an indefinite process), provided that parties  have
    the chance to put their case and are not taken  unfairly  by  surprise.
    The appellant disagrees with what the FtT made of the evidence, but  he
    does not show any prejudice of that nature.

 7. The appellant also fails to show that even if given the chance to  take
    his case further, he had anything else to offer.  The case on which  he
    relies, HA & TD v SSHD [2010] CSIH 28, states at [15] that a procedural
    impropriety will not vitiate a decision  if  it  is  apparent  that  no
    prejudice was suffered.

 8. Ground 2 is headed "errors as to  the  application  of  the  historical
    [in]justice", but in substance it is a complaint that the judge  should
    have found family life, within article 8 protection, to  exist  between
    the appellant and the sponsor in 2006 (when  the  sponsor  left  Nepal,
    shortly after the appellant became 18) or to have revived since then.

 9. Ground 2, so far as it goes to the existence of  family  life,  at  any
    date, is only disagreement with conclusions which were open to the FtT,
    which were firmly grounded in the evidence, and which are not shown  to
    err on any point of law.

10. It is not clear what further error, if any, ground 2 aims at  in  terms
    of principles of "historical injustice"; but as  family  life  was  not
    established, that was the end of the matter.

11. Ground 1 shows no unfairness, and ground 2 shows no error on a point of
    law, so the decision of the FtT shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    25 January 2021



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





