
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12697/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2019                       |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                   Mrs AIK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Tobin, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal to dismiss her appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's
(ECO's) decision on 5 September 2017 to refuse entry clearance as the
perfect partner of a person present and settled in the UK.

2.   The background to this matter is that it came before me on 10 April
2019 when I heard oral argument by both representatives. I directed a
further hearing to take place at which the parties were to file any
evidence relevant to the issue of the alleged lack of capacity on the part
of the appellant to enter a marriage with the sponsor. The evidence was to
be limited to issues which had arisen since the last hearing on 7 December
2018.

3.   By way of further background, the relationship between the appellant
and the sponsor is said to have begun in December 2012.  However, both
parties agree that this was an arranged relationship.  The appellant first
met her partner therefore on 11 November 2014 and the arranged marriage
took place on 15 November 2014.  For reasons which seem understandable, the
ECO decided to refuse entry clearance as a partner of a person present and
settled in that he was not satisfied that the relationship was genuine and
subsisting but more importantly, for the purposes of this hearing, he was
not satisfied that the appellant had capacity to consent to marriage at
that time.

4.   The decision of the ECO was appealed to Judge Beach sitting in the
First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Beach decided to find that there was a genuine
and subsisting relationship but also decided that the evidence did not show
that the appellant had capacity to enter a marriage.  Although the judge
was referred to the relevant authority, that is the case of London Borough
of Southwark v KA [2016] EWCOP 20, Judge Beach nevertheless decided that
the capacity to enter a marriage and sexual relations had to be established
by the appellant and she had not done so.  This contradicted earlier
observations by the judge, at paragraph 42 of her decision, where she noted
that capacity to enter a marriage and sexual relations must be presumed
unless there is evidence to the contrary.

5.   When the matter came before me on 10 April 2019 I agreed with the
grounds of appeal in that it seemed to me clear that in relation to
capacity the judge should have assumed capacity unless the appellant was
proved to lack it.

6.   Helpfully, at the adjourned hearing there has been a measure of
agreement between the parties.  Ms Tobin, who represented the appellant
today, expressed some doubt as to the clarity of my directions.  I regret
any lack of clarity in the earlier directions. In addition, I raised in my
earlier decision I raised the possibility that the appellant and the
sponsor may be able to continue their family life in India. However, that
has clearly has not resulted in any change of approach on the part of the
respondent. Mr Bramble accepts that possible resettlement of the sponsor to
India with the appellant cannot seriously be advanced, given the
respondent's international obligations.  That clearly has not been a matter
that has been worthy of any further exploration be. The respondent accepts
that the sponsor is resident in the UK and that he is entitled to use the
National Health Service and enjoys European standards of welfare provision.

7.   In relation to the capacity assessment, following the previous hearing
I set aside the adverse capacity assessment made by the judge at the time
that the marriage was entered into. Following reflection and consideration
of further evidence and in particular the evidence of Dr Vishal Savani
dated 21 June 2019 Mr Bramble has accepted that it is now clear from the
answers to the questions given to Dr Savani that the appellant had capacity
to enter her marriage to the sponsor.

8.   It is therefore unnecessary for me to say anything further at this
stage but simply to agree with the respondent, who now accepts that the
appellant qualified under the Immigration Rules for entry clearance.
Accordingly, although this appeal is limited to human rights grounds, it is
appropriate to allow the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has  already  been  set  aside.  The
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 9 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

