
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12714/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2021                     |On 01 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                             MR Adriatik Sokoli
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, Counsel, instructed by AR Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania.  His date of birth  is  6  April
    1987.  He appealed against a decision of the ECO  on  2  July  2019  to
    refuse to grant him entry clearance as the spouse of  British  citizen.
    His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M Paul  in
    a decision that was promulgated on 11 January 2021. The  Appellant  was
    granted permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes  on  4  February
    2021.

 2. The Appellant was unlawfully in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  voluntarily
    departed the United Kingdom on 22 April 2019  to  make  an  application
    under Appendix FM based on family life with  his  partner  here,  Maria
    Marilyn Bandoles Tayo.  The application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules.  The  ECO  said  that  the  Appellant
    having entered the UK illegally on 27 August 2011, was served  with  an
    IS75 and IS76 on 14 March 2015.  He failed to report as required on  11
    May 2015 and was, on 16 June 2015, recorded as  being  "an  absconder".
    The ECO stated: -

         "I am satisfied that you have previously contrived in a significant
         way to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by
         overstaying.  There were additional aggravating  features  in  that
         you failed to follow reporting procedures and absconding".

 3. The Appellant's case is that there were no aggravating features because
    he had not absconded. He had been declared an absconder as  the  result
    of an application which in  fact  had  not  been  made.   The  relevant
    decision was not served on the Appellant.  He  was  not  aware  of  the
    requirement to report or inform the Secretary of State of a  change  of
    address.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Appellant's evidence is that he came to the UK in August 2011.   He
    and his wife were married on 9 June 2018.  He was living at an  address
    in Enfield, which the Secretary of  State  was  aware  of  because  the
    Appellant had communicated with DVLA. However,  he  moved  in  February
    2015. The Appellant stated that he did not receive  any  correspondence
    from the Home Office and did not know of the requirement to report.  He
    did not intend to be an absconder.

 5. The judge at paragraph 11 stated as follows: -

         "The essence of the respondent's case is that  after  he  made  his
         application for the DVLA and was served with the IS75 and 76 he/the
         appellant failed to report on 11 May 2015 and was  recorded  as  an
         absconder.  He subsequently made 2 human rights applications  which
         were refused."

 6. The judge under the heading "Conclusions & Reasons" stated as follows:

         "15. The appellant's evidence in relation to this is  limited,  and
             in my view unsatisfactory.  In his witness statement he  makes
             no reference at all to the application for a driving  licence.
             But it is  worth  pausing  to  note  that  when  he  made  the
             application,  he  would  have  had  to  provide  an   address.
             According to the witness statement, he was then living at  117
             Pembroke Avenue but moved on in February 2015.   He  does  not
             assert that he provided a follow up address.  He  simply  went
             to  ground  and   asserts   that   he   never   received   any
             correspondence from the Home Office to report.  However, it is
             self-evident that any notices must have been  served  at  that
             address, and if in fact he had moved by the time those notices
             were issued, he should have notified the Home  Office  of  his
             change of address.  It is self-evident and common  sense,  and
             clearly the responsibility of the appellant when dealing  with
             the Government Department, to keep them notified of any change
             of address so that correspondence can continue to be  sent  to
             him. Alternatively, of course, he could have made arrangements
             for the correspondence sent to Pemberton Road to be  forwarded
             to his new address.  His statement  is  completely  silent  on
             that point.

         16.  In my view, the  appellant's  submissions  that  in  some  way
             because it was mistakenly considered at the time that  he  had
             made a human rights application which never led to a decision,
             does not mean that any of the removal notices that were served
             subsequent to the driving licence  applications  somehow  fall
             away.  In my decision, it is quite plain  that  the  appellant
             must have been served with those notices once the Home  Office
             realised that he was in the country unlawfully.  The fact that
             he says that he never received them  does  not,  in  my  view,
             justify him claiming that he was not an absconder.

         17.  In my view, that  means  that  he  is  to  be  treated  as  an
             absconder in 2015, and that is also an aggravating feature  as
             foreshadowed in the  case  of  PS  (see  above).   He  clearly
             dropped beneath the radar until  he  was  able  then  to  make
             applications based on his marriage to a British  citizen.   In
             my view, it is clear that this was an aggravating  feature  of
             the exercise of discretion under paragraph 320(11)  cannot  be
             faulted."

 7. The judge considered Article 8 at paragraphs  18  and  19  noting  that
    there was no issue taken as to the genuineness  of  the  marriage.   He
    said that "the decision therefore has  to  be  based  on  applying  the
    principles of proportionality and section 117B". The  judge  said  that
    "There is no doubt that the relationship of the  marriage  was  entered
    into whilst the appellant was in the country unlawfully.   There  is  a
    statutory  requirement,  therefore,  to  give  little  weight  to   the
    private/family life that results."

The grounds of appeal

 8. The first ground is that the Appellant was declared as an absconder  as
    a result of a human rights application that was made in 2015  which  in
    fact he never submitted.  The judge at [15] made assertions  that  were
    not grounded in the evidence.  All the notices served as a result of  a
    void application should be considered as null and  void  and  therefore
    the Appellant should not be considered an absconder and penalised.

Error of law

 9. Mr Tan on behalf of the Secretary of  State  conceded  that  the  judge
    materially erred.  The decision that the Appellant was an absconder  is
    inadequately reasoned.   In the  light  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    concession, I conclude that the FTTJ materially erred  for  the  reason
    identified by Mr Tan. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.




10. I add that the grounds in so far as  they  challenge  the  validity  of
    notices because the Appellant had not made a human  rights  claims  are
    misconceived. The Appellant was in the United  Kingdom  illegally.  The
    Respondent was entitled to serve notices on him.   However,  the  judge
    did not adequately  reason  why  the  Appellant  should  be  deemed  an
    absconder ( an aggravating feature) if he was not aware that he had  to
    report or provide an address. If the Appellant  is  simply  an  illegal
    entrant it is material to the assessment of whether the  appeal  should
    be dismissed under Article 8 with reference to paragraph  320  (11)  of
    the Rules.

11. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.
    Applying paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement of the Senior President
    dated 24 September 2012, paragraph 7.2 (b), I agree with the parties
    that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    fresh hearing.[1]



Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 25 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


-----------------------
[1] 7 Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal
7.1 Where under section 12(1) of the 2007 Act (proceedings on appeal to the
Upper Tribunal) the Upper Tribunal finds that the making of the decision
concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law, the Upper
Tribunal may set aside the decision and, if it does so, must either remit
the case to the First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or proceed
(in accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to re-make the decision
under section 12(2)(b)(ii).
7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to re-
make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that: (a) the effect of
the error has been to deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of a
fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or (b) the nature or extent of any
judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the decision in the
appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to the overriding
objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier
Tribunal. 7.3 Remaking rather than remitting will nevertheless constitute
the normal approach to determining appeals where an error of law is found,
even if some further fact finding is necessary.

