
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12579/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2019                             |On 15th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                  ilir [r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells (M & K Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant,  an  Albanian
    national who had made a human  rights  application  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of his relationship with  his  partner  and
    their young son and also the fact that his wife  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing was some eight weeks pregnant.  The judge dismissed the  appeal
    finding that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    being enjoyed in Albania.  That decision and reasons was promulgated on
    20th December 2018.  Permission to appeal was granted and the  argument
    put to me today is that the judge had made an error at paragraph 44  of
    the decision and reasons  in  relation  to  his  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's partner's state of mental health.

 2. The couple relied upon the fact that they had a young child,  that  the
    partner was an Israeli who had been recognised in the UK as  a  refugee
    and who suffered from depression.  The judge noted at paragraph 44 that
    the partner had ceased  taking  anti-depressant  medication,  he  said,
    because she  was  breast  feeding.  Although  he  said  that  he  could
    understand that she wanted to breast feed her child, that was a  little
    surprising given that the child was now 2.  In that the judge has  made
    an error because the reasons given  by  the  partner  for  ceasing  her
    medication were twofold.  As was clear in her statement, she was breast
    feeding but she was also eight weeks pregnant and pregnancy is a reason
    to quite properly stop taking anti-depressant medication.

 3. The judge went on from that to consider however the best  interests  of
    the child, noting that the child was only aged 2 whose  best  interests
    were to remain with both parents and that his best interests  would  be
    equally well served living  with  them  in  Albania.   The  judge  also
    considered the position of the partner in living with the appellant  in
    Albania.  He noted the objections to that were that she was vulnerable,
    that she had had difficulties in Israel, which were accepted, and  that
    Albania is a patriarchal society.  However, the judge also  noted  that
    the strength of the relationship had  been  of  great  benefit  to  the
    partner and that they would of course  be  going  to  Albania  together
    where she would have his support.  Also a consideration for  the  judge
    was the fact that the Appellant had come to the UK illegally.  He found
    the Appellant to have been less than honest as  to  what  he  had  been
    doing prior to leaving Albania and what he had been  doing  in  the  UK
    since.

 4. Mr Wells, on behalf of the Appellant this morning, confirmed that there
    was no evidence that the medication which the Appellant had been taking
    was not available in Albania.  It is also of note that, notwithstanding
    her ceasing to take medication, she remains well enough to  work.   For
    those reasons had the judge not made the mistake  he  did,  the  result
    would inevitably  have  been  the  same;  namely  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Albania.   For
    those reasons, while the judge did make a mistake of fact, I find  that
    it is not material to the outcome.

    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed [pic]                            Date 11th April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed [pic]                            Date 11th April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
