
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/12351/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2019                  |On 3 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD ASHRAF PRINCE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth is  recorded
    as 1 January 1980.   On  25  April  2016  the  respondent  refused  his
    application for further leave as the spouse of a  settled  person,  for
    use of deceit in an English language test (the  obtaining  of  a  TOEIC
    certificate).

 2. FtT Judge P A Grant-Hutchison dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 13 December 2017.

 3. The FtT and the UT refused permission to appeal.

 4. The appellant petitioned the Court of Session to  set  aside  the  UT's
    refusal of permission.  In a  joint  minute,  parties  agreed  that  it
    should be set aside, because it was arguable that the judge  "erred  in
    law in that he failed to carry out a fact specific assessment regarding
    the [appellant's] evidence of taking the test."

 5. On 25 October 2019, the Vice President of the UT granted permission, in
    light of the interlocutor of the Court.

 6. Expanding on the ground, and on a written note of argument, Mr Ndubuisi
    said that although the decision summarised the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant  and  his  wife  at  [8  -9]  it  included  "no   assessment,
    evaluation, analysis, weighing up of, or  conclusion  on"  his  or  her
    credibility.

 7. Mr Clark said that the respondent's evidence was not merely generic, it
    went to the specific test results of the appellant, and that  it  could
    be inferred from the rehearsal of the oral evidence that the judge  had
    taken everything into account.

 8. I indicated that the decision fell to be set aside.

 9. It may certainly be taken from the decision that the  judge  understood
    what the oral evidence was, and that he rejected it;  but  despite  the
    best efforts of Mr Clark to divine some reasoning, there is nothing  to
    explain the judge's negative evaluation of that evidence.

10. Following that finding, parties agreed that the outcome  should  be  as
    follows.

11. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

12. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

13. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Grant-Hutchison.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      28 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




