
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12478/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House Remotely                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2020                           |On 4 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                           mohammad moshiur rahman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, Counsel instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh against a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
respondent refusing him indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on
4 July 2019.

2. The Reasons for Refusal Letter  shows  that  the  appellant  entered  the
United Kingdom with leave in December 2010.  It followed that by  the  time
the application leading to this appeal was  made  he  had  resided  in  the
United Kingdom for eight years and  six  months  and  so  clearly  did  not
satisfy the requirement of ten  years  continuous  lawful  residence.   The
respondent then considered the application outside  the  Immigration  Rules
but found nothing that warranted a decision in the appellant's favour.   In
particular the respondent found that the appellant was an educated man with
family connections in Bangladesh and that  he  could  re-establish  himself
there.  The appellant has a wife and child in Bangladesh and  had  returned
to Bangladesh for a time to support his  wife  after  the  birth  of  their
daughter.

3. The appellant had said that he feared returning to Bangladesh because  he
and his family had been attacked there  and  had  received  death  threats.
This claim was acknowledged.  It was suggested that  the  appellant  should
consider making a protection claim but no further investigation was made on
those points.

4. Included in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal there  is  a
letter dated 16 April 2018. It appears to come from solicitors representing
the appellant but the title is copied so badly that this  is  not  entirely
clear.  It refers to being instructed to make representations on behalf  of
the appellant and purports to rely on human rights grounds as  a  variation
of the claim.

5. The claim then sets out the background history of  the  applicant.   This
asserts that he came to the United Kingdom in December 2010 to study for  a
postgraduate diploma  in  business  management  and  that  he  successfully
completed a Master's degree from the University of Gloucestershire and that
he was given leave to remain in 2012 as a post-study worker.

6. The appellant made an in-time application  for  further  leave  that  was
unsuccessful but he appealed and the appeal was allowed  on  the  basis  of
"exceptional circumstances".  He was then given permission to study for  an
MBA at the American International University in London.  He completed  that
course and then wanted to pursue a PhD.

7. In November 2017 he applied for further leave to remain.   He  relied  on
exceptional circumstances.  The letter then set out details of  his  family
life.  He married in February 2017.  His wife joined  him  with  permission
for a short time before returning to Bangladesh.  Their  son  was  born  in
December 2014 and a daughter in January 2017.  The applicant said  that  he
had a strong family unit with his cousin a British national in  the  United
Kingdom and described himself an indispensable part of the cousin's  family
and he wanted to vary application to remain on the basis of his private and
family life.

8. Some details are given but they amount to little more than an  expression
of a deep desire to study for  a  PhD  and  being  of  good  character  and
supportive of his cousin.  The appellant asserted at paragraph  34  of  the
letter that he "has a fear of being killed or abducted and cannot return to
Bangladesh".  As far as I can see he did little to flesh out this claim.

9. There is a statement from the appellant  dated  5  November  2017.   This
says much the same as the submissions but he did refer to  an  incident  in
January 2017 when a group of people approached him  outside  the  house  in
Dhaka and beat him and he fainted.  Somebody described as "my other"  (sic)
went to the police station to make a complaint but the  police  refused  to
get involved and rather threatened the appellant's mother.  The people  who
attacked him he said were aligned to the government.  He then referred to a
"reliable source" that Bangladesh was not safe for him.

10. There is a further statement dated 16 July 2018.  This does  not  appear
to add anything.

11. The grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  again  set  out  the
immigration history and say, tellingly,  that  the  "appellant  has  passed
almost ten years in the UK lawfully" which is another way of saying he  has
not had ten years lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

12. At paragraph 9 there is reference to the respondent being informed  that
the appellant "has a serious  threat  in  Bangladesh  and  his  application
should have been considered under Article 2 and 3 of the ECHR."

13. The appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  17  December  2019.
The appellant did not attend and the Secretary of State was represented  by
a Presenting Officer.

14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  a  letter  from  the   earlier
representative saying that they were no longer  instructed  and  the  judge
proceeded to determine the appeal.

15. At paragraph 14, having summarised the immigration  history  and  points
that were made in submissions he turned to the threat against the appellant
and said:

  "Alternatively, the appellant claimed that there was a threat to his life
  in Bangladesh and that he could  not  visit  his  wife  and  this  was  a
  significant obstacle, or exceptional circumstances preventing his  return
  to Bangladesh.   By  reference  to  a  letter  dated  22  May  2019  from
  solicitors the appellant claimed that his house in  Bangladesh  had  been
  attacked on 19 January 2019 by a group of people and his  family  members
  had been brutally assaulted.  The solicitors stated that on 10 April 2018
  they were sent newspaper reports and a translation  of  that  report  was
  provided.  The appellant claimed that his mother had to pay a huge amount
  of Awami League leaders to save her life, and the appellant was going  to
  receive more evidence in the future in relation  to  the  threat  to  his
  mother and would provide this evidence to the Respondent."

16. Dealing with the alleged fear on return the judge noted  the  claim  and
said at paragraph 21 of the Decision and Reasons:

  "The appellant has relied on representations from his solicitors together
  with a copy of a newspaper report.  Regarding this  issue,  the  original
  newspaper report has not been provided.  The report appears to  be  dated
  Tuesday 19 February 2019.  It is asserted  by  the  legal  representative
  that the appellant's mother had to pay a huge amount of  money  to  Awami
  League leaders to save her life and the appellant would  provide  further
  evidence in relation to the life threat of  his  mother  as  soon  as  he
  received it; no further evidence has been provided and I do not have  the
  original newspaper report.  I have no credible or reliable evidence as to
  any threat to the appellant's mother or payment to the  Awami  League  or
  that his mother's life is at real risk, and indeed, the only  evidence  I
  have are assertions in a  solicitor's  letter  and  a  copy  of  what  is
  apparently a newspaper report dated 19 February 2019.  There is no asylum
  claim being made by the appellant for protection and I  make  no  further
  comment on this issue in those circumstances."

17. The judge then purported to dismiss the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
Rules.

18. The newspaper report is reproduced in the appellant's  bundle  in  three
ways.  At page 15 there is a translation of the newspaper article; at  page
16 there is a photocopy of the newspaper article and at page 17 there is  a
photocopy of the relevant page in the newspaper.  The newspaper appears  to
show a total of five columns of different widths and the article relied  on
appears in the right-hand column approximately halfway down the page and  I
estimate the article to be no more than a fifth of the column long.  It  is
short enough to set out in its entirety  and  I  set  out  the  translation
below:

  Attack on London-ex pat's house.

  Staff correspondent

  Land grabbers all of a sudden attacked on  UK  ex  pat  Mohammad  Moshiur
  Rahman's house at Dhanmondi.  During the attack they tortured the  family
  members and gave death threat.  On 19 January at around 10-11 o'clock  at
  night a group of eleven-twelve miscreants forcibly entered into the house
  of UK-ex pat Moshiur and vandalised furniture of the house.  At that time
  they attacked the family  members.   According  to  the  locals,  Moshiur
  Rahman has been living in the UK for the last few years.  Moshiur came in
  February 2017 and had signed an agreement with  a  building  construction
  agency on the land and that the land-grabbers were in attempts of  taking
  possession of this land.  Since then the land-grabbers  have  been  after
  Moshiur and  his  family  members.   At  one  stage  they  took  forcible
  possession of Moshiur's shop. When Moshiur protested they had  heightened
  level  of  torture  over  the  family  members.   They  started  to  give
  continuous  death  threat  to  Moshiur  and  his  family  members.   When
  contacted, the local Police Station declined to extend any  help.   Under
  this circumstance, Moshiur and his family have been passing  an  insecure
  and uncertain life."

19. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are dated 16 June  2020  and
are prepared by the present solicitors, D J Webb & Co.

20. The grounds can be summarised as a failure to make  proper  findings  on
material points.

21. This is particularised.  The  newspaper  was  identified  as  the  Daily
Nabochetona.  The grounds contend that  the  matters  set  out  there  were
highly pertinent to difficulties  amounting  to  significant  obstacles  to
reintegration in Bangladesh.

22. The grounds complain that the judge should have made a finding  on  this
evidence.  The absence of an asylum claim  did  not  excuse  him  from  his
obligations to make a decision.  In any event it was not an  asylum  claim.
The claimant did not claim to be part of a  particular  social  group  just
somebody who was at risk in Bangladesh and the  point  was  not  addressed.
The judge did not explain why  he  objected  to  not  having  the  original
newspaper.  There was a copy before him.  The report had been sent  to  the
Secretary of State who did not appear to challenge it.

23. The appellant's solicitors had prepared  a  skeleton  argument  dated  8
October 2020.

24. In summary it reminded me that the appellant  claimed  that  his  mother
had been threatened by unidentified persons in July 2019 and also  that  in
January 2019 he heard that there had been an attack on the family home  and
that was reported in the Bangladeshi press on 19 February 2019.  It is  his
case that he was not  safe  to  return  and  there  were  very  significant
obstacles to his integration in Bangladesh.  He repeated the claim that the
Secretary of State had not done anything to say it was unreliable.

25. There was a Rule 24 response.  Had the judge accepted  the  evidence  he
may well have been impacted on his findings on  the  returnability  of  the
appellant. However the Rule 24 notice  plainly  opposes  the  appeal.   The
thrust of the notice is that there was no protection claim and there  could
have been.  The appellant did not attend and presumably  could  have  done.
That the judge's findings on "very significant  obstacles"  were  adequate.
The original report had not been prepared and the  judge  was  entitled  to
give less weight to the newspaper report.

26. Before me the appellant relied  essentially  on  the  skeleton  argument
although Mr Youssefian made the  points  succinctly  and  clearly  and  the
Secretary of State relied on the Rule 24 notice.  Ms Everett described  the
treatment of the newspaper evidence as "adequate".

27. With respect I cannot agree with Ms Everett.  The  judge  did  not  make
clear findings about the newspaper evidence and they should have been made.

28. This is material. Even if the newspaper report is found to  have  little
or no weight there must be an evaluation.

29. It follows that I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

30. However,  I  can  proceed  immediately  to  remaking  the  decision.  No
application was made to adduce further evidence.   The  appellant  did  not
attend before the First-tier Tribunal.  I see no reason why  he  should  be
given an opportunity to attend again.

31. I remind myself that fact relevant to an article  8  balancing  exercise
have to be proved on the balance of probabilities.

32. I have considered  the  material  before  me.   I  have  considered  the
witness statements and all the other matters provided.

33. I accept the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  for  nearly  ten
years lawfully and that he would very much like to remain.  I  accept  that
he has behaved himself in that time in the  sense  that  he  has  not  been
convicted of any matters and has not been  irresponsible  in  his  dealings
with the Secretary of State.  These are not important points.

34. I am not persuaded that  there  has  been  an  attack  on  the  home  as
alleged.  The newspaper report is of very limited value.  It is made  about
a month after the event complained of.  It is by a journalist  who  is  not
identified.  The sources are not explained in any way.  It could be no more
than a repetition and slight reworking of the appellant's witness statement
or something rather like it.  No evidence has been given about  the  status
and standing of the newspaper.  The story is clearly not an important story
in the mind of the newspaper.  As I have explained it only occupies a small
area of newsprint on one page.  It does not trouble  me  particularly  that
the original was not served.  It is clearly available somewhere else a copy
could not have been made and although I do not discourage the provision  of
original material my concern is not that the original has not been produced
but that the  story  itself  is  not  particularly  well  explained  and  I
certainly do not know why it took a month to get in the daily newspaper.

35. However, even if it is true, and it is my finding that it is  not,  this
has not helped the appellant.  It might be  that  difficulties  around  his
home would make it harder for him to re-establish himself in that  part  of
Bangladesh but the evidence just does not deal with  relocation  throughout
the country.  I cannot  attach  weight  to  the  unexplained  reference  to
"reliable sources" telling him that he is in  trouble  in  Bangladesh.   It
might be a sincerely held view but this does not begin to explain  why  any
problem is nationwide.

36. Nor do I accept that the appellant could not be expected to relocate  in
a different part of Bangladesh.  That might be harder for  him  than  going
back to his home area and living there safely if he  could,  but  he  is  a
national of that country and has kept in touch with that  country  and  has
family in that country.  He is an educated man.  The idea that he could not
re-establish himself in his country of nationality does  not  begin  to  be
supported  by  the  very  brief  evidence  where  serious  claims  are  not
explained.

37. I have considered too the links that  he  has  in  the  United  Kingdom.
These are not weighty matters in an Article 8 balancing  exercise.   It  is
wholly understandable that he has got good relations with his  family  here
and that he enjoys living in the United Kingdom but those are  not  reasons
to be allowed to remain.  There is nothing that comes close to  the  weight
that is given, for example, to relationships with a life partner or a minor
child which occasionally make a difference.

38. Similarly his ability to speak English and apparent good  character  add
little or nothing. They merely serve to exclude aggravating factors.

39. The very sketchy evidence here, even if  true,  does  not  outweigh  the
public interest in enforcing immigration control.  I remind myself of  Part
5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I  do  not  accept
there are very significant obstacles  in  the  way  of  reintegration.   In
accordance  with  statute  I  give  little  weight  to  the  private   life
established while the appellant is in the United  Kingdom  with  precarious
immigration status.  There is simply nothing here on which  the  claim  can
succeed.

40. I make it plain that  the  Article  3  claim  is  not  made  out.   Even
applying the real risk standard, it is quite impossible to say there  is  a
serious risk to this appellant's safety throughout Bangladesh.   I  do  not
accept there is even a risk at his home.  The story is too contrived.

41. The facts necessary to allow the appeal on "article 8 grounds"  are  not
established but even if  they  are  they  go  no  further  than  showing  a
subjective fear that that is wholly  unexplained  of  risk  throughout  the
country.  No  objective  evidence  was  provided  to  justify  the  alleged
subjective fear.

42. Although the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  and  I  set  aside  this
decision I have remade it and I dismiss this appeal.

43. Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I  set  aside  its  decision  but  I
substitute a decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 January 2021                |




