
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12026/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2019                 |On 11 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     M Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Caskie, instructed by Gray & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellant  and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan who was born in August 1994.
     It is against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McGavin  who
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights  grounds  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision dated 19 May 2018, which had been made in
    response to the appellant's  application  under  FLR(M)  based  on  his
    marriage to a British citizen wife, who is also from Pakistan  and  who
    has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2009.   She  had  obtained
    settlement here on the basis of an  earlier  marriage.   The  appellant
    himself had been last granted permission to enter the United Kingdom as
    a spouse on 23 July 2015, having been previously here as a student from
    24 November 2010.  Extension of leave to remain as a student  had  been
    refused, and the appellant unsuccessfully appealed which had led to his
    voluntary departure on 2June 2014.  They had married in Pakistan on  22
    October 2014.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis that in  an
    application dated 20 December 2011 the appellant had submitted a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Services.  However, the respondent
    had been informed that a proxy test taker had been used.

 3. As a consequence, the Secretary of State did not consider the appellant
    met the suitability requirements of the relevant Immigration  Rules  to
    his application although  he  had  met  the  eligibility  relationship,
    immigration status, financial, and English language  requirements.   In
    applying paragraph EX.1 the Secretary of State contended  that  he  had
    not seen any evidence that there were insurmountable obstacles, meaning
    the very significant difficulties the appellant and his  partner  would
    face in continuing  their  family  life  together  outside  the  UK  in
    Pakistan and therefore the requirements of EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM  did
    not apply.  Nor did paragraph EX.1.(a)  of  the  same  provision  apply
    because of the failure to meet the suitability requirements  under  the
    Rules.

 4. Further, the respondent did not consider the appellant came within  the
    scope of paragraph 276ADE in respect of his private life nor that there
    were exceptional circumstances on the basis that the  appellant's  wife
    would be able to care for the child should she decide to  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom and not return to Pakistan.

 5. Judge McGavin found on the evidence that it was more probable than  not
    the appellant or someone acting on his behalf had arranged for a  proxy
    to take and pass the ETS English test which the appellant had not taken
    and  passed.   He  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  used  the
    certificate issued which had been fraudulently  obtained  in  order  to
    obtain leave to remain.  He upheld the Secretary of State's decision on
    suitability and in relation to paragraph 276ADE.   As  to  the  child's
    best interests, the judge considered the best interests were to  remain
    in the care and custody of his mother.

 6. Specifically in respect of section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 the judge explained at [40]:

         "40. Turning to section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
             Asylum Act 2002, it is submitted for the  appellant  that  the
             public interest does not require the appellant's removal where
             he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
             qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect  the
             child to leave the UK.  However, whilst the child  is  British
             and therefore it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
             leave the UK, the appellant has not  shown  that  he  is  "not
             liable to deportation" (which is required by  this  provision)
             in the present circumstances where he has  obtained  leave  to
             remain without any evidence of having passed  the  appropriate
             English language test, and in light of  the  evidence  that  a
             proxy took the language examination required by the  appellant
             who  fraudulently  obtained  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis
             thereof."

 7. Further consideration of the case "outside the Immigration  Rules"  the
    judge concluded after some negative observations  regarding  the  speed
    with which the appellant had met and become engaged to his current wife
    concluded at [49]:

         "49. Considering all  of  the  evidence  and  weighing  the  public
             interest in immigration control and  the  appellant's  private
             life rights, I find that there would be no unjustifiably harsh
             consequences for the appellant, his partner  or  their  child,
             were he to be returned to Pakistan.  There are no  exceptional
             circumstances in  this  case  which  render  the  respondent's
             decision not proportionate.  The public interest prevails."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  in
    response to a renewed challenge based solely on error  arising  out  of
    misapplication of the  law  regarding  the  appellant's  liability  for
    deportation  with  reference  to  Yussuf   (meaning   of   "liable   to
    deportation") [2018]  UKUT  00117.   This  included  reference  to  the
    observation in [40] that it would not be reasonable for  the  child  to
    leave the UK.

 9. In a Rule 24 response the Secretary of State explained that the  appeal
    was not opposed, explained as follows:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites  the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
         appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider  whether
         the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  s117(6);  given   the
         Appellant is not subject to deportation action (it is conceded  the
         FTTJ's approach at Para 40 discloses material error), and the  FTTJ
         otherwise found the it was not reasonable to expect the  qualifying
         child to leave the UK."

 1. Mr Govan and Mr Caskie explained at the outset of the hearing that  the
    parties had agreed that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  and
    that the decision by Judge McGavin should be set aside.   They  further
    agreed that as to the re-making to the decision:  the appellant  is  to
    be granted leave to remain in the light of the requirements of  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 having been
    met.  These matters are reflected in a consent order pursuant  to  Rule
    39 of the Procedure Rules.

 2. Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  I re-
    make the decision based on the matters agreed between the  parties  and
    allow the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated 19 May
    2018.

Signed                                  Date 4 October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
