
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/12988/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2017                            |On 31 October 2017            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    Ms Jeanniffer Jamoraon Molano Molano
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None, No appearance by the Appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant a national of the  Philippines,  date  of  birth  20  June
    1986, appealed against the Secretary  of  State's  decision,  dated  11
    January 2016, to refuse to grant her leave to remain  on  human  rights
    grounds based  on  her  family  and  private  life  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules (the Rules) and Article  8
    ECHR.

3.   Her appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sethi  (the  Judge)
    whose decision (D) on 13 June 2017 allowed her appeal with reference to
    Article 8 ECHR on human rights grounds.

4.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes on 13 July 2017.  The Judge  in
    granting permission accepted that the first and third grounds raised by
    the Secretary of State raised arguable  errors  of  law  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sethi (the Judge).  It had been conceded at  the  appeal
    by counsel on behalf of the Appellant that the Claimant's  claim  could
    not succeed under Appendix FM  or  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Rules.  Reliance before the Judge  was  solely  put  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules in respect of the  Appellant's  family
    life as an adult dependent child in the UK.

5.   Notice of hearing of today's hearing was sent out to the  Appellant  at
    her home address and  to  her  representatives  Bespoke  Solicitors  of
    Harrow on 31 August 2017.  With the attendance of  neither  I  arranged
    for Tribunal staff to telephone the solicitors to ascertain whether  or
    not notice of the hearing had been received by them giving today's date
    19 October 10 a.m. for hearing at Field  House,  15  Breams  Buildings,
    London, EC4A 1DZ.  Bespoke Solicitors said they had sent a fax  to  the
    Tribunal on 18 October 2017 in which  they  indicated  that  they  were
    without instructions, they had no contact with their  client  and  they
    would not be appearing to make any response on her behalf.  There is no
    explanation why the Appellant was not present and nothing  to  indicate
    any reason why she did not attend or could not attend.  No request  had
    been made for an adjournment of the hearing in order to enable  her  to
    attend.  The notice of hearing also states:

         "If a party or his representative does not attend the  hearing  the
         Tribunal may determine the appeal in the absence of that party."

6.   At the hearing Mr Jarvis indicated to me why  the  Secretary  of  State
    maintained the arguments that the Judge had failed to properly consider
    the correct pathway under the Rules  before  assessing  the  Article  8
    claim and in particular had failed to address the significance  of  the
    fact that the Appellant, because of her circumstances, as found  to  be
    in the Philippines,  could  not  show  that  she  could  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.  Rather it  was  clear  from  the
    Judge's decision that whilst it would not be the same life she would be
    provided for with the practicalities of food and shelter and she  would
    be able to develop her own private life in  that  country.   Mr  Jarvis
    pointed out the apparent contradiction between that  finding  [D38]  of
    the decision of the Judge and the finding in  paragraph  39  where  the
    Judge said:

         "...although the Appellant's mother had stated the  willingness  to
         send financial remittances to the Appellant as would be required it
         was clear from her evidence that  her  real  concern  was  for  her
         married daughter's  wellbeing  as  a  woman  living  alone  in  the
         Philippines in isolation from her parents.  I find concerns  to  be
         genuine in the circumstances where the Appellant has no  experience
         of living independently and no means of her own."


7.   I remind myself that at the material time  the  Appellant  had  entered
    the United Kingdom aged 23 years as a student and had overstayed  after
    2012 and was currently aged 27 -  a  mature  adult.   It  is  therefore
    factually to correct her describe her as the child of her  parents  but
    it is perhaps to understate her age and responsibilities  as  an  adult
    let alone her abilities to manage her own affairs.

8.   It did not seem to me that the Judge appreciated that the fact  that  a
    woman can live alone in the Philippines : Nor  was it determinative, as
    the Judge seems to think, of the impact  on  family  life  and  whether
    Article 8 was truly engaged as one of those exceptional cases where the
    facts show that it did.

9.   It is clear that the Appellant in the UK was  not  in  its  true  sense
    financially independent.  In the case of Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA  Civ  803
    the court said as to the meaning of financially independent in  Section
    117B(3) NIAA 2002  '...  This is an ordinary English  phrase,  and  the
    FTT  gave  it  its  natural  meaning,  as  indicating  someone  who  is
    financially   independent   of   others.    This   is    the    correct
    interpretation'.  The fact was that the Appellant was  not  financially
    independent as she relied upon her parents for her  financial  support.
    Accordingly the Judge's finding of her  being  financially  independent
    was misconceived.  Ultimately taken at its highest the Judge concluded,
    although it appears to be mistyped or an error, that if the appeal  had
    been based only on the  Appellant's  private  life  he  would  have  no
    hesitation in finding the Respondent's decision proportionate  but  the
    Judge on the strength of what he assessed the Appellant's  family  life
    with her parents: Bearing in mind the correct assessment  is  still  as
    stated in the case of Kugathas [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31   that  more  than
    normal emotional ties between  an  adult  child  and  its  parents  was
    required.   In those circumstances being recited by  the  Judge  simply
    did not get close to the kind of connection that is needed  to  sustain
    an Article 8 ECHR claim.

10.  Accordingly I found, having considered the  matter,  that  the  Judge's
    decision demonstrated an error of law in the manner  in  which  he  had
    proceeded to consider the  Article  8  ECHR  claim  particularly  when,
    because of her circumstances, there were no very significant  obstacles
    to the Appellant having a private life in the Philippines.

11.  Then as to the conclusion which the Judge reached  that  the  Appellant
    would be returning to the Philippines to live as a single  woman  alone
    with no family support is not sustainable when as is pointed out it was
    accepted the Appellant had her grandfather's home and family to  return
    to, the circumstances in which the Appellant lived prior to  coming  to
    the United Kingdom were plainly  relevant  and  as  such  there  was  a
    material mistake of fact and law, on the evidence, that  the  Appellant
    would be alone in the Philippines as the conclusion set out [D39].

12.  In the circumstances I considered that  the  impact  of  removal  would
    lead to the Appellant's return to the Philippines, where she  grew  up,
    to the existence of  family  and  connections  with  presumably  school
    friends and adult friends before she left to come as a student  to  the
    United Kingdom: At which time of course she had the intention to return
    to have a life there.  In the circumstances it did not seem to me  that
    these are the kinds of exceptional circumstances that make  up  a  case
    which can succeed outside of the Immigration Rules which  are  directly
    applicable to her claim.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was made nor is one required or was sought for.

FEE AWARD

A fee was paid but the appeal has failed and accordingly  no  fee  award  is
    appropriate.


Signed                                  Dated 25 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

