
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12691/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Remotely                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2021                             |On 3 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    f o a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Adewole, Solicitor, Blackfields Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
      Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I  make
      this order because the Appellant  has  established  that  she  is  the
      victim of trafficking.

   2. The appeal came before me for re-hearing.  It is an appeal against the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 12 November 2019 dismissing the
      Appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent on  15  July
      2019 refusing her application of 20 May 2019 for leave  to  remain  on
      human rights grounds.

   3. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch's reasons for finding an error of law  have
      already been served on the parties but for the purposes of any  appeal
      they should be regarded as annexed to this Determination  and  Reasons
      even though they have already been served.  The short  point  is  that
      Judge Finch was not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
      given the balancing exercise that was required to determine the  human
      rights appeal and set aside its decision.  Judge Finch gave directions
      including a direction that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings at
      paragraphs 15, 16, 17 and 31 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision are
      preserved.  I set those out below.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal decided:

  15.    The respondent states that no family  life  has  been  established
  because the Appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting relationship
  with her British partner.  In making a determination on this issue, I had
  in mind the following aspects:-

   (i) The Appellant and her British partner  had  a  traditional  marriage
   ceremony on 1 February 2019.

   (ii) The Appellant then contacted the Marriage Registry at  Peterborough
   and was invited to go in for a  marriage  interview.   Thereafter,  they
   were both invited to attend for a further interview with the Home Office
   at Solihull, following which, they were given permission to marry.

   (iii) The Appellant got married  to  her  British  partner  in  a  civil
   ceremony at Peterborough Registry Office on 1 July 2019 and had a church
   ceremony on 5  August  2019.   Photographic  evidence  was  produced  to
   support this.

   (iv) The Appellant gave evidence that they began living  together  on  1
   July 2019, the date they got married.  She gave a  detailed  account  of
   how she met her partner and how she met his parents and family.

   (v) The Appellant's partner, Dr Akinbami  Akinwale  gave  evidence.   He
   likewise confirmed how he met the Appellant, explained how much he loved
   and cared for her and that he wanted her with him every day.

   (vi) Ms Kehinde Ajayi gave a statement dated 24 September 2019, in which
   she confirmed that the  Appellant  introduced  her  to  Dr  Akinwale  in
   December 2017 and that the  Appellant  began  living  with  him  from  1
   February 2019.  She says that she did not object as she could  see  that
   they both loved each other.  Based on all that I heard, whilst there was
   a discrepancy between the Appellant and Mrs Ajayi as to  the  date  that
   the Appellant and her partner began living  together,  I  am  more  than
   persuaded that the relationship between the Appellant and her partner is
   one that is genuine and subsisting.  This was based  on  the  fact  that
   they  took  their  marriage  vows  seriously  and  followed  their   own
   traditions initially, married according to English law and then  married
   according to their religion.  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  has  been
   living with her British partner either from February 2019 or at the very
   latest, July 2019.  It was evident that both parties care very much  for
   each other, are both in a relationship with each other  and  are  making
   future plans together, such as having a family.   The  evidence  of  the
   British partner was compelling.

  16.         It thus follows that the immigration decision has the  effect
  of preventing the Appellant living in the United Kingdom with her partner
  against their wishes.  The failure to respect her wishes  does  not  have
  the potential to engage Article 8 but the very fact that her partner is a
  British citizen, works and lives in the United  Kingdom  means  that  the
  decision to refuse  leave  may  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
  potentially to engage the operation of Article 8,  thereby  disposing  of
  the second Razgar question.

  17.         In considering the proportionality of the decision, I have in
  mind that the Appellant and her partner  were  given  permission  by  the
  respondent to get married, which may have led to an expectation in  their
  minds, that they would be  allowed  to  remain  together  in  the  United
  Kingdom.

  31.         As I balance both sides of the argument, I bear in mind  that
  the Appellant speaks English, she is now  financially  supported  by  her
  partner and has been in the United Kingdom for sixteen years, which is  a
  lengthy  period  of  time.   She  could  also  rightly  argue  that  with
  permission having been given her to get married, there was an expectation
  by her that she would be allowed to remain."

   5. I say immediately that this case was not argued before me on the basis
      of there being a "legitimate expectation" in  the  public  law  sense.
      The point being made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and accepted  by
      Judge Finch was that the Appellant's decision to remain in the  United
      Kingdom after applying for permission to marry has  to  be  considered
      against the possibility that being given  permission  to  marry  could
      have been construed as permission to remain.

   6. I have before me the papers that were before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and indeed skeleton arguments and  similar  submissions  made  in  the
      course of proceedings that are relevant to determining  whether  there
      was an issue of law.  I have not spent much  time  with  these.   More
      importantly because they are relevant to these proceedings, I  have  a
      skeleton argument for  the  Appellant  dated  10  November  2020.  The
      earliest document I was asked to  consider  is  entitled  "Appellant's
      Written Submissions and is signed by Mr  Shahadoth  Karim  of  Counsel
      dated 16th May 2020.  Although primarily concerned with whether or not
      there was an error of law these are still of  some  relevance  because
      they emphasise the importance of following the  decisions  in  Agyarko
      and Iguga, R (on the  application  of)  v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  and
      Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and particularly Agyarko at  paragraph
      51 in where it was said:

  "If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if  residing  in  the  United
  Kingdom unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to  enter,
  at least if an application were made from  outside  the  UK,  then  there
  might be no public  interest  in  his  or  her  removal.   The  point  is
  illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40."

   7. The written submissions also refer to the "very significant  obstacles
      to  reintegration"  test  at  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)   of   HC   395
      maintaining that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom as  a  child
      and spent all of her adult life in the United Kingdom and  has  strong
      and private family life ties in the United Kingdom so that she  cannot
      return.  This is particularly so because it is  the  Appellant's  case
      that she was maltreated and this claim is supported by her own witness
      statement and that of her aunt. It is  also  said  that  the  Tribunal
      ought to have shown more regard for the sponsor's ties and family  and
      private life in the United Kingdom.

   8. In short it was contended that there is no public interest in  removal
      and the appeal should be allowed.

   9. There is a Reply also by Mr Karim dated 9 June 2020.  This is prompted
      by the reliance on the decision of this Tribunal  in  Younas  (Section
      117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 00129 (IAC).   The  Reply
      recognises the weight of Younas but emphasises there still has  to  be
      an individual decision in each case. Before me it  was  certainly  not
      the contention of the Secretary of State, nor could it have been, that
      the decision of the Tribunal in Younas somehow overrides the  decision
      of the House of Lords and Supreme Court.

  10. It was contended that there were no good reasons to justify  temporary
      separation.  The Appellant has not been  shown  to  have  committed  a
      criminal offence and there is no suggestion of deception or  fraud  on
      her part.  It was contended that Agyarko recognised that  there  might
      be no public interest in removal where a person has  been  in  the  UK
      unlawfully and according to the Reply:

  "Therefore, the fact that the person has been here unlawfully, cannot  be
  a factor to be weighed heavily against the appellant.   This  would  make
  [51] of Agyarko devoid of any real meaning."

  11. The appellant's skeleton  argument  for  the  hearing  before  me,  as
      indicated above, was dated 10 November 2020.  It  is  not  signed  but
      runs to 33 paragraphs.  Curiously it seems to be concerned whether  or
      not an error of law  should  be  found  when  that  had  already  been
      established but it  does  assert  that  the  Article  8  exercise  was
      materially flawed.

  12. The Secretary of State's skeleton argument is signed by  Ms  Isherwood
      and is dated 21 December 2020.  This makes  certain  points.   One  is
      that the Appellant never complained about trafficking to the Secretary
      of State directly; the claim to have been the victim of trafficking is
      something that emerged in the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms
      Isherwood's point is that the Appellant did  not  present  as  someone
      afraid of returning to her country of  nationality  lest  she  be  re-
      trafficked.

  13. The Secretary of State maintained that Agyarko was explained  properly
      in Younas which pointed out how in Chikwamba Lord Brown had recognised
      that it might sometimes be appropriate for a person  to  return  to  a
      country and seek entry clearance from there even if it was only  going
      to be a short stay.

  14. The grounds emphasised that the Appellant could not succeed under EX.1
      of Appendix FM.  The Appellant had not status in  the  United  Kingdom
      and she could not satisfy the Rules.

  15. It is of particular  concern  to  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
      Appellant did nothing to regularise her position after her application
      was refused until 2011 until the application  leading  to  the  appeal
      before me.

  16. According to the Respondent, there were no insurmountable obstacles in
      the way of the Appellant returning to Nigeria.

  17. Before I highlight the evidence, I remind  myself  that  any  findings
      necessary for a "private and family life "claim have to be  proved  by
      the Appellant on the balance of probabilities and  I  confirm  that  I
      have not made any findings without first considering the evidence as a
      whole even if in place I indicate findings before finishing my  review
      of the evidence.

  18. The Appellant gave evidence.  She adopted her witness statement  dated
      24 September 2019 and a supplementary statement dated 18 May 2020.

  19. In her witness statement 24 September 2019 the Appellant explained how
      she had entered the United Kingdom in 2003 with her mother's  approval
      because  of  her  uncle's  promise  to  advance  her  education.   The
      Appellant soon formed the view that the real reason he had brought her
      to the United Kingdom was to babysit and do family chores.  In January
      2005, that is two years after she arrived, she enrolled in a secondary
      school and studied for her GCSE's and then went to a college where she
      studied for a BTEC in IT.  Contrary to her  uncle's  expectations  she
      did well in her BTEC examinations but her uncle made it clear that  he
      would not shoulder any further responsibility and he did  not  need  a
      babysitter because his children are now mature.

  20. The Appellant applied for a place at the University of Northampton and
      accepted the place even though she was unsure how she would fund it.

  21. I note that she was nearly 22 years old when she  started  university.
      She had help from friends and church members and raised fees  for  her
      first year, but life was very expensive and she had to drop out.   She
      then engaged in charitable activities and did much work for the church
      and came to meet the man she later  married.   She  talked  about  her
      relationship with her husband but that  is  not  relevant  because  of
      findings that have been made and preserved.

  22. The Appellant explained how there was a proxy marriage in  Nigeria  in
      accordance with custom and that her father organised the  registration
      of the proxy marriage.

  23. The Appellant said very little, if anything, in  her  statement  about
      any difficulties she  might  have  in  returning  to  Nigeria  and  of
      establishing herself there although she did make the  point  that  she
      had been in the United Kingdom for over sixteen years  when  she  made
      the statement, which  is  more  than  half  her  life,  and  that  her
      husband's family were all settled in the United Kingdom  and  she  had
      strong relationships with people in the United Kingdom who had  become
      her friends.

  24. The supplementary statement expressed her "joy" at an  opportunity  to
      appeal and then said at paragraph 4:

  "However, since the COVID-19 pandemic and everywhere is locked  down,  it
  has become  increasingly  difficult  to  even  contemplate  returning  to
  Nigeria to go and apply for entry clearance."

  25. In answer to supplementary questions she expressed  the  pleasure  she
      had in her husband's family in the United Kingdom  and  said  how  she
      wanted to start a family with her husband in the United Kingdom.

  26. She was asked specifically if she had any  fears  about  returning  to
      Nigeria and replied that she knew no-one there and had no idea for how
      long she would have to stay there without  her  husband  and  she  had
      become used to spending her time with her husband.   This  has  to  be
      considered  with  evidence  about  their  present  arrangements  which
      involve her husband spending more than a small  amount  of  time  away
      from the United Kingdom.

  27. In cross-examination she confirmed without hesitation that she  had  a
      mother in Nigeria but said that she was not close.  She accepted  that
      she had sent her aunt to talk to her mother and I consider the  aunt's
      statement below.

  28. She was asked if  she  had  some  relationship  with  her  mother  and
      accepted readily that she did and that her parents and stepfather  had
      been involved in her  wedding  planning  but  that  was  for  cultural
      reasons.  She said that she last spoke to her mother by telephone over
      the Christmas holiday period 2020.  It was a  brief  conversation  but
      she had contacted her mother  to  ask  after  her  health.   They  had
      previously spoken on the occasion of her wedding anniversary. She  had
      never been back to Nigeria since she left as  a  child.   She  had  no
      contact with her grandmother.  Her only contact was with her mother.

  29. She said that her husband and his parents mainly arranged the marriage
      and her father stood in for her.  She explained this was part  of  the
      proxy marriage arrangements.  She said that she had no dealings at all
      with her natural father.  She dealt with her stepfather.

  30. She was asked why she did not  leave  the  United  Kingdom  after  her
      application was refused in 2012.  She said she had  been  there  as  a
      child and abandoned and did not know what to do.  She admits that  she
      broke the law.

  31. Ms Isherwood produced the refusal letter dated 5 March 2012.  This was
      addressed,  apparently,  to  the  appellant's  solicitors  because  it
      referred to them stating that their client had developed a strong bond
      with her uncle, aunt and cousins in the United Kingdom.  It seemed  to
      be the case then that there was family life with her relatives in  the
      United Kingdom.  She offered no explanation for this but had indicated
      that she had little to do with that application.

  32. The appellant's husband gave evidence.

  33. He adopted a witness statement that he  had  signed  on  24  September
      2019.  He is a British citizen although also had retained his Nigerian
      nationality.  He had lived most of his life in the United Kingdom.  He
      had obtained a PhD in December 2013 from the University  of  Glamorgan
      also known as the University of South Wales.  He had a job as  a  data
      analysis with BGL Group in Peterborough but then worked for a firm  in
      London and presently worked with Credit Suisse.  He had  started  that
      employment  in  October  2017  and  that  required  him  to  work   in
      Switzerland for much of his time.  He also had a consultancy  business
      that gave him a self-employed income.  He explained  how  he  met  and
      eventually fell in love with his wife.

  34. He said how he had decided  to  try  and  regularise  the  Appellant's
      immigration status at about the same time that he had started to  work
      in Zurich.  He returned to the United Kingdom every weekend to see his
      wife.  He wanted to get their domestic circumstances on an  even  keel
      and the traditional arrangements of the  marriage  all  sorted  before
      regularising the position.

  35. He said that he had spent his teenage years in  Nigeria  but  had  not
      lived there for over eighteen years and claimed  to  have  only  spent
      eight days in Nigeria.  He had no ties with  Nigeria  at  all  as  his
      family were all in the United Kingdom.  He had clients in  the  United
      Kingdom who depended  on  him  being  there  to  support  his  private
      business.

  36. He did not say how much he earned but confirmed it was more  than  the
      �18,600 required by the immigration rules.

  37. He thought it would be difficult to integrate into Nigeria.  They  had
      no experience of living there and  were  much  better  in  the  United
      Kingdom with their extended families.

  38. He was cross-examined.

  39. In answer to further questions he said that since the COVID crisis  he
      no  longer  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  every  weekend.   More
      typically it was every two weeks.  He was asked if he had ever been to
      Nigeria and he replied, "Almost twenty years ago and only  back  twice
      the last time ten years ago I went for a weekend and a wedding."

  40. He was cross-examined.

  41. He was asked why he had a Nigerian passport if he never used  it.   He
      gave no satisfactory answer.

  42. He was then asked about his wedding in  Nigeria.   He  said  that  his
      relatives went to Nigeria for the wedding and stayed in a hotel.

  43. He said he had minimal contact with his wife's family but did wish his
      mother-in-law "Happy Christmas" when his wife was talking  to  her  by
      telephone.

  44. He confirmed that he had attended his wedding ceremony in Nigeria.  It
      was pointed out that this was inconsistent with his claim not to  have
      been to Nigeria for ten years.  He offered no explanation for  getting
      that wrong.

  45. That was the end of the evidence.

  46. I looked at the "aunt's" witness statement.  She is Mrs Kehinde  Ajayi
      and the statement is dated 24  September  2019.   Mrs  Ajayi  did  not
      attend before me because of family commitments.

  47. Her evidence has rather lost its  significance  because  it  has  been
      taken over by events.  In extreme outline it said that  she  took  the
      Appellant into her family partly to help her and  partly  because  she
      proved a very valuable and useful babysitter.  She  was  pleased  when
      the Appellant and her husband found each other.  She explained how  in
      2015 she travelled "home" and met the Appellant's mother  and  clearly
      found that a pleasant meeting although she was sorry for the  way  the
      Appellant had been treated by her uncle.   She  said  that  since  the
      engagement the Appellant had been staying at her now husband's house.

  48. She offered the opinion that it would be harsh for  the  appellant  to
      return to Nigeria.  The Appellant and her husband  both  left  Nigeria
      when they were young and have lost touch with the place and have built
      a life for themselves in the United Kingdom.

  49.  The  documentary  evidence  includes  documents  relating  to   their
      accommodation  and  their  marriage  and  the  appellant's   husband's
      employment.  It also shows that he has  declared  income  as  a  self-
      employed consultant.  These things are not in dispute  and  I  see  no
      need to consider the evidence in more detail.

  50. There are startling absences in the evidence which do not  assist  the
      Appellant.  Perhaps of  primary  importance  is  the  absence  of  any
      evidence about the waiting time that the  Appellant  could  expect  to
      face in the event of her going to Nigeria and making an application to
      return.   There  is  nothing  here  to  suggest  that  it   would   be
      particularly difficult for her to make an application (I have in  mind
      that in some parts of the world people with very modest resources have
      to travel very long distances indeed to attend an interview  and  that
      can be very burdensome) or that the application system is  delayed  by
      reason of being overwhelmed.

  51. There is no evidence before me that the appellant would not be safe in
      Nigeria.   Certainly,  asylum  claims   from   citizens   of   Nigeria
      occasionally succeed and Nigeria is not listed under section 94(4)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  a  place  where
      claims from women are identified as "clearly unfounded" but  generally
      I have no reason to fear that an educated woman such as the  Appellant
      who has access to financial support and, probably, some social support
      cannot go about her ordinary lawful business there with due expedition
      and confidence.

  52. The Appellant's relationship with her mother is clearly subsisting.  I
      accept that the Appellant probably is a victim of "trafficking" in the
      sense that she entered the United Kingdom  expecting  to  advance  her
      education and found herself doing a lot of domestic chores.   However,
      this is not the case of a  person  who  is  attracted  to  the  United
      Kingdom by false promises and find herself working for example in  the
      sex industry.  She has been deeply disappointed but that is all.  This
      is not the kind of case where there are reasons to fear that a  person
      who has been tricked into being trafficked would be a victim again  in
      the event of return.  Neither is it the kind of case where  there  are
      people in the country of nationality that might be harbouring a grudge
      or anxious to settle a score.  These concerns just do not exist  here.
      The Appellant has earned a BTEC and has read one year  at  university.
      She has a financially secure husband and a loving marriage.

  53. Further, although the Appellant's relationship  with  her  mother  may
      well be strained but it is pleasant rather than antagonistic.  I  base
      this finding on the fact there  are  telephone  conversations  between
      them and the readiness with which she volunteered the information that
      there was a call at Christmas.  It seems to me likely that her  mother
      would be more than willing to meet her and give her  some  support  if
      not to accommodate her.  There is nothing to support  a  finding  that
      the mother would be making life difficult for  her  in  the  event  of
      return to Nigeria but even if her mother  ignored  her,  there  is  no
      evidence to support a finding that she would  endeavour  to  harm  the
      Appellant.

  54. I do not suggest that the appellant's husband is  fabulously  wealthy,
      but he is in regular work.  There is nothing to suggest that he  would
      be unwilling or unable to pay for the  appellant  to  be  accommodated
      decently and respectively and safely whilst an application was made.

  55. There is nothing to direct me away from my finding that the  appellant
      would be able to return safely to Nigeria and make an application  for
      entry clearance to enter the country with permission as a wife and for
      that application to succeed and be granted in the usual way.

  56. This is not a case where there are children of  the  family  who  need
      their mother.  It  is  not  the  case  where  there  are  particularly
      compelling reasons for a husband and wife to be  together.   In  fact,
      this is a case where the husband and wife have organised their affairs
      that they spend quite a bit of their time  apart.   I  am  not  for  a
      moment suggesting that this indicates that there is a lack of  sharing
      in their married lives.  I accept completely the  evidence  that  they
      prefer to spend time together and look forward to the times that  they
      can spend together but this is just not the kind of case that one sees
      occasionally where one party to  a  marriage  really  cannot  function
      without the presence of the other.

  57. I do not accept that the appellant's husband was entirely truthful  in
      his evidence to me.  He was clearly shown to have been at least casual
      in his evidence about returning to Nigeria because he did tell  me  he
      had not been there for ten years and he did tell me he had  been  back
      for his wedding and those answers  are  completely  incompatible.   He
      clearly was not concerned to be absolutely accurate and  full  in  his
      answers to questions.  However, he certainly gave no evidence that his
      wife would be in any kind of danger in Nigeria because she was married
      to him but his evidence, like the Appellant's in this respect, I  find
      more significant for its omissions than its content.

  58. Really the reason the appellant has not gone back is she does not want
      to return and her husband does not want her to.  There  is  no  reason
      why they cannot.

  59. This is where I must consider the submissions on the law.  Clearly the
      appellant and her husband have established a genuine marriage and this
      means that requiring her to leave the United Kingdom where her husband
      is resident some of the time and is a national,  will  interfere  with
      their private and family lives  and  the  interference  will  be  with
      relationships that are special and have to be promoted  and  are  very
      much at  the  "family  life"  end  of  the  private  and  family  life
      continuing.  There is no argument about this.  The  interesting  point
      is  whether  it  should  be   decided   that   the   interference   is
      proportionate.  It is now established beyond all doubt in Part  5A  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that the  maintenance
      of effective immigration controls is in  the  public  interest.   This
      must mean that is in the public interest to enforce the Rules  and  to
      expect people to abide by them.  It is the nature of a Rule to  create
      a boundary or line and there will  always  be  occasions  when  people
      close to the line but not on the side of it they wish to be,  will  be
      able to give an aura of being hard done by and it is also  right  that
      on occasions interference is disproportionate and this has  been  well
      recognised by this Tribunal and more importantly by the Supreme  Court
      and the Court of Appeal.  However, the difficulty for the appellant in
      this case is that she remained in the United Kingdom  when  she  ought
      not to have done.  She could have returned to Nigeria or at  the  very
      least regularised her position if she had a proper reason  to  remain.
      She did not do that and whilst remaining in the United Kingdom without
      permission became attracted to a  man  with  whom  she  has  formed  a
      genuine marriage.  The requirements of the Immigration Rules which are
      approved by parliament and are the result of policy  worked  out  over
      many years of experience is that people who wish to marry should  have
      permission to be in the United Kingdom and if they do not should go to
      their country of nationality or at least outside  the  United  Kingdom
      and make an application under  the  Rules.   It  is  established  that
      sometimes (and indeed on other occasions  too)  where  the  Rules  are
      going to be satisfied it is disproportionate  to  require  someone  to
      leave in the expectation that they would soon return.  However, it  is
      not the role of the Tribunal or the Human Rights Act to circumvent the
      will of parliament or to say that people who  comply  with  the  Rules
      should not have to leave the United Kingdom in  order  to  make  their
      application.  It is not suggested that the Immigration  Rules  are  in
      themselves fundamentally compatible with human rights and if that were
      suggested it would not be determined here.  So the appeal can only  be
      allowed if there is something out  of  the  ordinary  that  shows  the
      ordinary consequences of the operation of the Rules  would  produce  a
      disproportionate result.  The decision in Younas  reminds  me  to  pay
      particular regard to Part 5A.  There are no aggravating factors  here.
      Clearly it is not a  deportation  case.   The  appellant  speaks  good
      English and is able to integrate into British society.  A relationship
      was established when she was in the United Kingdom unlawfully and that
      means little weight can be attached to it there is no child  involved.
      I reject completely any contention that the  appellant  satisfies  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 terms.  She  has
      not shown very significant obstacles to  reintegration  into  Nigeria.
      As indicated she has no enemies there.  Her mother is there.   She  is
      not short of money.  There really is no argument at all about it.  She
      just does not want to go.

  60. Clearly any refusal to permit the Appellant to remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom would frustrate her wish to  live  with  her  husband  in  his
      country of nationality. It would interfere with her, and his,  private
      and family lives. It would also be lawful in the sense that there is a
      basis in law for the decision and it would be for the  proper  purpose
      of enforcing immigration control. The more challenging question is  if
      the decision is "proportionate" with regard to the rules, to  Part  5A
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and generally.

  61. The evidence clearly show that the Appellant is a thoroughly competent
      user of the English language, that she  would  be  maintained  by  her
      husband and, although not necessary for the purpose of considering the
      rules, that she would probably be able to earn at least a living  wage
      when she was permitted to work. Her long stay in the  United  Kingdom,
      her time at university and her connections with a Church  are  amongst
      the more important reasons for finding that she is "integrated".

  62. I have no hesitation in finding that the Appellant  does  not  satisfy
      the relevant rules. For the reasons given  to  explain  my  conclusion
      that the Appellant could establish herself in Nigeria in order to make
      an application for return to the United Kingdom as a wife I  am  quite
      unpersuaded that the Appellant would face  "insurmountable  obstacles"
      in the way of continuing their family life outside the United Kingdom.
      They have the means and wherewithal, but not the inclination  to  live
      in Nigeria.

  63. Neither can the appeal be allowed with reference  to  Part  5A.  I  am
      obliged by section 117B(5) to give "little weight" to  a  relationship
      with a qualifying partner that is a established a time when the person
      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. The Appellant knew in March  2012
      that her application for leave had failed. She was then 21 years  old.
      She was responsible for her affairs and was not  overshadowed  by  her
      trafficker. I give some weight to the thin veneer of approval given by
      the decision to permit her marriage and that fact  that,  by  then  at
      least, she was not hiding from the authorities but she should not have
      been in the United Kingdom much after March 2012.

  64. Even so, I remind myself that Article 8 means that it might not be the
      case that requiring the Appellant to  leave  is  proportionate.   That
      done, I find that there is nothing here that elevates this into a case
      where there are particular concerns.  Especially there are no children
      and no reason to  think  that  the  appellant  would  be  involved  in
      protracted delays or at any kind of risk in Nigeria.   The  fact  that
      there is a well-known pandemic which I describe as  the  COVID  crisis
      has not been developed in a way that gives any  evidential  basis  for
      saying  that  it  creates  any  reasons  that   would   make   removal
      disproportionate.  I just do not know what travel  restrictions  there
      are about  going  to  Nigeria  or  to  conditions  that  would  create
      restrictions on arrival or the chances of anyone being infected there.
       I have just not been told and I am not prepared to guess.

  65. The starting position must be that the Rules apply and  a  person  who
      does not comply with the Rules cannot expect to be allowed  to  remain
      on human rights grounds just because an out of country application for
      leave can be expected to succeed.  None of the concerns that have been
      found in reported decisions that have been  brought  to  my  attention
      make separation unacceptable exist here.

  66. I appreciate that from  the  perspective  of  the  Appellant  and  her
      husband that this decision is a  nuisance  and  a  disappointment.   I
      emphasise that the primary cause of the problem  is  her  decision  to
      remain in the United  Kingdom  without  permission.   People  are  not
      entitled to their own private Immigration Rules and there is  a  route
      open to the Appellant to succeed in what she wants to achieve.  It  is
      to go to her country of nationality and make an application  and  then
      she can expect to succeed.  That will involve a period  of  separation
      (there is no evidence of an  excessive  period  of  separation)  in  a
      country where she could live safely while the application is  made.  I
      am satisfied that the decision is entirely proportionate.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss this appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 January 2021                |










