
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12664/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10th January 2018                  |On 23rd February 2018                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                  isaac [o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson of Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Obhi  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 2nd March 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born 2nd June 1966 who on 2nd June
    2015 made a human rights application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK
    based upon his family and private life.

 3. The Appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 20th  December  2003  with
    permission to remain until 11th June 2004.  He overstayed and  did  not
    apply for leave until 29th January 2013. He then applied for  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a person settled in the UK.   This  application
    was refused on 15th March 2013 with no right of appeal.

 4. The Appellant made a similar application on 24th April 2014  which  was
    refused on 29th May 2014 without a right of appeal.  On 2nd  June  2015
    the Appellant made a further application for leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of his family and private life, this application was  refused  on
    19th November 2015 with a right of appeal to the FtT.

 5. The basis of the application for leave to remain is that the  Appellant
    met [AK], who is  a  British  citizen,  in  2007.   Their  relationship
    commenced in 2009 and they  underwent  a  customary  marriage  on  30th
    January 2010.  This was a proxy marriage celebrated in Ghana  by  their
    families.

 6. The Appellant pointed out that he had been resident  in  the  UK  since
    2003 and that he and his  spouse  were  on  an  NHS  waiting  list  for
    infertility treatment, and his spouse has employment in the  UK  and  a
    private life  in  this  country,  and  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple relocating to Ghana.

 7. The Respondent's reasons for refusal are contained in  a  letter  dated
    19th November 2015 and are summarised below.

 8. It was accepted that the Appellant and his spouse  were  in  a  genuine
    relationship  and  that  the  Appellant   satisfied   the   suitability
    requirements of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) and (ii).   The  Respondent
    went on to consider section EX.1(b) and  refused  the  application  for
    leave to  remain  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles  to  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  his   spouse
    continuing outside the UK.

 9. The Respondent considered the Appellant's private life  with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules, finding  that  he  had
    not resided in the UK for a continuous  period  of  twenty  years,  and
    there would be no very significant obstacles to  his  integration  into
    Ghana.

10.  The  Respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant a grant of leave to  remain  pursuant
    to Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the  1950
    Convention) outside the Immigration Rules and decided that  there  were
    no such exceptional circumstances.

11. The FtT heard evidence from the Appellant  and  his  spouse.   The  FtT
    found that the financial requirements of  Appendix  FM  were  satisfied
    because the spouse earned above the minimum income threshold, and noted
    that the Appellant speaks English and  that  they  were  in  a  genuine
    relationship.  The FtT found that the suitability criteria were not met
    because the Appellant did not have permission  to  be  in  the  UK  but
    accepted this may not be an issue if it was proved that  insurmountable
    obstacles existed to family life continuing outside the UK.

12. The FtT found that such insurmountable obstacles did  not  exist.   The
    FtT did not accept that there were any exceptional circumstances  which
    would justify allowing the appeal with reference to Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  The FtT found  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and his spouse, but found
    that the Appellant could return to Ghana to  make  an  application  for
    entry clearance.  The FtT referred to the case of Chen [2015] UKUT  189
    (IAC).  The FtT therefore found that the Respondent's decision did  not
    breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention and the appeal was dismissed.

13. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Judge Gibb of the FtT in the following terms;

         1.   The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Ghana,  was  refused  leave  on
             19.11.2015, and his appeal against removal  was  dismissed  by
             Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Obhi   (promulgated   on
             2.3.2017).  This means that the hearing was  just  before  the
             judgment in Agyarko v Secretary of State [2017]  UKSC  11,  on
             22.2.2017 but promulgation was just after it.

         2.   The grounds, which were in time, complain that the judge erred
             in her approach to Article 8 and the tests in the Rules.

         3.   The grounds are poorly drafted.  They contain errors, such  as
             referring to children at para 8, and lack proper analysis  and
             specificity.  They also fail to mention the Agyarko case.

         4.   However, the test for granting permission is not the  same  as
             assessing the quality or otherwise of the grounds.

         5.   Although the judge is not  to  be  blamed  given  the  timing,
             nevertheless the Agyarko case,  which  can  be  said  to  have
             established what the law in this area had been, undermines the
             legal framework that she applied in a number of  ways.   First
             it showed that the SS  (Congo)  threshold  that  she  used  in
             reasoning and in questioning the Sponsor was wrong; second  it
             showed  that  'insurmountable  obstacles'   and   'exceptional
             circumstances'  were  different  tests  (and  a  couple  could
             succeed on the latter having failed on the former); and  third
             it showed that public interest would be at  its  lowest  in  a
             case where the Rules were met save  for  entry  clearance  (as
             here) (see paras 48 and 51 of Agyarko).

         6.   It is therefore arguable that the judge erred in law  in  that
             the legal framework applied, relying on  SS  (Congo),  and  on
             Chen [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) in relation  to  entry  clearance
             was not the correct one in the  light  of  the  Supreme  Court
             judgment in Agyarko v Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 11.

14. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending, in summary, the FtT  directed  itself  appropriately,
    considered whether there were any insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing in Ghana in paragraph 24, and also considered Article 8
    outside the rules,  and  properly  balanced  the  Appellant's  interest
    against the public interest.

15. Directions were issued making provision for there to be hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision  contained  an
    error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

16. Mr Richardson relied  upon  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  in
    particular paragraph 5 thereof and the third point made therein.

17. Mr Richardson stated  that  it  was  accepted,  in  view  of  the  high
    threshold, that the Appellant could not show  insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing outside  the  UK.   There  was  therefore  no
    challenge to the FtT decision on that point.

18. In summary I was asked to note that the FtT accepted that the Appellant
    and his spouse were in a genuine relationship, and that they  would  be
    able to adequately financially maintain themselves, by  reason  of  the
    spouse's income from employment.  The FtT was wrong  to  say  that  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the suitability criteria, as  the  Respondent
    specifically accepted that he did at paragraph 11 of  the  reasons  for
    refusal decision.  It was contended the FtT was also wrong at paragraph
    23 in finding that the point to be considered was  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles either to the Appellant returning to Ghana and
    applying for entry clearance or the couple both returning to live their
    lives in  Ghana.   Mr  Richardson  submitted  that  the  insurmountable
    obstacles test  related  only  to  whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple continuing their family life outside the UK.

19. It was contended that the FtT erred by not following the principles  in
    Agyarko, which set out the law as it always should have  been  applied.
    The only reason why the FtT dismissed  the  appeal  with  reference  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules was because the  Appellant  was
    in the UK without leave, and it was found that he could return to Ghana
    and apply for entry clearance.  Such a finding was not in line with the
    guidance at paragraph 51 of Agyarko.  Mr Richardson submitted the FtT's
    reasons for dismissing the appeal, in that the Appellant  could  return
    to make an application for entry clearance, were in fact reasons  given
    in Agyarko at paragraph 51 for allowing the appeal.

20. Mr Tarlow relied upon the rule 24 response.  It was submitted that  the
    FtT had made findings which it was entitled to make upon the  evidence,
    and there was a public interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I  reserved  my  decision.   Both
    representatives agreed that if an error of law was found, the  decision
    could be remade taking into account the evidence that had  been  before
    the FtT, and there would be no need for a further hearing.





Conclusions and Reasons

Error of Law

22. I find that the FtT erred in law for the reasons given in the grant  of
    permission to appeal.  There is no criticism  of  the  FtT  and  it  is
    evident that care has been taken in the preparation  of  the  decision.
    However Agyarko provides the correct guidance, and  that  guidance  was
    not followed by the FtT.

23. It is  not  contended  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles as defined in EX.2 to family  life  continuing
    outside  the  UK.  Agyarko  confirms  at  paragraph  48  that  if   the
    insurmountable obstacles test is  not  met,  and  the  refusal  of  the
    application would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences such  that
    refusal would not  be  proportionate,  then  leave  should  be  granted
    outside  the  Rules  on  the   basis   that   there   are   exceptional
    circumstances.

24. At paragraph 51 of Agyarko, it is confirmed that there may be no public
    interest in removal of an  individual,  even  if  that  individual  was
    residing in the UK unlawfully, if he or she was otherwise certain to be
    granted leave to enter if an application was made from outside the UK.

25. In conclusion, on the error of law issue, the failure  of  the  FtT  to
    apply the guidance in Agyarko amounts to a material error of law  which
    means that the decision of the FtT is set aside.

Re-Making the Decision

26. Only one ground of appeal is available to the  Appellant,  and  I  must
    decide whether the Respondent's decision is contrary to  section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998.  The Appellant argues that the  Respondent's
    decision fails to respect his private and family life rights  that  are
    protected under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

27. In deciding this appeal I adopt the balance sheet approach  recommended
    by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, and
    in so doing have regard to  the  guidance  of  the  functions  of  this
    Tribunal given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.

28. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances in the UK and why the decision to refuse his human rights
    claim interferes disproportionally  in  his  family  and  private  life
    rights in this country.  It is for  the  Respondent  to  establish  the
    public interest factors weighing against the Appellant.   The  standard
    of proof is a balance of probabilities throughout.

29. I base my decision on the following facts.

30. The Appellant entered the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  December  2003.   He
    overstayed and first made an application to regularise  his  status  in
    January 2013.  The Appellant's spouse was born  in  the  UK  and  is  a
    British citizen.  The relationship between the Appellant and his spouse
    commenced in 2009.  They underwent a customary  marriage  in  Ghana  on
    30th January 2010.  This was  a  marriage  by  proxy.   The  Respondent
    accepts that the couple have a genuine relationship.  The couple are on
    an NHS waiting list for infertility treatment.

31. The Appellant's spouse has family  in  Ghana  as  does  the  Appellant.
    Their relationship commenced in the knowledge that the Appellant had no
    leave to remain.  The spouse is employed as a social worker.   The  FtT
    accepted that the financial requirements of Appendix FM  are  satisfied
    in that the spouse has employment which provides an  annual  income  of
    approximately �48,000 per year.  The Appellant speaks English.

32. The FtT was wrong at paragraph 23 to state that the Appellant  did  not
    meet the suitability requirements.

33. It is conceded on behalf of the Appellant that he and his spouse cannot
    satisfy the high threshold of insurmountable obstacles,  and  therefore
    his appeal cannot succeed with reference to EX.1.  The  couple  do  not
    have children therefore EX.1(a) is not relevant.

34. I must consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules in the light of
    the guidance given in Agyarko.  Having found that Article 8 is  engaged
    on the basis of the Appellant's family life  with  his  spouse  I  must
    consider  the  public  interest,  and  therefore  must   consider   the
    considerations listed in section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

35. Sub-section (1) of  section  117B  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest.

36. Sub-section (2) confirms that it is  in  the  public  interest  that  a
    person seeking leave to remain can speak English, and  sub-section  (3)
    confirms that it is in the public interest that  a  person  seeking  to
    remain in the UK is financially independent.  The Appellant  can  speak
    English and is financially independent, but these are  neutral  factors
    when considering proportionality and the public interest.

37. Sub-section (4) confirms that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life  or  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner
    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  The Appellant has been in the UK without  leave  with  the
    exception of the visa that he was granted as a visitor that expired  in
    June 2004.

38. Sub-section (5) confirms that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.  The Appellant's appeal is based upon
    his family life rather than his private life.

39. Sub-section (6) is not applicable in this appeal, as the Appellant  and
    his spouse do not have children.

40. At paragraph 49 of Agyarko it is stated it  is  important  to  consider
    whether family life was created at a time  when  the  persons  involved
    were aware that the immigration status of one of them was such that the
    existence of family life in the host State would be precarious.   Where
    this is the case, it is likely only to be in exceptional  circumstances
    that removal of the non-national family member would breach Article  8.
    That is the case in this appeal.  It is of significant  relevance  that
    the Appellant and  his  spouse  started  their  relationship  when  the
    Appellant had no leave to remain, and both the Appellant and his spouse
    were aware  of  this.   Taking  the  above  into  account,  I  find  it
    appropriate to set out below paragraph 51 of Agyarko;

         51.  Whether the applicant is in the UK lawfully, or is entitled to
             remain in the UK only temporarily, however,  the  significance
             of  this  consideration  depends  on  what  the   outcome   of
             immigration control might otherwise be.  For  example,  if  an
             applicant would  otherwise  be  automatically  deported  as  a
             foreign criminal, then the weight of the  public  interest  in
             his or her removal will generally be very  considerable.   If,
             on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in  the  UK
             unlawfully - was otherwise certain  to  be  granted  leave  to
             enter, at least if an application were made from  outside  the
             UK, then there might be no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
             removal.   The  point  is  illustrated  by  the  decision   in
             Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department.

41. It is not contended that the Appellant is a foreign  criminal.   Taking
    into account the findings made by the FtT, and the facts which are  set
    out earlier in this decision, if the Appellant left the UK, returned to
    Ghana and make an entry clearance, he would be granted entry clearance.
      There  is  a  subsisting  and  genuine  relationship,  the  financial
    requirements are satisfied, and the Appellant can speak English.  There
    are no criminal convictions.  The Appellant would not be  a  burden  on
    public funds.  Applying the guidance in Agyarko at paragraph 51, I find
    that in this case there  is  no  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
    removal from the UK, therefore there are exceptional  circumstances  in
    this  case  in  that  the  Respondent's  decision   would   result   in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences and is disproportionate, because there
    is no public interest in the Appellant's removal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside and re-made.  The appeal is allowed pursuant to  Article  8  of
the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
direction.


Signed                              Date: 15th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the appeal has been allowed I make no fee award.   The  appeal  has
been allowed because of evidence presented to the  Tribunal  which  was  not
before the original decision maker.


Signed                              Date: 15th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



