
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12045/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Working Remotely by Skype for Business        |                              |
|On 25 February 2021                           |On 17 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                  sinan gok
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, instructed by Kidd Rapinet Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 13 March 1984.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 28 November 2008 as a student with  leave
    valid until 31 July 2009.

 2. On 30 July 2009, he made a Tier 4  (General)  Student  application  but
    this was rejected as he had not paid the fee.

 3. On 26  August  2009,  he  made  a  further  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    application and was granted leave until 20 November 2010.

 4. On 19 November 2010, he made an application  for  further  leave  as  a
    Turkish  citizen  under  the  EC  Association  Agreement  (the  'Ankara
    Agreement') and was granted leave until 16 February 2012.   On  further
    application,  that  leave  was  extended  until  15  October  2013  and
    subsequently until 16 February 2015.

 5. On 20 April 2015, the appellant made an application  under  the  Ankara
    Agreement for Indefinite Leave to Remain.  That application was refused
    on 6 October 2015.

 6. On 25 November 2015, the appellant made a further application for leave
    to remain under the Ankara Agreement but that was again refused  on  23
    February 2016.  A further application under the  Ankara  Agreement  was
    made on 17 June  2016  but  again  refused  on  23  November  2016.   A
    subsequent Administrative Review maintained that decision on 4  January
    2017.

 7. The appellant made another application under the Ankara Agreement on 26
    September 2017 for further leave but  this  was  again  refused  on  22
    January 2018 and that decision  was  maintained  in  an  Administrative
    Review decision on 3 March 2018.

 8. Most recently, an application under the Ankara Agreement for  leave  to
    remain was made on 26 March 2018 but again was refused on 8 August 2018
    and that decision was maintained in an Administrative  Review  decision
    on 18 September 2018.

 9. On 4 October 2018, the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain based upon his private and family life in the UK under Art. 8 of
    the ECHR.

10. On 1 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused that application.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 13 March 2020, Judge  Manyarara  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art. 8 of the ECHR.  The judge found that the appellant could not
    succeed on the basis of his private life in the UK under para 276ADE(1)
    of the Immigration Rules (HC  395  as  amended)  or  on  the  basis  of
    "compelling circumstances" outside the Rules under Art. 8 of the  ECHR.
    As regards the latter, the judge found that the public interest in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control outweighed the appellant's
    private life established in the UK whilst his  immigration  status  was
    precarious.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  In particular,  the  appellant  contended  that  in
    assessing the weight to be given to the public interest, the judge  had
    failed to take into account that his solicitors had  failed  to  notify
    him of the decision, following his application on 15 October  2013,  to
    grant him further leave under the Ankara Agreement  until  16  February
    2015.  As a consequence, the appellant had not thereafter  made  an  in
    time application for further leave.  Instead, he made an application on
    20 April 2015  which  was  out  of  time.   That  error  by  his  legal
    representatives adversely affected his application  and,  relying  upon
    the UT decision in Mansur (Immigration advisor's failings:  Article  8)
    Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 274 (IAC), the judge  had  failed  to  take  his
    solicitor's error or mistake into account as relevant to the weight  to
    be given to the public interest in assessing proportionality under Art.
    8.2.

13. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but, on 17 July 2020, on a renewed application  UTJ  Blum  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal limited to that ground.

14. In response to directions from the UT,  the  appellant  and  respondent
    made further submissions dated 16 September 2020 and 1  September  2020
    respectively.

15. The appeal was listed for hearing at the Cardiff Civil  Justice  Centre
    on 25 February 2021, with the  UT  working  remotely.   Mr  Lewis,  who
    represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Howells,  who  represented   the
    Secretary of State, joined the hearing by Skype for Business.

Discussion

16. The single issue between the parties is whether the judge erred in  law
    by failing to take into account the circumstances (it is said) when the
    appellant's solicitors failed to notify him that his  2013  application
    for leave had been successful and that he had been granted leave  until
    16 February 2015.  As a consequence, it  is  said,  the  appellant  was
    unaware that his leave expired on that date and, due to  an  oversight,
    no application was made by him or his legal  representatives  until  it
    was out of time on 20 April 2015.  That, thereby, deprived  him  of  an
    opportunity to succeed under the Rules and, the fact  that  he  was  an
    overstayer, was a principal reason why  his  application  for  ILR  was
    refused on 27 September 2015 under the Ankara Agreement.

17. The appellant relies, squarely, upon the UT's decision in  Mansur.   In
    that case, Lane J (President, UTIAC) was concerned with a  case  where,
    in the context of a claim under Art. 8 of the ECHR, it was said  to  be
    relevant  that  the  individual's  solicitors  had  failed,   on   that
    individual's instructions, to withdraw an application for permission to
    appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the effect of  which  was
    that a subsequent application for leave was invalid as  an  appeal  was
    "pending".  This resulted in the individual not being able to establish
    the required ten years' continuous lawful residence  under  para  276B.
    The actions of that individual's immigration advisors (IWP)  were  said
    to be relevant in assessing that individual's Art. 8 claim.   At [28] -
    [33], Lane J said this:


         "28.    The correct way of looking at the matter  is  not  to  ask
             whether IWP's failure  on  7  October  2014  to  withdraw  the
             appellant's application for permission to appeal in  some  way
             gives the appellant a stronger form of protected  private  (or
             family) life than he would otherwise have. Plainly, it cannot.
             Rather,  one  needs  to  ask   whether   in   the   particular
             circumstances I have set out, IWP's  misfeasance  affects  the
             weight that would otherwise be  given  to  the  importance  of
             maintaining the respondent's policy of immigration control.

         29.       Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  the  appellant's  "lack  of
             culpability" reduces the weight to be placed  on  that  public
             interest. A lack of culpability is, however, a  necessary  but
             not a sufficient factor. Even where the  person  concerned  is
             not to be taken as sharing the blame with  his  or  her  legal
             adviser, it will still be necessary to show that the adviser's
             failure constitutes a reason to qualify the public interest in
             firm and effective immigration control.

         30.      Once the issue is analysed in this way, it can readily be
             seen why it will be only rarely  that  an  adviser's  failings
             will constitute such a reason. As a general matter, poor legal
             advice in the immigration field will have no correlation  with
             the relevant public interest. The weight that would  otherwise
             need to be given to the maintenance of  effective  immigration
             controls is not to be reduced just because there happen to  be
             immigration advisers who offer poor advice and other services.
             Consequently, a person who takes advice to do X when  doing  Y
             might have produced a more favourable  outcome  will  normally
             have to live with the consequences.

         31.      The facts of the present case  are,  however,  strikingly
             different. The OISC decision shows that IWP did not  give  the
             appellant poor advice. The organisation  blatantly  failed  to
             follow the appellant's  specific  instructions  regarding  the
             timing of the withdrawal of the application for permission  to
             appeal. That failure was the sole reason why  the  appellant's
             application for leave fell to be treated as invalid.

         32.      The conclusions of  the  OISC  investigation  are  highly
             material in determining whether this really is a rare case  in
             which the misfeasance of a legal adviser can affect the weight
             to be given to the public interest in maintaining an effective
             system of immigration control. The OISC findings are clear and
             categorical. The position is far removed from  that  which  we
             frequently see in this jurisdiction, where legal advisers  are
             belatedly blamed but where there  has  been  no  admission  of
             guilt and no finding of culpability by a relevant professional
             regulator.

         33.      Would confidence in the respondent's system of immigration
             controls be diminished if, in the particular circumstances  of
             this case, regard was to be had to the fact that, if  IWP  had
             complied with their client's instructions, the appellant would
             have made a valid application for leave that is likely to have
             been successful? It seems to me plain that the answer to  that
             question must be in the  negative.  On  the  contrary,  public
             confidence in the system could be said to be  enhanced  if  it
             were known that the system is able, albeit  exceptionally,  to
             take account of such a matter."


18. Lane J identified a number of features relevant to the issue of whether
    an advisor's failings could have the effect of reducing the  weight  to
    be given to the  public  interest  in  effective  immigration  control.
    First, Lane J considered that a "lack of culpability" by  an  appellant
    was a "necessary but not a sufficient factor" (see [29]).  Secondly, he
    distinguished between cases of "poor immigration advice" and, given the
    outcome  in  Mansur  itself,  procedural  errors  which  lead   to   an
    application failing (see [30] - [31].  Thirdly, an admission  of  guilt
    (perhaps attested by a culpability finding by the relevant professional
    regulator) is important (see [32]).  Fourthly, it was relevant  whether
    the application, had it  not  been  for  the  error,  would  have  been
    successful.   Finally,  however,  the  ultimate  question  was  whether
    confidence in the system of immigration control would be diminished  if
    the error of the  individual's  immigration  advisors  was  taken  into
    account.

19. Mr Lewis submitted that the appellant's  circumstances  are  materially
    similar to those in Mansur.  There had been a procedural error  by  his
    solicitors for which he was not to  blame  and  which  had  an  adverse
    effect on the appellant's immigration status.  Mr Lewis submitted  that
    the appellant's solicitors  had  accepted,  and  continued  to  accept,
    responsibility for the error for which the  appellant  was  not  to  be
    blamed.

20. Mr Lewis relied upon the letter from the appellant's solicitors to  the
    Home Office dated 20 April 2015 in which they set out what had occurred
    in 2014 when the appellant  was  last  granted  leave  valid  until  16
    February 2015.  The letter is in the following terms:

         "We firstly need to explain the reason for our client  making  this
         application for indefinite leave to remain and/or for an  extension
         after the expiry of his leave to remain.

         Please note that this is due to circumstances beyond the control of
         our client.  Our client's documents  were  received  by  ourselves,
         then placed in his file without the usual letter being sent to  him
         advising him that the documents had been received.   The  applicant
         was, it is believed, telephoned that  his  documents  were  in  our
         office but it seems the applicant believed what was said  was  they
         were still at the Home Office.  Unfortunately there is no  note  of
         that telephone conversation.

         The file was then placed in safe storage with the  offices  in  the
         awaiting collection hold and this oversight only came to light when
         a review was carried out of all the files and safe storage  in  the
         office.  During this period the applicant genuinely  believed  that
         the matter was still outstanding with the Home Office and  as  such
         did not chase the matter further.  He had previously had experience
         of matters taking some time to resolve with  the  Home  Office  and
         believed that nothing was amiss.

         Please note this is of course extremely embarrassing as  this  firm
         handles thousands of applications and matters and this is the first
         time that such situation has arisen.   We  will  request  that  the
         applicant not be penalised for this and would stress that  as  soon
         as the matters come to light, he has taken all steps  necessary  to
         submit this application to yourselves as soon as practicable.

         He has in previous years always submitted his application  in  time
         and always attended to his matters diligently.  He has no  criminal
         convictions whatsoever and he has throughout his stay in the United
         Kingdom  always  maintained  and  accommodated  himself  from   the
         proceeds of his  self-employed  activity  and  has  not  taken  any
         employment other than to do with his business activity.

         ....

         Given the above our client was unable to register with the  Police.
         We would therefore be grateful if you could advise whether he still
         needs to do this and if so whether  you  are  able  to  return  the
         documents to him to enable him to do this or alternatively we would
         be grateful if you could let us know what steps, if any, he has  to
         take to rectify the oversight as well.

         Once again we would stress that Mr Gok has  always  acted  entirely
         properly and fully cooperated with this  firm  in  respect  to  his
         applications.  We do apologise for  any  inconvenience  this  error
         will have caused but do not believe it would be just and  equitable
         in the circumstances for this to prejudice  your  consideration  of
         the application.  We have  now  reviewed  our  procedures  and  are
         putting into place a Protocol to ensure that such an  oversight  is
         not repeated."

21. Mr Lewis submitted that, following  Mansur,  the  solicitors  error  or
    mistake was not merely a case of poor advice.  It was a case where  the
    solicitors had failed in their duty to  inform  the  appellant  of  the
    grant of leave and to provide him with his immigration documents  prior
    to him overstaying without knowing it.

22. Mr Lewis accepted that the appellant's application had not solely  been
    refused on the basis that he was an overstayer.  He contended that  the
    police registration document had been retained by  the  solicitors  and
    the appellant was unable to  update  registration.   In  addition,  the
    reliance  in  the  respondent's  decision  upon  the  appellant  taking
    employment was a matter which the appellant had dealt with  before  the
    judge and was due to a misunderstanding of  the  circumstances.   As  I
    understood what was being  said,  the  appellant  claims  that  he  was
    'helping out' rather than being employed by  another  business  in  the
    same  line  of  work  as  his  own  (see  para  5(e)  of  the   judge's
    determination).

23. In response, relying on the earlier  written  submissions,  Mr  Howells
    submitted  that  Mansur  was  not   applicable   to   the   appellant's
    circumstances.  Mr Howells submitted that the judge had dealt  with  Mr
    Lewis' submissions and had specifically said at para  73  that  he  had
    taken into account "those matters urged  upon  me  by  Mr  Lewis".   Mr
    Howells submitted that this was not a  case,  like  Mansur,  where  the
    appellant's application would have succeeded but for the error  by  his
    solicitors.  There was an ambiguity in the evidence as to  whether  the
    appellant was, himself, at fault and the judge had not been assisted by
    the fact that the appellant was not called to give oral  evidence.   He
    submitted that this  was  not  one  of  those  "rare"  cases  where  an
    advisor's failings constituted a valid reason to reduce the  weight  to
    be given to the public interest in assessing proportionality under Art.
    8.2.

24. In the result, I am persuaded by Mr Lewis' submissions.   There  is  no
    doubt that Judge Manyarara was referred to, in Mr  Lewis'  submissions,
    the decision in Mansur.  That case was central to the  argument  relied
    upon, then and now, by the appellant.  Mr Lewis also referred me to the
    UT's decision in Patel (historic injustice; NIAA Part 5A[2020] UKUT  35
    (IAC).  However, that case does not  assist  the  appellant  as  it  is
    concerned with failings by the respondent rather than  the  appellant's
    own legal representatives.

25. In this appeal, the judge dealt with the solicitors' claimed  error  or
    mistake in para 17 of his determination as follows:

         "In relation to the reason for the gap in the appellant's leave,  I
         have  considered  the  information  provided  by  the   appellant's
         solicitors.  Contrary to the submission made by Mr Lewis  that  the
         applicant's solicitors had accepted that they were to blame for the
         predicament that the appellant found himself  in,  the  appellant's
         solicitors referred to a possible misunderstanding between them and
         the appellant, which resulted in the appellant overstaying.  Whilst
         submissions have  been  made  in  relation  to  the  error  by  the
         appellant's solicitors, there is indeed an undisputed  gap  in  the
         appellant's leave to remain and he became an overstayer after 2015.
          I therefore make this finding of fact".

26. Apart from the reference to having taken into  account  "matters  urged
    upon me by Mr Lewis" (at para 73), the judge did not  engage  with  the
    issues identified in Mansur at [28] - [33].  If there was an  issue  as
    to whether or not  the  appellant  was,  in  part,  to  blame  for  the
    'misunderstanding' that led to him overstaying,  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitors goes a considerable way to accepting that it was
    their fault (not his), that led to the out of time application in 2015.
     It is unclear from para 17 of the judge's  determination  whether,  in
    the light of that evidence,  he  accepted  the  "necessary  but  not  a
    sufficient factor" that there  was  a  "lack  of  culpability"  by  the
    appellant (see Mansur at [29]).  This was not a case of  "poor  advice"
    of the kind identified in Mansur  at  [30].   There  was  a  procedural
    error, not balanced legal advice as to a course of action to be  taken,
    which, on the face of it, disadvantaged the appellant.  That is, by its
    very nature, the kind of "error" or "mistake" by a legal representative
    which Mansur identifies as potentially relevant to a subsequent  Art  8
    claim.

27. One distinction between Mansur and this case is that relied upon by  Mr
    Howells, namely that the error by the appellant's  solicitors  was  not
    the sole reason why the appellant's application  for  leave  under  the
    Ankara  Agreement  was  unsuccessful.   The  appellant,  however,   had
    explanations as to why the two reasons relied upon by the Secretary  of
    State should not hold good.  First, in relation to not reporting to the
    police station that was, in itself, affected by the  solicitor's  error
    and the retention of documents.  Secondly, there was a misunderstanding
    as to his role in the other business such that he  was  not,  in  fact,
    employed in breach of the conditions of  his  leave  under  the  Ankara
    Agreement.  Had the appellant's legal representatives put the appellant
    in a position to make his application in time,  he  would  have  had  a
    right of appeal in which these matters could have been aired.

28. Whilst that is a distinction between the facts of this case and Mansur,
    I do not consider that it is determinative of the issue as  to  whether
    effective immigration control can be affected by the error or   mistake
    of the appellant's solicitors.  The error or mistake adversely affected
    his ability to establish his application under  the  Ankara  Agreement.
    Of course, approaching the appellant's appeal  under  Art.  8  on  that
    basis, Judge Manyarara should have made findings on these  issues.   If
    made in the appellant's favour, then I do not  see  how  the  appellant
    would necessarily be in a different position to an individual, such  as
    in in the Mansur case, who can show that the error or  mistake  of  his
    legal representatives affected him adversely  such  that  what  was  an
    invalid or unsuccessful application, should be viewed  as  having  been
    one that would have been successful.  Turning to Lane J's  question  in
    [33] of Mansur, in such a  situation  confidence  in  the  respondent's
    system of immigration control would be no less, and no more, diminished
    if the appellant would have succeeded on appeal than if his application
    would have succeeded at the outset but  for  the  error  by  his  legal
    representatives.

29. In this case, Judge Manyarara made no findings on these issues and  so,
    whether (and, if so, to what extent) the public interest  in  effective
    control should be given  less  weight  because  of  the  error  of  the
    appellant's legal representatives, was not properly grappled with.

30. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art. 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art. 8 involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   The
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

32.  Both  representatives  indicated  that  if  the  error  of   law   was
    established, the proper disposal of the appeal was to remit it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

33. I agree.  Having regard  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  fact-finding
    required, and having regard to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, the proper disposal of this appeal is to  remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal in order to remake the decision under Art. 8
    of the ECHR de novo.  The appeal to be heard  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Manyarara.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                9 March 2021

