
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12470/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     m s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of Designated Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal McCarthy ('the Judge') issued on 30 June  2017  by  which
    the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse
    to grant him leave to remain on human rights (article  8)  grounds  was
    dismissed.

 2. By means of an order dated 3 September 2019 the High  Court  quashed  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse  permission  to  appeal.  This
    order was issued  consequent  to  the  appellant  having  been  granted
    permission to apply for judicial review on 19  July  2019  following  a
    Cart application.

 3. In granting permission to appeal to this Tribunal the Vice-President of
    the Upper Tribunal granted permission on all grounds.


Anonymity

 4. An anonymity direction was previously  made  in  this  matter  and  the
    parties did not request it to be set aside.  I therefore direct:-

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
         these proceedings or any formal publication thereof shall  directly
         or indirectly identify the appellant  or  members  of  his  family.
         This direction applies to, amongst others, the  appellant  and  the
         respondent. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
         rise to contempt of court proceedings.



Background

 5. The appellant is a national of Syria. He entered this country  in  2013
    and claimed asylum.  He was fingerprinted by the Italian authorities as
    he travelled through that country on his way to the United Kingdom  and
    following a  request  made  under  the  mechanics  of  the  Dublin  III
    Regulation, the Italian authorities  accepted  responsibility  for  his
    application for international protection. The appellant was returned to
    Italy in January 2015 but proceeded to return to this country six weeks
    later. The respondent's effort to return him to Italy for a second time
    was  challenged  by  means  of  judicial  review  proceedings  and  the
    challenge was subsequently settled by consent. The respondent  accepted
    that she would consider the appellant's human rights application  based
    on family life consequent to the birth of his British  citizen  son  in
    January 2016. The respondent refused the human  rights  application  by
    way of a decision dated 27 April 2016.

 6. The Judge heard the appeal on 21  June  2017  and  made  the  following
    findings of fact:-

         "29. Because the situation  was  unclear,  I  have  considered  the
             situation for myself.  I recognise that paragraph EX.1(a)  has
             three components, each of which must be satisfied.  The  first
             is that an applicant is the father of a British citizen  child
             or a child who has lived in the UK for more than  seven  years
             continuously.  Both children are British citizens.  The second
             is  that  there  is  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
             relationship between the  appellant  and  his  children.   The
             evidence I have discussed confirms that to be the case.


         ...


         33.      It is obvious that if the appellant  goes  to  Italy,  his
             wife would not be  able  to  join  him  because  it  would  be
             unreasonable to expect their children to leave  the  UK.   She
             would be required to remain in the UK to care for them.   This
             means they would be expected to maintain their family life  at
             a distance. There is no evidence the  appellant's  wife  would
             not be able to visit the appellant  in  Italy.  As  a  British
             citizen, she has a right under European  Union  free  movement
             laws to be admitted and stay in Italy for up to  three  months
             if she can support herself during that time. The same  applies
             to her children."

 7. The Judge dismissed the appeal concluding, inter alia:-

         40.  Section 117B(6) makes provision to reduce any public  interest
             in expulsion where  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a
             qualifying child to leave  the  UK.   This  provision  mirrors
             paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix  FM.   I  must  apply  the  same
             reasoning as I have already set out and can only find that the
             appellant  does  not  benefit  from  s.  117B(6).    This   is
             consistent with the  Court  of  Appeal's  guidance  in  R  (MA
             (Pakistan) & Ors) v SSHD and another [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


         ...


         49.      Ms Radford suggested that I should bear in mind  the  fact
             that there was no provision in law for the appellant to return
             to the UK. I acknowledge the appellant  is  unlikely  to  ever
             derive a benefit from the free movement laws of  the  European
             Union because it is very unlikely his wife  could  ever  be  a
             worker or self-employed  in  Italy.  Not  only  would  she  be
             prevented  from  leaving  the  UK  because  of  her  childcare
             commitments, she would be unlikely to find  work  because  she
             does not speak Italian, has no qualifications and has no  work
             experience.


         50.      But it is  open  to  the  appellant  to  apply  for  entry
             clearance as the  partner  of  a  British  citizen  under  the
             Immigration Rules. I have made clear findings of their  period
             of  cohabitation  and  it  would  appear  he   satisfies   the
             provisions  of  paragraph   GEN.1.2   and   the   relationship
             requirements.  Of course, it is not for  me  to  consider  the
             likely outcome of such an application, but  it  is  trite  law
             that an Entry Clearance Officer  would  have  to  respect  the
             right  to  family  life  if  there  are   exceptional   and/or
             compelling factors."


Decision

 8. The respondent wrote to the Tribunal on 3 January 2020  conceding  that
    in light of the Supreme Court judgment of KO (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR 5273 and the
    unchallenged findings of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraphs 29 and 33 of its decision that the appellant's children  are
    British,  that  there  exists  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship and it would be unreasonable to  expect  the  children  to
    leave this country, the subsequent findings as to  the  application  of
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  at
    paragraph 40 of the decision discloses a material error of law  and  so
    it was not open to the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal. She invited the Tribunal to find a material error of  law,  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and allow the appellant's
    appeal on the basis of article 8  without  the  necessity  of  an  oral
    hearing.

 9. On 7 January 2020  the  appellant  confirmed  in  writing  through  his
    solicitors, Duncan Lewis Solicitors, that he was in agreement with  the
    proposed course of  action.  I  directed  that  in  such  circumstances
    neither party was required to attend the oral hearing.

10. Having carefully considered the findings of fact made at paragraphs  29
    and 33 the respondent's concession is  wholly  appropriate  as  to  the
    judge having materially erred in law at paragraph 40  of  his  decision
    and reasons. It was not lawfully open to him to determine that in light
    of  his  findings  of  fact  section  117B(6)  could  not  benefit  the
    appellant, without giving adequate reasons.

11. Upon remaking the decision I observe that the appellant has been  found
    to  enjoy  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and I am satisfied to the requisite standard  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom:
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  In such  circumstances  the  proposed
    removal of the appellant from this country would be a  disproportionate
    interference in his family life rights and so the appeal is allowed  on
    article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision

12. The Judge materially erred in law for the  reasons  identified.  I  set
    aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  30  June  2017  pursuant  to
    Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

13. The decision in the appeal is remade. The appeal is  allowed  on  human
    rights (article 8) grounds.

14. The anonymity direction is confirmed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 13 January 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was paid I make no fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 13 January 2020
