
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12098/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision &Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 26 September 2018                  |On 13 November 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 GUIGUI [N]
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mitchell of Notre Dame Refugee Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For convenience I retain the designations as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, thus Mr [N] is the appellant and the Secretary of  State
    the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Ivory  Coast  born  in  1979.   He  made
    application on 15 January 2016 for leave to remain on the basis of  his
    family life in the UK. This was refused on 26 April 2016.

 3. The basis of the refusal was that he could not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules under the partner route.   It  was  not  accepted
    that his claimed relationship was genuine and subsisting. Further,  his
    children, born in 2007 and 2012  are  not  British  citizens.   As  for
    private life he had arrived in 2002 with leave as a student until  2004
    then overstayed.  A claim for asylum made in  2010  was  refused  later
    that year.  It was considered  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in  his  home  country.   It  was  further
    considered that there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  meriting  a
    grant of leave outside the Rules.

 4. He appealed.



    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 4  October  2017  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Mitchell allowed the appeal.

 6. His findings are at paragraph 11ff of his decision.  Having heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and witnesses he found  that  the  children
    lived with their mother, the appellant's  ex-partner.   All  three  are
    citizens of Ivory Coast and they have limited leave to remain which was
    granted in September 2015 valid until March 2018.  He added:

           "It seems probable that this leave was granted  as  one  of  the
           children had lived in the United Kingdom continuously for  seven
           years at that time.  Neither the appellant's ex-partner nor  the
           children are British citizens. There is no reason to doubt  that
           the  children  have  limited  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom."


 7. He found that the appellant does not live with his ex-partner (who  did
    not attend the  hearing).   However,  the  appellant  has  an  "ongoing
    parental role with the children as he sees them on a daily basis taking
    them to school and collecting them from school and spending  time  with
    them at the weekend."

 8. The judge, having noted that it was not submitted  that  the  appellant
    could satisfy the Rules and  that  the  appeal  was  solely  Article  8
    outside the Rules, went on in the proportionality  assessment  to  find
    that the "best interests of the children would be to  maintain  contact
    with the appellant as he is a significant part of their lives  and  has
    been so throughout the whole of their lives.  The children have limited
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and although they are not British
    citizens it is likely they will be able to remain in the United Kingdom
    for the foreseeable future".   Another factor in  his  favour  was  the
    "significant" length of time he has been here  and  the  fact  that  no
    attempt had been made to remove him despite removal action having  been
    instigated in 2010.

 9. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was refused.  However,
    it was granted  on  21  August  2018  on  reapplication  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



    Error of law hearing

10. The grounds are brief, a single point, namely, that the judge had  been
    wrong to assume that the children had been granted status on account of
    their long residence.  Home  Office  records  indicated  that  the  ex-
    partner was granted discretionary leave,  and  the  children  in  line,
    based on her claim to being the sole carer for her children.  Since the
    appellant   submitted   his   own   application   claiming   to   share
    responsibility her leave had been curtailed.  She and the children  are
    currently without status.  Thus, the argument that the appellant should
    be given leave in order to maintain contact  with  his  children  falls
    away as he, his ex-partner and the children could return to Ivory Coast
    as a family unit.


11. I pointed out to Mr Lindsay that the respondent had chosen  not  to  be
    represented at the First-tier hearing and there was nothing before  the
    judge from the Home Office giving that information. He was not able  to
    address me on how on the evidence before him the judge had erred.   The
    fact that the respondent may have curtailed the mother's  leave  on,  I
    was told by Mr Lindsay, 25 April 2016 does not mean  that  the  judge's
    decision at the time of the First tier hearing was flawed.   The  judge
    gave reasons for allowing the appeal and on  the  facts  presented  his
    findings and conclusions were open to him.

12. For the sake of completeness I was told by Mr Mitchell, and it was  not
    disputed by Mr Lindsay, that the mother was subsequently granted  leave
    again on 19 July 2018 until 2021, the younger child the same,  and  the
    older child was granted British citizenship on 4 June 2018.



    Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law
    and that decision allowing the appeal shall stand.


Signed                                             Date 5 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
