
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12037/2015


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 22 February 2017                 |On 6 December 2017                      |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Ms Aimei Song
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office
                                 Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Ms Song):   Mr M Adophy, Counsel, instructed by Saintta
                                 International Lawyers UK


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony, which had been promulgated on  31
    August 2016 following a hearing  at  Birmingham  Sheldon  Court  on  11
    August 2016.  For ease of reference I shall  throughout  this  decision
    refer to Ms Song, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant" and
    to the Secretary of State, who was the  original  respondent,  as  "the
    Secretary of State".

 2. This appeal was before me on  22  February  2017,  when,  having  heard
    submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties  I  gave  an  oral  decision
    immediately following the hearing  ex  tempore.   I  stated  within  my
    decision (which would take effect on promulgation) that I  intended  to
    allow the appeal on the limited basis that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, such that it would have to be reconsidered  by
    the Secretary of State, but on further consideration I appreciated that
    because this was a post April  5  2015  decision,  and  the  Rules  had
    changed, this course was no longer open to the Tribunal.

 3. Accordingly, I sent the parties a Note of Hearing  and  Directions,  in
    which I indicated that for the reasons which were set out  within  that
    Note (which were essentially the reasons  I  had  given  within  my  ex
    tempore decision) I was minded to  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal, and affirm Judge Anthony's decision,  on  the  basis  that  any
    errors which had been contained in that  decision  were  not  material.
    However, in light of the  difference  between  what  I  had  originally
    stated I had intended by way of disposal and  how  I  now  proposed  to
    dispose of this appeal, I gave the Secretary of  State  an  opportunity
    first of making any representations she might consider  appropriate  as
    to the course which I proposed to take before promulgating a  decision.
    I directed that the Secretary of State could, if so advised, within  28
    days of the date on which these Directions were sent  to  the  parties,
    file with the Tribunal and serve on the  claimant  written  submissions
    with regard to what I proposed.  I directed that in the event that  the
    Secretary of State sought to persuade the Tribunal to adopt a different
    course, further directions would be given, but in the absence  of  such
    submissions, it would be assumed that the Secretary  of  State  had  no
    objection to the Tribunal disposing of the appeal in the manner which I
    had indicated I intended in the Note of Hearing.

 4. No submissions having been received  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, for the reasons set out within the Note  of  Hearing  (which  is
    appended to this decision) the Secretary of State's appeal against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony is  dismissed,  with  the
    consequence that Judge Anthony's decision is affirmed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Anthony,  which  had  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal,  is
dismissed, and Judge Anthony's decision is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:



Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 5 December 2017

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12037/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 22 February 2017                |On 6 December 2017                       |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MS AIMEI SONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     (Secretary of State): Mr P Duffy, Senior Home
                    Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    (Ms Song):  Mr M Adophy, Counsel, instructed by
                    Saintta International Lawyers UK


                       NOTE OF HEARING AND DIRECTIONS

1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State  against  a  decision
   of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony, which was promulgated on 31  August
   2016 following a hearing at Birmingham Sheldon Court on 11  August  2016.
   For ease of reference I shall throughout this decision refer to Ms  Song,
   who was the original appellant, as "the claimant" and to the Secretary of
   State, who was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

2. This appeal was before  me  on  22  February  2017,  when,  having  heard
   submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties,  I  gave  an  oral   decision
   immediately following the hearing ex tempore.

3. Regrettably, the file  was  then  mislaid,  but  neither  the  claimant's
   representatives nor the Secretary of State has made  any  enquiry  as  to
   when my decision could be expected, and my obligation  to  promulgate  my
   Decision with regards to this appeal was overlooked as  the  pressure  of
   other work intervened.

4. Fortunately, the Administration at Field House has alerted me to my  need
   to promulgate a Decision in this case and following a search I  was  able
   to locate the file. I am accordingly giving my Decision  without  further
   delay.

5. Regrettably also, although I had intended (and so  stated  within  my  ex
   tempore decision) to allow the appeal  on  the  limited  basis  that  the
   decision was not in accordance with the law (such that it would  have  to
   be reconsidered by the Secretary of State), on  further  consideration  I
   now appreciate that because this is a post April 5 2015 decision, and the
   rules have changed, this course  is  no  longer  open  to  the  Tribunal.
   Accordingly I have had to reconsider what is the  appropriate  course  to
   follow having regard to the change in the  rules  and  have  amended  the
   decision I had originally intended to give  (which  had  been  stated  ex
   tempore).  However, my essential findings remain unchanged.  I  apologise
   to both parties for the delay.

6. The claimant is a national of China who was  born  on  20  October  1958.
   She claims to have arrived in the UK on 26 April 2003 with leave to enter
   as a student valid from 10 February 2003 to 31 August 2004.  She  applied
   for various extensions of her leave which were granted.   These  included
   periods in which she claimed to be intending to study at Thames  College,
   London.  In one application she claimed that  she  was  to  study  for  a
   degree of Master of Business Administration and subsequently she  claimed
   that she was intending to study for a doctorate at that college.   On  20
   March 2009 she made a further  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
   student which it appears was not refused until 4 September 2014 when  the
   decision was served on file.  For the  reasons  which  follow  I  do  not
   propose to  make  a  detailed  examination  of  the  intricacies  of  the
   applications which were made.

7. On 22 September 2015 the claimant applied for indefinite leave to  remain
   on the basis that she had lawfully been in  this  country  for  over  ten
   years.  The application was made under paragraph 276B of the  Immigration
   Rules which will be referred to in a  little  more  detail  below.   This
   application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision made on 6
   November 2015.  In that decision the Secretary of State referred  to  the
   claimant's immigration history but  refused  the  application  under  the
   general grounds set out in paragraph 332(2) of the Rules which  state  as
   follows:

         "In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension  of  stay  set
         out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following provisions apply  in
         relation to the refusal of an application for variation of leave to
         enter or remain or, where appropriate, the curtailment of leave:

             '322(2) the making of false representations or the failure  to
             disclose any material fact for the purpose of obtaining  leave
             to enter or a previous variation  of  leave  or  in  order  to
             obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third  party
             required in support of the application for leave to enter or a
             previous variation of leave'."

8. The basis of the refusal was that the Secretary  of  State  claimed  that
   evidence from investigations which had been carried  out  on  her  behalf
   between July 2008 and December 2009 showed that Thames College was not  a
   bona fide education establishment "and that it is reasonable  to  believe
   that this would be known to any person claiming to have  studied  or  was
   applying to study there".

9. The Secretary of State also referred to a statement which had been  given
   by the claimant to a police constable (Police Constable  Stewart)  on  27
   October 2009 at Croydon Enforcement  Unit,  where,  it  is  said  in  the
   refusal letter, "you confirmed that you have never  undertaken  study  at
   Thames College London but that you  agreed  to  sign  FLR(s)  application
   which gave evidence contrary to this".

10. The claimant appealed against this decision and  her  appeal  was  heard
   before First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony, sitting at  Birmingham  Sheldon
   House on 11 August 2016, and as already noted her appeal was allowed in a
   Decision and Reasons promulgated on 31 August 2016.

11. By virtue of the change in the Immigration Rules  (and  this  is  common
   ground between the parties as it has to be) the only basis now upon which
   this claimant could appeal was on human  rights  grounds.   There  is  no
   longer an appeal  based  simply  against  a  decision  under  the  Rules.
   However, Home Office guidance does acknowledge  that  applications  under
   paragraph 276B (long residence) do contain human rights aspects such that
   it is very likely that an applicant would have a right of appeal  against
   a decision on human rights grounds.  Certainly the claimant did raise her
   Article 8 rights as a ground of appeal and in  her  statement  which  was
   before the First-tier Tribunal she concluded as follows, with  regard  to
   her Article 8 rights:

         "5.  Article 8 Rights:

             (i)  I am advised by my representatives that I have  right  to
                  have my family and private life respected.  The action  of
                  the Respondent constitutes a bar to my  enjoyment  of  the
                  rights.

             (ii) I repeat and rely on the all averments above  in  respect
                  of my Article 8 claim.

             (iii)    I am further advised that there cannot be any  public
                  interest in my exclusion from the UK.

             (iv) I am not nor have I been reliant  upon  public  funds  in
                  respect of my maintenance or accommodation."

12. The claimant's statement was apparently read back  to  her  in  Mandarin
   before she signed it.

13. Accordingly, the position when the appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal was that the judge had jurisdiction only to consider the  appeal
   on human rights grounds.  It is, obviously  a  factor  and  an  important
   factor in considering whether an appeal should be allowed  on  Article  8
   grounds whether or not an applicant has a right to remain under the Rules
   because clearly the public interest, if any in removal of  a  person  who
   otherwise would have a right to remain cannot be a high one.  Accordingly
   when considing whether or not the claimant in this case could lawfully be
   removed under Article 8, consideration would have to  be  given  to  what
   right she would have under the Rules to remain.

14. As already indicated Judge Anthony allowed the  appeal.   She  first  of
   all considered the statement which had been made by the claimant  to  the
   police and made a finding (at paragraph 19) that "having  considered  the
   statement the appellant gave to the police,  I  am  unable  to  find  any
   references in this statement to  the  appellant  stating  she  had  never
   undertaken studies at Thames College London".

15. She then found on the balance of probabilities  that  the  claimant  had
   been a genuine student even though it was accepted  that  she  had  never
   undertaken any studies at the college in respect of the PhD course  which
   she had claimed she would be undertaking.  The judge found with regard to
   the PhD course, that there had been no false representation made  at  the
   time of obtaining an extension of her leave to study this course  because
   at that time she had intended to do so but changed her mind later.

16. The judge  considered  that  the  claimant  had  been  in  this  country
   lawfully for ten years for the reasons which she gave and then  found  as
   follows at paragraph 37:

         "As stated above, the respondent has not raised any other issues in
         the refusal letter.  I can find no such evidence before me  of  any
         convictions.  I find that in light of  the  information  before  me
         relating  to  the  appellant's  personal  history,  including   her
         character, conduct, associations and employment record  and  having
         regard to the public interest, there are no reasons why it would be
         undesirable for the appellant  to  be  given  indefinite  leave  to
         remain.   She  therefore  meets  the  requirements   of   paragraph
         276B...."

17. The judge did not make any reference to Article 8  or  indeed  to  human
   rights as such in the decision at all.

18. The respondent now appeals against  this  decision,  leave  having  been
   granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell  on  24  November
   2016.  The grounds of appeal are very short indeed and are as follows:

         "Ground: material misdirection in law

         1.   This is an application which was made on 22.9.15 and as it  is
             an application after April  2015,  it  is  asserted  that  the
             amended grounds of appeal under sections  82  and  84  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  applied.   This
             only allows for an appeal in respect of a protection claim  or
             a human rights claim.

         2.   As such, it is asserted that the FTTJ fundamentally  erred  in
             law by allowing this  appeal  under  Immigration  Rules  276B,
             rather than engaging with Article 8  within  and  outside  the
             Rules....".

19. The grounds do not contain any challenge to the findings of  fact  which
   had been made by the judge,  although  having  myself  read  the  witness
   statement which the claimant had given to the police officer the findings
   which the judge made with regard to this statement  are  surprising.   In
   this statement she says with regard to a person called David who made her
   application to Thames College on her behalf that:

         "I was always concerned  from  the  beginning  about  the  need  to
         provide documented record of attendance for college  [but]  when  I
         queried this with David he said to me that I  worry  too  much  and
         told me to let him do his job and I do mine".

    She later at the end of the statement says that:

         "I believe David has misled me throughout the period I was involved
         with Virgil [the body  David  worked  for  through  whom  her  visa
         applications were made] by abusing the Immigration law and using me
         to do it, as I did not know any different.  I  did  not  understand
         the Immigration system."

20. Although it is  arguable  that  the  rational  interpretation  of  these
   statements is that at the very least this claimant  was  aware  that  her
   applications were not legitimate,  on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,
   Mr Duffy did not seek to advance an argument at this very late stage that
   the judge's decision had  been  perverse  on  this  point  and  in  these
   circumstances I do not consider it is appropriate for this  Tribunal  now
   to raise this issue of its own volition.  Accordingly, for  the  purposes
   of this appeal the findings of  the  judge  that  the  claimant  had  not
   herself exercised deception in obtaining her periods of leave must  stand
   as must her finding that her leave had  never  been  curtailed  and  that
   accordingly at the time she made her application for indefinite leave  to
   remain in 2015 she had been in this country lawfully for over ten  years.



21. When granting permission to appeal Judge Manuell  gave  his  reasons  as
   follows:

         "1.  The Appellant's appeal against refusal of  her  10  year  long
             residence  claim  brought  under   paragraph   276B   of   the
             Immigration Rules was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             Anthony in a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  31  August
             2016.

         2.   The Respondent's in time grounds of onwards  appeal  dated  15
             September 2016 contend that the judge erred fundamentally: the
             application was made on 22 September 2015  and  so  it  argued
             that the  tribunal's  jurisdiction  was  restricted  to  human
             rights matters only.

         3.   The grounds have substance and are arguable.   In  any  event,
             the judge plainly erred by  purporting  to  allow  the  appeal
             outright, as paragraph 276B is discretionary and the  relevant
             discretion had not been exercised by the Secretary  of  State.
             Whether the transitional provisions applied  may  need  to  be
             considered.  Unfortunately  the  judge  was  not  referred  to
             them...".

22. Before me, it was not suggested other than that there was only  a  right
   to appeal on human rights grounds.

23. I had in mind the guidance given by the Home Office to the  effect  that
   applications under paragraph 276B (long residence) have  a  human  rights
   element to them and that clearly must be right.  In  this  case,  I  know
   very little about the private life exercised  by  the  claimant  in  this
   country but having been here for over ten years  she  clearly  must  have
   some and Mr Duffy did not seek to persuade the Tribunal that it is not  a
   very relevant factor whether or not an applicant would have  a  right  to
   remain under the Rules.  Not only did the judge fail to consider  Article
   8 at all but in my  judgment  her  consideration  of  the  provisions  of
   paragraph 276B(ii) and in particular how that applied to the Secretary of
   State's decision was arguably flawed.  As I have already noted, this very
   important aspect  of  the  Rules  was  only  mentioned  very  briefly  at
   paragraph 37 and it is clear that this aspect of  the  case  had  neither
   been considered by the Secretary of State and  nor  had  it  been  argued
   properly or at all before her.  Section 276B provides as follows:

         "Requirements for Indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long
         residence in the United Kingdom

         276B:  The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:

         (i)(a)   he has had at least ten years' continuous lawful residence
              in the United Kingdom.

         (ii) Having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
              it would be undesirable for him to be given  indefinite  leave
              to remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account
              his:

              (a) age;

              (b) strength of connection with the United Kingdom;

             (c)    personal   history,   including   character,   conduct,
                  associations and employment record;

             (d)  domestic circumstances;

             (e)  compassionate circumstances; and

             (f)  any representations received on the person's behalf; and

         (iii)    the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
              grounds of refusal.

         (iv) The applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
              English language and sufficient knowledge about  life  in  the
              United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

         (v)  The applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  Immigration
              Rules except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28
              days or less will  be  disregarded,  as  will  any  period  of
              overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter
              or leave to remain of  up  to  28  days,  and  any  period  of
              overstaying pending the determination of an  application  made
              within that 28 day period."

24. The judge was  satisfied  that  the  claimant  had  provided  sufficient
   evidence of life in the United Kingdom and  as  already  noted  that  the
   application did not fall to be refused under general grounds for refusal,
   but as I have already noted, in order for a decision  to  be  made  under
   paragraph 276B(ii) it is necessary for the  decision  maker  to  actually
   consider this aspect of the application in light of a correct finding  of
   fact.  The view I originally expressed immediately following the  hearing
   was that before a Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider an appeal on  the
   merits against the exercise of a discretion by the Secretary of State, it
   was necessary first for that discretion to have been exercised.  In  this
   case I considered that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  never  considered
   whether or not the  discretion  which  she  is  granted  under  paragraph
   276B(ii) should  be  exercised  in  the  claimant's  favour  because  the
   decision was made on the basis that the leave to remain had been obtained
   fraudulently and thus the application fell for refusal under the  general
   grounds of refusal.  That decision  has  been  found  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to be wrong and accordingly I intended to find that it  was  now
   for the Secretary of State to consider whether or not she should exercise
   her discretion under  paragraph  276B(ii)  but  on  the  basis  that  the
   objection which she originally took which was that the application should
   be refused under the general grounds of refusal  had  been  found  to  be
   wrong.

25. Accordingly, I intended to decide that the  decision  of  Judge  Anthony
   allowing the appeal outright should be set aside,  but  the  findings  of
   fact which she had made that  the  claimant  had  been  in  this  country
   lawfully for over ten years must be retained.  The effect would  be  that
   because the Secretary of State had not exercised her discretion  one  way
   or the other under paragraph 276B(ii)  there  was  still  an  outstanding
   decision which needed to be made.  I  had  then  intended  to  allow  the
   appeal in part on the basis  that  before  a  decision  was  taken  under
   Article 8 the Secretary of State first had to exercise her discretion  to
   consider whether or not this claimant would be granted  leave  under  the
   Rules, and in light of that decision she must then  consider  whether  or
   not to grant the application.  I expressed the view that if the Secretary
   of State decided to maintain the original refusal, unless the  claim  was
   then certified as clearly unfounded (which on  the  facts  of  this  case
   would be hard to maintain) the claimant would have a right of  appeal  to
   the First-tier  Tribunal  under  Article  8.   I  accordingly  stated  my
   intention to allow the appeal to the limited  extent  that  the  decision
   made was not in accordance with the law.

26. However, having considered this appeal  further  in  light  of  the  new
   rules, I appreciate that it is not now open to this Tribunal to allow  an
   appeal on the limited basis that the decision was "not in accordance with
   the law".  Further, I have had regard to  the  recent  decision  of  this
   Tribunal in SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania  [2017]  UKUT
   00120, a decision of a panel presided  over  by  the  Vice-President,  in
   which he gave guidance essentially that where the  Secretary  of  State's
   guidance pointed clearly to a particular  outcome,  in  order  to  obtain
   consistency between those cases which come before the Tribunal and  those
   which do  not,  the  Tribunal  could  itself  make  the  decision  in  an
   appropriate case.  In my judgement, this guidance of  the  Vice-President
   is equally applicable where on the facts as found, the decision can  only
   be made one way.

27. In this case the only reasons why the Secretary  of  State  had  decided
   not to allow the application were first that she did not accept that  the
   Claimant had had 10 years lawful residence and secondly that because  she
   had fraudulently claimed to have attended a college when she had not done
   so, her application must fail on suitability grounds.  Both these reasons
   have been found to be unsustainable  (and  Mr  Duffy  does  not  seek  to
   challenge either of them now). Although Judge Anthony had not  considered
   in any detail precisely what private  life  this  Claimant  had  in  this
   country, and as I have found,  her article 8 consideration  may  arguably
   have been flawed, in light of the Claimant's 10 years' lawful  residence,
   as found, and the further finding that her application did not  fall  for
   refusal under suitability grounds, which is not now challenged, and  also
   that the appellant was found to have provided sufficient evidence of life
   in the UK,   on the basis of these findings there does not appear  to  be
   any good reason why her claim should not  have  been  allowed  under  the
   rules. In these circumstances, on the  facts  of  this  case,  it  is  my
   provisional view  that  this  Claimant's  appeal  under  article  8  must
   ultimately succeed.

28. It would accordingly follow that whatever errors there may have been in
   Judge Anthony's decision, these were not material, as on her findings,
   which are not now challenged, and in light of the decision of the
   Tribunal in SF, the appeal was bound to succeed.

29. For the reasons I have given, I am minded to dismiss the Secretary of
   State appeal, and affirm Judge Anthony's decision, on the basis that any
   errors in that decision were not material.  However, in light of the
   difference between what I had originally stated I had intended by way of
   disposal and how I now propose to dispose of this appeal, it is
   appropriate to give the Secretary of State the opportunity first of
   making any representations she may consider appropriate as to the course
   which I propose to take. I accordingly make the following Directions:



       Directions

       1) The Secretary of State may, if so advised, within 28 days of the
          date on which these directions are sent to the parties, file with
          the Tribunal and serve on the Claimant written submissions as to
          the manner in which the Tribunal has stated it intends to dispose
          of this appeal.

       2) In the event that the Secretary of State seeks to persuade the
          Tribunal to adopt a different course, the Tribunal will then give
          such further directions as may be appropriate.

       3) In the absence of such submissions, it shall be assumed that the
          Secretary of State has no objection to the Tribunal disposing of
          this appeal it in the manner indicated above.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                 Dated: 26 September 2017

