
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12163/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 July 2016                               |On 31 August, 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JUNAID [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Butler, Counsel, instructed by Synthesis
Chambers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    The claimant claims to have entered the UK in 2004 as an  11  year  old
    unaccompanied minor.  He claimed asylum in April 2004.  This claim  was
    rejected in June 2006, but he  was  granted  Discretionary  Leave  (DL)
    until June 2007.  He submitted an application for ILR in June 2007, but
    this was not dealt with until 4 March 2014, when he  was  granted  ILR.
    On 21 January 2016, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Trevaskis  allowed  his
    appeal against the decision of the appellant (hereafter  the  SSHD)  to
    make a deportation order.  The appeal was allowed on Article 8  grounds
    only.  Between August 2010 and August 2015 the claimant accrued  eleven
    convictions for 24 offences, being sentenced to  consecutive  terms  of
    imprisonment totalling 54 weeks.

2.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal were five-fold.   It  was  submitted  that
    the judge erred by:

    (1)  failing to give proper weight to the public interest in  deporting
         the claimant, given his history of offending;


    (2)  wrongly regarding the claimant's culpability as  lessened  by  his
         inability to work legally;


    (3)  failing  to  explain  the  importance  he  attached  to  the  best
         interests of the child;


    (4)  failing to have regard to all  the  relevant  evidence  concerning
         whether there was a genuine and subsisting relationship between the
         appellant and his partner; and


    (5)  giving inadequate reasons for finding it would be unduly harsh for
         the appellant's children to remain in the UK if he was deported.

3.   In submissions Ms Ahmad for the SSHD relied on what had  been  said  by
    the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ  450  regarding  the
    need to treat the public interest as one of the factors relevant to the
    "unduly harsh" test.  Simply mentioning offences did not establish that
    the judge attached proper weight to them.  The judge's treatment of the
    best interests of the children effectively treated them as "the" rather
    than "a" primary consideration.

4.   Ms Butler contended that the SSHD's grounds  were  in  reality  a  mere
    disagreement as to the weight the judge had given to  relevant  factors
    and did not disclose an error of law.  The judge had taken  account  of
    the public interest in  deportation  in  the  context  of  a  carefully
    conducted balancing exercise.

5.   Ms Butler argued that the judge considered all the claimant's  offences
    referring to them in [107] as "numerous", and describing  the  claimant
    in [66] as a "persistent offender".  As regards the level of risk of re-
    offending, the judge had taken account  of  the  fact  that  the  OASys
    Report assessed that as "medium", not high, and Ms Ahmad  had  conceded
    that reference in the SSHD's grounds to "high" was mistaken.   Even  if
    there had been only a relatively short time since the  claimant's  last
    offence, (6 March 2015), the judge was correct to say he  had  not  re-
    offended during it.  His offences were at a low level  of  seriousness.
    The judge was entitled to say the claimant stood to be granted ILR on 4
    March 2014.  In the context of the claimant's immigration history,  the
    SSHD must take some responsibility for his inability to work.

6.   As regards the judge's treatment of the best interests of the  children
    and of the nature of the claimant's relationship with his partner,  the
    judge  made  perfectly  proper  findings.   There   was   evidence   of
    cohabitation and the partner stayed  at  her  parents'  house  for  the
    purposes of choice of school for the children.  The findings the  judge
    made as regards the unduly harsh  effect  on  the  children  were  well
    within the range of reasonable responses.

7.   I am persuaded by Ms Butler's submissions that the judge's decision  is
    not vitiated by legal error.  It is not one that I would have  made  on
    the evidence before the judge, had I been  sitting  at  first-instance,
    but I am  not  entitled  to  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  unless
    satisfied it is vitiated by legal error.

8.   As regards the judge's treatment of the public  interest,  she  clearly
    understood that in the case of deportation of foreign criminals it  was
    "strong", as noted when citing case law in [63].  She  correctly  noted
    in [83] that the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
    interest and that the more serious the offences committed by a  foreign
    criminal the greater the public interest in  deportation.   It  was  in
    that context that the judge assessed that notwithstanding the fact that
    the claimant was a persistent offender his index offences were not  the
    most serious.  It is clear that the judge did not fail to  have  regard
    to the claimant's offending history.  I do not consider the  judge  can
    be  criticised  at  [105]  for  noting  that  since  his  release  from
    immigration detention the claimant had not re-offended and had complied
    with the conditions of his  licence.   That  was  a  fact.   In  taking
    account of it the judge was adhering to the guidance given by the Upper
    Tribunal in Masih [2012] UKUT 00046 at (a) which  she  cited  in  [63].
    The judge clearly weighed in the balance also the risk of  re-offending
    and harm to others and (as noted already) correctly noted he  had  been
    assessed (by OASys) as presenting a medium risk of harm to the  public.
    The judge had  earlier  noted  evidence  that  the  claimant  had  been
    undertaking relapse prevention work as part of drug rehabilitation.

9.   It seems to me that there  is  an  additional  reason  why  the  SSHD's
    challenge to the judge's treatment of the public interest factors lacks
    force.  When the SSHD considered whether to grant the claimant  ILR  in
    March 2014, she either knew or should  have  known  that  he  had  been
    committing offences since 2010, yet she still went ahead.

10.  I do not regard the judge's findings at [98] as intended to lessen  the
    claimant's culpability for  his  crime.   The  paragraph  is  carefully
    worded so as to make clear that she was intent on  making  findings  as
    regards the ability of the claimant to support himself and  his  family
    by working and the reasons for that inability.  Her  finding  that  his
    inability to obtain work lawfully "led  [him]  to  engage  in  criminal
    activity" may not be one that may have been reached by  another  judge,
    but it was one which was open to her on the evidence.  Further, it  was
    not a finding that he was not responsible for his criminal conduct;  it
    was only about its cause.

11.  As regards the  SSHD's  challenge  to  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    claimant's relationship with his (British citizen)  partner,  I  concur
    with Ms Butler that it  does  not  rise  above  the  level  of  a  mere
    disagreement with the judge's findings of fact.  The  judge  was  fully
    aware that the couple's history of cohabitation was chequered.   Having
    seen and heard from the claimant and his partner, it was entirely  open
    to the judge to conclude that the SSHD's original position at the  date
    of decision -  that  the  couple  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship - continued to be correct.

12.  Nor do I consider that the SSHD's grounds succeed  in  identifying  any
    legal error in the judge's treatment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  Whilst I cannot agree with Ms Butler that the judge's treatment
    of this issue was extensive (of the paragraphs devoted to this  subject
    - [91]-[99] - all but two are devoted to mere recitation of case  law),
    the judge's assessment at [98] demonstrates that she was satisfied: (i)
    that the appellant had a good and close  relationship  with  the  three
    children; (ii) that in assessing their  best  interests  he  took  into
    account that they were British citizens; and (iii)  that  it  had  been
    conceded by the SSHD that the  best  interests  of  the  children  were
    served by continuing to live with the mother, and continuing to  derive
    the benefits of their citizenship.  This assessment  clearly  built  on
    earlier findings (not disputed by the SSHD) that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect either the mother or  the  children  to  accompany  the
    claimant to Afghanistan: see [89].  Hence the only  issue  was  whether
    the effect of the claimant's  deportation  on  the  children  would  be
    unduly harsh, which was, as the judge correctly observed, a  matter  to
    be determined  within  the  framework  of  ss.117(4)  and  (5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended: see [84]-[87].

13.  In relation to the issue of undue harshness and Ms Ahmad's  attempt  to
    rely on the Court of Appeal judgment in MM (Uganda), she correctly fell
    short of suggesting that the judge's reasoning was at  odds  with  that
    decision.  Although setting out the two reported  cases  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on this issue - KMO and MAB - the judge (whether aware or  not
    that they were in conflict over this issue) in any event  proceeded  on
    the basis that the law on this matter was as stated in KMO  -  see  the
    final sentence of [88]..

14.  Read as a whole, the judge's subsequent  assessment  was  made  on  the
    basis that the public interest was relevant to the issue of whether the
    impact on the children was unduly harsh.  This  appears  to  me  to  be
    implicit in the assessment  set  out  in  [106]  and  [107]  when  read
    together.

15.  The judge made very clear that she treated the best  interests  of  the
    child as "a", not "the" primary consideration: see [99].

16.   Whilst  the  judge  can  be  criticised  for  not  conducting  a  full
    assessment of the factors relevant to assessment of the best  interests
    of the children, including language, culture and educational factors, a
    reading of the determination as a whole makes clear the judge was alive
    to all relevant factors - the judge clearly accepted that the  claimant
    had no family members in Afghanistan who would be able  to  assist  him
    and no property or assets there [103]; that neither  the  claimant  nor
    his partner nor children spoke  the  native  languages  of  Afghanistan
    [78]; that the claimant's partner (of Jordanian  origin)  had  no  ties
    with  Afghanistan  either;  and  that  his  partner  and  children  had
    established a family and private life in the  UK  [33]:  also  seen  as
    relevant were the claimant's medical difficulties.

17.  I would observe that the claimant's case is not one that is  caught  by
    the provisions of s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    as amended. Subsections [4]-[6] provide that:

         "Little weight should be given to-


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."


    In  the  claimant's  case,  his  relationship  with  his  partner   was
    established when his immigration status was lawful.

18.  For the above reasons I conclude:

         The judge did not materially err in law.

         Accordingly her decision to allow the claimant's appeal must stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 26 August 2016

Dr H H Storey
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
