
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/12077/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Determination Promulgated      |
|On 22 December 2017                        |  On 29 January 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                            Stephen Kwabena Antwi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Hossain, of Liberty Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Aujla, who in a determination promulgated on 24  January  2017
    dismissed his appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Ghana  (incorrectly  referred  to  as  a
    citizen of Algeria in the determination) who  was  born  on  25  August
    1960.  He entered Britain  as  a  visitor  on  23  September  2002  and
    overstayed thereafter.  He made two applications to  remain  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 in November 2013 and July 2014, both
    of which were refused.

3.   On 4 September 2015 he made an application on human rights  grounds  on
    the basis of his private life in Britain.  The  letter  of  application
    briefly mentioned that he had a school-going daughter but the focus  of
    the application related to his private life here.

4.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant, noting that the  appellant
    did not have a partner in Britain and that his daughter and her  mother
    had no status here and therefore it was conceded that family  life  was
    not relied on.  He recorded  that  "the  matter  was  based  solely  on
    private life considered under paragraph 276ADE".

5.   He heard evidence from the appellant and his son and  in  paragraph  20
    noted that when refusing the application the respondent had  considered
    his claim in respect of his daughter, who had been born in  July  2008,
    and had stated that the appellant did not qualify under the  provisions
    of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii).  The child was not a  British  citizen
    although it was accepted that the child had lived in Britain  for  over
    seven years.  It was not deemed unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave Britain as she was able to return to Ghana with one  or  both  of
    her parents.

6.   The appellant stated that he had made efforts to have contact with  his
    daughter and that there was a court  hearing  listed  for  27  February
    2017, that is, over a month after the date of hearing.

7.   From paragraphs 26 onwards the judge considered the appeal, noting  the
    provisions of Section 55 of the 2009 Act and stating that he had  taken
    into account the best interests of the appellant's  child.   He  placed
    weight on the fact that the appellant had waited until 9  January  2017
    before making an application to the Family  Court  for  access  to  his
    daughter.  He stated that there was no credible explanation as  to  why
    that application had not been  made  long  before  as  the  appellant's
    evidence was that the child's mother had denied him  contact  with  the
    child after they had separated in 2009.  He stated that he did not find
    that the appellant was credible and stated that "the genuineness of his
    efforts to have realistic contact with his daughter was suspect".

8.    In  paragraph  31  he  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had   given
    contradictory  evidence  about  his  relationship  with  his  daughter.
    First, the appellant had said that the child had  lived  with  him  for
    four or five years after her birth but  that  the  appellant  had  then
    stated that he had separated from the child's mother in 2009  when  the
    child would have been 1 year old and that thereafter the child's mother
    had not allowed him to have contact with the child.  The  judge  placed
    weight on that discrepancy in the appellant's evidence.  He stated that
    he rejected the appellant's account that his daughter  had  lived  with
    him for four or five years or that he was in contact with her.

9.   He went on to state that:-

         "Given the fact that he had had no contact  with  the  child  since
         2009, I find it totally incredible that it took the appellant eight
         years to go to the family court to have contact with the child.  If
         the appellant had been making  efforts  to  resolve  the  situation
         otherwise than going to court, I do not  find  it  credible  for  a
         moment that, if he were genuinely interested in the child, he would
         have waited eight years before going to the family court whilst the
         child was growing up."


10.  He therefore rejected the appellant's claim that he was  interested  in
    having contact with the child and stated  that  he  believed  that  the
    appellant had commenced family court proceedings purely with a view  to
    enhance his human rights appeal and defeat the respondent's efforts  to
    remove him from the  United  Kingdom.   He  made  a  finding  that  the
    appellant was not genuinely interested in  the  child  or  the  child's
    welfare.

11.  He emphasised that there was no evidence to establish that there was  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship between the appellant  and
    his daughter  and  stated  that  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
    eligibility requirements of the Rules - the parent route under Appendix
    FM was not open to him.

12.  He considered the appellant's private life but  placed  weight  on  the
    fact that he had been aged 42 when he arrived in Britain from Ghana and
    that he was familiar with the culture as well as the language  of  that
    country.  He stated that he did not consider that the  removal  of  the
    appellant would be disproportionate.

13.  The grounds of appeal  argue  that  the  judge  had  misunderstood  the
    nature of the proceedings before the family court and the nature of the
    relationship with the daughter.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  granted
    permission on the basis that these matters affected the  decision  both
    in respect of EX.1 and outside the Immigration Rules.

14.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Hossain emphasised  that  the
    court proceedings had led to a child arrangements order under Section 8
    of the Children Act 1989 by which the appellant was entitled to see the
    child on alternate Saturdays between 12 noon and 2pm.  On the alternate
    Saturday there was to be no direct contact but there could be telephone
    contact.  From 11 November onwards there was to  be  contact  for  four
    hours between 12 and 4pm and from 6 January 2018 for six hours  between
    11am and 5pm.  A letter from a social worker at [            ]confirmed
    that the appellant had been seeing his daughter since the  court  order
    had been made on 25 August 2017.  Mr Hossain argued that  the  daughter
    was a qualifying child and referred me to the provisions of Appendix FM
    at EX.1, which states as follows:-

         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if


                (a)


                    (i)     the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                        parental relationship with a child who -


                        ...


                        (cc)   ... has lived in the UK continuously for  at
                             least the seven years immediately preceding the
                             date of application; and


                    (ii)   taking into account their  best  interests  as  a
                        primary consideration, it would not  be  reasonable
                        to expect the child to leave the UK."

15.  He stated that next year the child  would  be  eligible  to  apply  for
    British nationality.  He referred to the impact of  the  separation  of
    the father from the child on the child and to the best interests of the
    child.

16.  Ms Everett pointed out  that  the  judge  determined  the  appeal  long
    before the court order was  made  and  argued  that  his  decision  was
    entirely open to  him.   She  referred  to  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal in the case of Chalachew Mohammed (Family  Court  proceedings-
    outcome) [2014] UKUT 00419 (IAC), which stated that there  was  nothing
    in the guidance given in  the  determination  in  RS  (Immigration  and
    Family Court) India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC), which had been approved by
    the Court of Appeal  in  Mohan  v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1363,  that
    supported the notion that the mere possibility of such  an  application
    being made or pursued was a  relevant  criterion  in  the  case  of  an
    immigration appeal when deciding whether to adjourn  an  appeal  or  to
    direct a grant of discretionary leave in order for such proceedings  to
    be pursued.


Discussion.

17.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the First-tier Judge.  He gave  clear  and  persuasive  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant's application to the family court was not  a
    genuine expression of interest in the child.  His  reason  -  that  not
    only was the appellant not credible in his evidence (he referred to the
    contradictory evidence given by the appellant about  his  contact  with
    the child in her early years) but also because he had waited  until  he
    was practically at the door of the immigration court before making  the
    application for contact. The reality is that indeed, all he had  before
    him was the fact that an application had been made. The judge was fully
    entitled, I consider, to conclude that the  application  was  not  made
    because of a genuine interest in the child but merely  to  promote  the
    appellant's own interests.  I  note,  moreover,  that  the  appellant's
    child and her mother do not appear to have status in this  country.   I
    would add that the issue of whether or not the judge made an  error  of
    law in his determination relates to the facts as they stood at the date
    of the hearing and determination of the  appeal,  not  with  regard  to
    changed facts which changed eight months later  -  that  is,  with  the
    order of the family court and the arrangements made thereafter.

18.  I consider that  on  the  evidence  before  him  the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to reach the conclusion which he did and I therefore find that
    his determination shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Signed: [pic]                       Date: 25 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy














