
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12995/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely on Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2021                               |On 16 March 2021              |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             KASSIM BWULE KASASA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Sultan, Counsel, instructed by KSRI Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, with  permission,  against
    the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  ("the  judge"),
    promulgated on 27 September 2019,  by  which  he  allowed  Mr  Kasasa's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal  of  his  human  rights
    claim.

 2. The human rights claim was essentially based on a prolonged  period  of
    residence in the United Kingdom (since 2001), a fair  amount  of  which
    was on a lawful basis as  a  student,  the  ties  that  Mr  Kasasa  had
    established in this country, and the absence of ties with  his  country
    of origin, Uganda.

 3. At the hearing before the judge Mr Kasasa, for some unknown reason, did
    not attend and it appears as though there was no Home Office Presenting
    Officer either, although that is unclear because the  judge  failed  to
    state the position at the outset of his decision and reasons  document.



 4. The judge appeared to accept that Mr Kasasa  had  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a young child and then returned to Uganda at the age  of  6.
    At paragraph 27 the judge stated that:

         "It may well be that he [Mr Kasasa] ought to have indefinite  leave
         to remain stamped on his Passport as clearly as his other  siblings
         have had, although their documentation is not in the bundle  before
         me."

 5. Nothing more is said about this.

 6. At paragraph 29 the judge made reference to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules (this must presumably relate  to  276ADE(1)(vi))  and
    stated that Mr Kasasa would be able to succeed if he  could  show  that
    there were "some obstacles to his returning to Uganda".   In  the  next
    paragraph the judge refers to "insurmountable obstacles" and goes on to
    describe these as "very real obstacles to reintegration  into  life  in
    (the) country of origin".

 7. At paragraph 31  the  judge  found  that  there  was  just  "efficient"
    evidence notwithstanding the absence of the Appellant  at  the  hearing
    that he had been in the United Kingdom since 2001, that  Uganda  was  a
    "much changed place", and that there was "no evidence  before  me  that
    the Appellant has any accommodation, employment or means of support  in
    Uganda".  The  judge  thought  it  was  "certainly  possible"  that  Mr
    Kasasa's brother might be able to support him on  return,  but  it  was
    more difficult for such support to  be  given  when  the  parties  were
    geographically separated by several thousand miles.

 8. At paragraph 32, the judge found that it would be "extremely hard"  for
    Mr Kasasa to obtain employment and accommodation.   He  found  that  it
    "may possibly" be the case that some extended family members are  still
    living in Uganda, but that was, said the judge, "simply speculation".

 9. The judge then went on to refer to "rule 117"  and  took  a  number  of
    factors into account before concluding that Mr Kasasa should succeed.

10. Whilst his conclusions do not appear to be based in any material way on
    what was described as the "Windrush  scandal",  the  judge  nonetheless
    felt it appropriate to comment in paragraph 38 that the "culture of the
    Home Office may well have affected the decision making process of  many
    cases including that possibly of this Appellant".

11. Ultimately,  the  judge  purported  to  allow  the  appeal  "under  the
    Immigration Rules" as well as in respect of Article 8.

12. The Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the  judge's
    decision in two core respects.  First,  it  was  said  that  the  judge
    reversed the burden of proof in respect of relevant  matters.   Second,
    the judge erred his approach to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

13. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher  on  1  July
    2020.

14. A rule 24 response, dated 24 August 2020, was submitted by Mr  Kasasa's
    representatives.

15. At the hearing before me, Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal.

16. Mr Sultan submitted that the judge had not reversed the burden of proof
    and that the Secretary of State had failed to provide any  evidence  to
    show that relevant family  members  of  Mr  Kasasa  were  not  in  fact
    residing in the United Kingdom.  He also submitted that the  judge  had
    taken  relevant  considerations  into  account  and  that  it  made  no
    difference that the judge had referred to  "insurmountable  obstacles",
    rather than "very  significant  obstacles."   The  judge  had  in  fact
    considered matters under section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  The Windrush issue played no material part in the
    judge's considerations.

17. Both representatives agreed that Mr Kasasa's leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom ended on 5 May 2011  when  an  application  for  further
    leave to remain was refused by the Secretary of State.

18. I conclude that the judge  has  materially  erred  in  law  in  several
    respects, as set out in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.

19. Paragraph 26 of the  judge's  decision  represents  a  fairly  standard
    recitation of the burden and standard of proof applicable in cases such
    as the present.  However, what is important is not simply  a  statement
    of the location of the burden but its application  in  practice.   With
    reference to paragraphs 31 and 32 of the judge's decision,  I  conclude
    that he has effectively reversed that burden of proof b  requiring  the
    Secretary of State to have adduced evidence  to  show  either  that  Mr
    Kasasa would have accommodation, employment  or  means  of  support  in
    Uganda, or to show that he did not have any extended family members  in
    that country.  It was of course for Mr Kasasa himself to prove that  he
    would not have access to basic living requirements, means  of  support,
    or any extended family members living in Uganda.  This is an  error  of
    law.

20. I note with reference to Mr Kasasa's witness statement that  whilst  he
    had asserted that his father and a number of siblings  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom, nothing was said about an absence  of  extended  family
    members living in Uganda.  Thus, there was no evidence from  Mr  Kasasa
    on which the judge could have  concluded  that  there  were  no  family
    members in that country.

21. The error of law is material.

22. Turning to the issue of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, the judge
    has erred in several respects.  At paragraph 29 he refers to  the  need
    to show "some obstacles": that is plainly wrong in law and casts  doubt
    on the relevant  threshold  subsequently  applied.   There  is  then  a
    reference to "insurmountable obstacles" in the  next  paragraph.   That
    too is wrong in law.  However, I do take on board the point  raised  in
    the rule 24 response that  this  particular  threshold  may  indeed  be
    higher or at least the same as the "very significant obstacles" test.

23. Yet this does not cure the erroneous approach adopted by the judge.  He
    simply does not engage with the core issue of  "integration",  as  this
    term has been authoritatively construed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813; [2016] 4 WLR 152.  There is  no  engagement
    whatsoever with what "integration" entails and  its  objective  nature.
    In respect of this issue, I have already mentioned the reversal of  the
    burden of proof as regards the possibility of obtaining  accommodation,
    employment or means of support in Uganda.  In addition  to  this  first
    error, the judge has entirely failed to deal  with  possible  means  of
    support from relatives living  in  the  United  Kingdom  including  the
    brother.  Indeed, the judge himself had stated that it  was  "certainly
    possible" for such support to be given.  The fact that there may  be  a
    geographical separation between the supporter  and  the  individual  in
    receipt of that support  is  entirely  beside  the  point,  absent  any
    exceptional circumstances, none of which have been  identified  by  the
    judge in this case.

24. The judge has entirely failed to explain  why  he  regarded  Uganda  as
    being a "much changed place" since Mr Kasasa's departure in 2001.   The
    judge has failed to explain why it would  in  his  view  be  "extremely
    hard" for Mr  Kasasa  to  obtain  employment  and/or  accommodation  in
    Uganda.  There are no findings in respect  of  Mr  Kasasa's  health  or
    ability to work in the sense of there being very significant  obstacles
    to him finding reasonable employment  and  to  establish  a  reasonable
    level of existence within a reasonable period of time on return to  his
    country of origin, a country in which he has spent a  large  proportion
    of his life.

25. These  errors  fatally  undermine  the  core  element  of  the  judge's
    reasoning in this case.

26. I make the following additional observations.  It is surprising, to say
    the least, that the judge keeps referring to "rule  117",  rather  than
    section 117B of the 2002 Act.  He has also failed  to  properly  engage
    with the mandatory considerations set out therein, although this is not
    an element of my conclusions on the errors of law.

27. Finally, in my view, the judge's comments in paragraph 38  relating  to
    the Windrush issue are inappropriate.  I do not say this lightly.  What
    the judge has effectively done is to imply that there was some bias  or
    bad faith element to the decision-making process in Mr  Kasasa's  case.
    There was absolutely no evidence whatsoever to suggest that this was in
    fact so.  The judge has in my view engaged in impermissible speculation
    and he simply should not have said what he did.

28. As a final comment, it is also surprising that the judge  purported  to
    allow  the  appeal  "under  the  Immigration  Rules".   The  First-tier
    Tribunal has had no such jurisdiction for a number of years now.

29. The judge's decision is set aside.

30. In my view, this appeal has to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    There needs to be clear findings of fact in the  context  of  a  proper
    consideration of the relevant legal framework.  The judge's allusion to
    the family history of Mr Kasasa's connections to the United Kingdom, as
    referenced at paragraph 27, needs to be properly explored in due course
    and the extent of the fact-finding involved therein means that remittal
    is appropriate in all the circumstances.

31. This appeal was therefore remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  no
    preserved findings of fact.



Notice of decision

32. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  it
    is set aside.

34. Mr Kasasa's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

35. No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

       1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete
          re-hearing with no preserved findings of fact;




       2) The remitted appeal shall not be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Herbert.





Signed   H Norton-Taylor                     Date: 9 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

