
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 April 2018                         |On 26 April 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                             MR SYED AKBER AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Eaton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He was born on 5 June 1985.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 28 October 2015  to
    refuse his application as the partner  of  Imogen  Corbett,  a  British
    national.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 12 May  2017,  Judge  Talbot  (the  judge)
    dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal
    because he found that the appellant had exercised deception with regard
    to his application  to  the  respondent,  and  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate in terms of Article 8.

 4. The grounds claim that the evidence in SM and Qadir (ETS -  evidence  -
    burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC)  was  considered  to  be  deeply
    flawed and with substantial limitations was it deemed to have  met  the
    respondent's initial burden of proof.   The  grounds  claim  the  judge
    erred in relying on the evidence  before  him  without  reservation  to
    create a rebuttable presumption on the appellant.   Further,  that  the
    judge had failed to consider whether in the particular circumstances of
    the appellant, the respondent had made out in  a  "fact  specific"  way
    that there was evidence that the appellant had used deception.

 5. The appellant also claimed the judge  had  erred  in  his  analysis  of
    paragraph 320(11) of HC 395 which requires  there  to  be  "aggravating
    circumstances" over and above the  specified  deception.   The  grounds
    made reference to PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed)  India
    [2010]  UKUT  440  (IAC)  and  the  "great  care"  in  assessing   such
    circumstances.

 6. In any event, the judge significantly misdirected himself regarding the
    applicant's immigration history.  Contrary to the judge's findings, the
    appellant did not receive a decision on 17 June 2014  but  rather,  was
    detained by the respondent on 3 December 2014 and given a decision  the
    same day.  It was that decision that was  based  on  the  assertion  of
    deception by the appellant.

 7. The grounds contend that if the judge had directed himself correctly on
    the appellant's immigration history, with particular reference  to  the
    period between 17 June 2014 and 3 December 2014, he might have  reached
    a different decision.

 8. Judge Frankish refused permission to appeal  in  a  decision  dated  21
    November 2017.  He said at [3]:

         "Applying SM and Qadir, with no rebuttal but for denial ([14])  and
         the wife now stating both that the appellant  speaks  good  English
         and she remembers him studying hard for the  exam,  the  conclusion
         that paragraph 320 applies was open to the F-tTJ.  The new rebuttal
         that the appellant left voluntarily as evidence of good faith  does
         not support a submission of an arguable error of law.  Full  credit
         is, in any event, accorded ([15]) in respect of eventual  voluntary
         departure once the stay under JR was  lifted.   No  arguable  error
         arises in respect of the Article 8 assessment".

 9. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.   On  30  January  2018
    Judge McWilliam said:

         "It is arguable that  the  judge  did  not  adequately  reason  the
         finding that the sponsor's evidence was insufficient (she said that
         she remembered the appellant preparing  for  the  test  and  it  is
         recorded at [14] that she recalled him going to the test).   Whilst
         the judge was entitled to  reject  the  evidence  or  find  it  not
         capable of raising an innocent explanation, his reasons  for  doing
         so are arguably absent".

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Mr Eaton relied upon the grounds.  He said that the history  the  judge
    set out at [15] was inaccurate.  It is correct that the  appellant  was
    appeal rights exhausted as of 5 March 2014 but  contrary  to  what  the
    judge said, he did not receive a refusal on 17 June 2014.   Rather,  he
    was detained by the respondent on 3 December 2014 and given a  decision
    that same day.  It was that decision that was based on the assertion of
    deception by the appellant.  Subsequently,  the  appellant  voluntarily
    returned to India.   Further,  the  judge  erred  in  finding  previous
    applications to be vexatious or  frivolous  merely  because  they  were
    unsuccessful.

11. Mr Eaton's submission is that the legal landscape  has  moved  on.   In
    particular Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 at [33] emphasised  that  SM  and
    Qadir "...... should not be  regarded  as  the  last  word".   That  is
    because the forensic as well as the legal landscape has changed in  the
    meantime.  Mr  Eaton  stressed  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's  "lukewarm
    endorsement" of the evidence in SM and Qadir should  be  considered  in
    the light of later jurisprudence in particular, Iqbal  [2017]  EWHC  79
    (Admin) and Majumder [2016] EWCA  Civ  1167,  in  particular  at  [23].
    Whether the respondent's initial  burden  of  proof  is  made  out  and
    whether  the  appellant  can  then  provide  evidence  of  an  innocent
    explanation must be "intensely fact-specific" see Majumder at [23].

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. Even if  the  judge  was  correct  in  his  initial  finding  that  the
    respondent had met her evidential burden in terms of SM  and  Qadir,  I
    find  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  subsequent  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility.  The appellant  was  out  of  country  but  Ms
    Corbett attended.  The allegation of deception had been denied  by  the
    appellant and Ms Corbett.  Ms Corbett said  that  the  appellant  spoke
    good English, was a law-abiding person, would  not  commit  fraud,  and
    that she recalled him preparing for and going to take  the  test.   All
    the judge  says  in  response  to  that  is  that  such  comments  were
    insufficient to rebut the  allegation.   The  judge  erred  because  he
    failed to give  Ms  Corbett's  evidence  any  analysis.   Clearly,  the
    appellant was entitled to know why it  was  that  Ms  Corbett  was  not
    accepted as a credible witness or alternatively, why it was that if she
    herself was credible, why the appellant was not credible.

Notice of Decision

13. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error of law for the reasons I have  set  out  above.   I  set
    aside the decision and remit the appeal for a de novo hearing.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         12 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

