
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12508/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2020                      |On 30 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     KS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel, instructed by S Satha &Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. His date of birth  is  15  April
   1984.

2. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom unlawfully in 2013. He  made  an
   application for asylum which was refused. His subsequent appeal  in  2016
   was dismissed on asylum grounds and allowed on Article 3 health  grounds.
   The judge found that the Appellant was  not  credible  and  rejected  his
   account about what happened in Sri  Lanka.   Following  his  appeal,  the
   Appellant was granted discretionary leave until 17 September 2018. On  30
   August 2018, he made an application for leave to remain under Article  8.
   The Respondent was of the view that he was  no  longer  at  risk  in  the
   absence of medical evidence to the contrary and refused his application.

3. The Appellant appealed. His appeal was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal C. Bennett in an extensive decision  comprising  50  pages.
   The Appellant was granted permission  by  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
   O'Callaghan on 26 February 2020. The matter  came  before  me  to  decide
   whether the judge made an error of law.

4. Judge Bennett proceeded on the basis that the appeal  was  on  Article  8
   and Article 3 health grounds. The judge recorded  that  Counsel  for  the
   Appellant was not seeking to rely on the Refugee Convention in respect of
   sur place activities.  The thrust  of  the  grounds  is  that  the  judge
   misunderstood Counsel, Mr Paramjorthy, who did not say that the Appellant
   was not relying on the Refugee Convention.


5. Mr Paramjorthy has provided two witnesses of 9 October 2019 and  16  June
   2020.  He says that he did indicate at any time that he was  not  relying
   on the Refugee Convention. The judge wrongly  recorded  this  to  be  the
   case. The Appellant was not seeking to interfere with the findings of the
   first judge in respect of his claim arising from events in Sri Lanka.  It
   is suggested that  there  must  have  been  a  misunderstanding.  As  the
   Appellant's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal discloses he
     was  relying  on  the  Refugee  Convention  in  respect  of  sur  place
   activities. Mr Paramjorthy gave evidence at the  hearing  before  me.  He
   adopted his witness statements. He has been a  practising  barrister  for
   over 20 years in this jurisdiction. He said that he would not  concede  a
   case after hearing the evidence as recorded by  the  judge  without  good
   reason and without taking instructions from his client.  He said that the
   judge identified medical grounds as  a  new  matter.  This  confused  the
   representatives.   He  said  that  he  then  identified  the  sur   place
   activities as a new matter.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  took
   instructions at the hearing and indicated that  the  Secretary  of  State
   consented to the appeal to be determined on the evidence advanced by  the
   Appellant.

6. The Respondent  disclosed  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  note
   prepared on 16 September 2019, three days after  the  hearing.  She  said
   that Counsel for the Appellant conceded that there was  no  asylum  claim
   and that the appeal was based on medical grounds. She said that the judge
   had raised whether the medical evidence amounted to  a  new  matter.  She
   recorded that both she and the Appellant's representative  were  confused
   by this. However, she spoke to a Senior Case Worker who instructed her to
   consent to  Article 3 in terms of the medical evidence.


Conclusions

7. It is clear  to  me  that  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   proceeded on the basis of a misunderstanding arising  from  confusion  at
   the hearing. The judge identified  a  new  matter  as  Article  3  health
   grounds. This caused confusion because it clearly is  not  a  new  matter
   (see section 85 (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).
   Both representatives were aware that it was not a new matter because they
   both describe confusion.  Consent was not needed  for  the  Appellant  to
   rely on health  grounds.   Nevertheless,  it  seems  that  neither  party
   explained this to the judge. Ms Ali, the Home Office Presenting  Officer,
   sought consent from a Senior Case Worker about a matter which was  not  a
   new matter and for which consent was not needed. Mr Paramjorthy  believed
   that the Home Office Presenting Officer sought consent to  the  Appellant
   relying on sur place activities (this is by any  account  a  new  matter)
   whereas this was not the  case.  Without  consent  the  Tribunal  has  no
   jurisdiction to  determine  the  appeal  on  refugee  grounds.  Counsel's
   skeleton argument indicates  that  the  Appellant  relied  on  sur  place
   activities and the Refugee Convention. Mr Paramjorthy  proceeded  on  the
   basis that the Secretary of State consented to the Appellant  relying  on
   the Refugee Convention in respect of sur  place  activity.  However,  the
   Respondent had not consented to this.

8.  I conclude that there has been a genuine  misunderstanding  which  gives
   rise to a procedural irregularity  depriving  the  Appellant  of  a  fair
   hearing.  Confusion may have  arisen  because  a  ground  of  appeal  was
   wrongly categorised by the judge as a new  matter.  Furthermore,  Counsel
   indicated that he was not seeking to interfere with the decision  of  the
   first  judge  in  respect  of  her  findings  relating  to  the   Refugee
   Convention.   Whilst I take on  board  Mr  Bate's  submission  about  the
   contemporaneous note of the Home Office Presenting  Officer  which  would
   support its reliability, it is not a matter of me preferring one person's
   account over that of another.  I have no doubt that the parties acted  in
   good faith and have given accounts which they believe to be accurate.

9. There is a further complaint  made  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
   medical evidence.  In the light of there being a procedural  irregularity
   as identified, fairness demands that the decision is  set  aside  in  its
   entirety.

10. I make the following observations. There is  no  dispute  that  the  sur
   place activities constituted a  new  matter.  It  was  incumbent  on  the
   Appellant's solicitors to properly raise the  new  matter  prior  to  the
   hearing and to seek the consent of the Secretary of State.   It  was  not
   satisfactory to leave the issue until the day of  the  hearing.   When  I
   raised this with Ms Bayati, her response was unimpressive. She said  that
   when she sought consent in the past, the Secretary  of  State  failed  to
   respond.   This  does  not  obviate  a  representative's  obligations  to
   cooperate with the Tribunal enshrined in the overriding objective at Rule
   2 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) Rules  2014.  Moreover,
   it is of concern that Mr Paramjorthy could not locate his notes from  the
   hearing. While Mr Paramjorthy conceded at the hearing before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal that sur place activities was a  new  matter,  this  should
   have been raised in his skeleton argument.

11. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bennett dismissing the  appeal
   is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-
   hearing. The scope of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  depends
   on whether the Appellant has by them the  consent  of  the  Secretary  of
   State to rely on sur place activities.




Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed. The decision of the judge to dismiss  the
appeal is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
a re-hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 20 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
