
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12688/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2019                    |On 18 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                              JACQUES DE BRUYN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance and no representative.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Isaacs promulgated on 11 February 2019 in which the Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed on human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa  born  on  2  October  1975.
    His immigration history is a matter of record set out in the papers  on
    file and for present purposes it is unnecessary for me  to  repeat  its
    entirety here.  Pertinently, he applied for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds on 17 February 2017; his application was refused  on  23
    May 2018. In his application - and in turn in substance in his appeal -
    the Appellant sought  to  rely  upon  a  current  relationship  with  a
    partner, Ms [GL], and  also  upon  paternal  relationships  with  three
    children from two previous partners.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept
    that the  Appellant  had  established  that  he  was  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with Ms [L], and also did not accept  that  the  Appellant
    had provided  adequate  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  he  was  in  a
    continuing paternal relationship with his children.

3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

4.   The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was originally listed for  10
    January 2019, but was adjourned in circumstances  where  the  Appellant
    had been unable to attend having been the victim of a knife attack on 8
    January 2019.  The appeal  was  relisted  for  29  January  2019.   The
    Appellant again did not attend.

5.   It is evident from the materials on file, and  expressly  addressed  in
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs,  that  the  Appellant
    communicated with the Tribunal to the effect that he was  not  able  to
    attend the hearing on 29 January 2019 because he had been the victim of
    an assault on the evening before.   Notwithstanding  this  circumstance
    Judge Isaacs determined that it was appropriate  to  proceed  with  the
    appeal  in  the  Appellant's  absence.   The  Judge  then  decided  the
    substantive issues  in  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  available
    documentary evidence. The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set  out
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The substance of the application was essentially a  pleading  that,  in
    particular, his relationships with his children  were  genuine  and  of
    great importance and significance to him.

7.   The application for permission to  appeal  was  refused  in  the  first
    instance by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on  15  March  2019.   The
    Appellant renewed his application for permission  pleading  essentially
    the same grounds.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 3 May 2019 in the following terms:

         "Although  the  grounds  of  appeal  drafted   by   the   appellant
         concentrate on his relationship with his children over the last two
         years since the application was made it  is  of  concern  that  the
         Judge in the First-tier did not adjourn the hearing as  it  appears
         from the evidence produced that there were clear  reasons  why  the
         Appellant had not attended the hearing, which was such that on  the
         evidence before her, it is arguable  that  the  judge  should  have
         adjourned the appeal.


         I will therefore grant permission as I consider that given that the
         appeal relates to the Appellant's relationship  with  his  children
         and a claimed partner it is arguable that it would  be  appropriate
         that the Appellant's oral evidence should be considered."


8.    The  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was   first   listed   for
    consideration on 4 June 2019.  The  Appellant  again  did  not  attend.
    Communication  was  established  with  him  on  that  occasion  and  he
    indicated that he had not received due notice of the hearing because of
    a change of address - albeit that  it  is  apparent  that  he  had  not
    informed the Tribunal of that change  of  address.   On  that  occasion
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman, decided that the Appellant  should
    be afforded a further opportunity to attend  his  appeal,  but  in  her
    decision/directions promulgated on 4 June 2019 warned "If the Appellant
    fails to appear on the next occasion that the hearing is listed then it
    is liable to be dismissed summarily".

9.   It is indeed the case that  the  Appellant  has  yet  again  failed  to
    attend the Tribunal.  I am satisfied that due notice of the hearing has
    been served on him.  No communication has been  received  from  him  to
    explain his absence.   Further,  I  note  that  no  further  supporting
    evidence has been filed by the Appellant in relation to the  issues  in
    the appeal  since  the  dismissal  of  his  appeal  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Accordingly, there is no up-to-date information in  relation
    to his claimed relationships with his children or any relationship with
    a partner.

10.  In circumstances where there is no explanation for the Appellant's non-
    attendance, and there does not appear to  be  any  serious  attempt  to
    engage with the appeal proceedings or the issues in the appeal,  I  was
    satisfied that it is appropriate to proceed with the appeal before  the
    Upper Tribunal in the absence of the Appellant.

11.  However, notwithstanding  the  warning  of  Judge  Chapman,  I  do  not
    consider it appropriate to dismiss the appeal summarily: I  have  given
    consideration to the issues raised and the issues  highlighted  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal.

12.  I  first  consider  whether  or  not  Judge  Isaacs  was  in  error  in
    proceeding with the appeal in the  Appellant's  absence,  or  otherwise
    acted in a way that rendered the proceedings unfair.

13.  Necessarily the Appellant is not present to  prosecute  that  argument;
    nor, it is to be noted, is it an argument that he had expressly  raised
    in his grounds of appeal, it really only being identified in the  grant
    of permission by Judge McGeachy.

14.  I have had careful consideration to Judge Isaacs' decision.   It  seems
    to me that before proceeding to consider the substance of the issues in
    the appeal,  Judge  Isaacs  gave  very  careful  consideration  to  the
    circumstance of the Appellant's absence  and  whether  or  not  it  was
    appropriate to proceed with the appeal: see paragraphs 10-26.  I do not
    propose to simply set out again what Judge Isaacs said in this  regard,
    but I can identify no error of approach.

15.  Judge Isaacs - in my judgement appropriately and in a  manner  entirely
    open to her - concluded that there was nothing in  the  materials  that
    the Appellant had sent to the Tribunal that demonstrated that he  could
    not attend the Tribunal on the day of the hearing, even if it was  only
    to ask for an adjournment.

16.   No  witnesses  attended  on  behalf  of   the   Appellant.    In   the
    circumstances the Judge, having had regard to the basis upon which  the
    Appellant claimed he was unable to attend the hearing, and also  having
    had regard to the history of the proceedings  and  the  issues  in  the
    appeal, reached an entirely sustainable and understandable decision  to
    proceed in the Appellant's absence.  Had the Appellant attended  it  is
    wholly  unapparent  what  his  oral  evidence   could   possibly   have
    convincingly added to the appeal. The Judge implicitly recognised  this
    at paragraph 26.

17.  In this latter regard, and generally,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
    fundamental difficulty for the Appellant in the application and  appeal
    was that he  had  quite  simply  failed  to  provide  any  satisfactory
    supporting  evidence  as  regards  his  claimed   relationships;   this
    continued to be  the  situation  on  appeal  notwithstanding  that  the
    absence of adequate supporting evidence had clearly been put  in  issue
    in the Respondent's decision letter.  Ms [L] had only provided a letter
    which, albeit being undated, the judge was in effect able to date to  a
    time prior to 16 February 2017, see paragraphs 31, 33  and  55  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly,  there  was  nothing
    remotely contemporaneous from Ms [L] that supported the notion that the
    Appellant was in a relationship with her.  In  this  regard  the  Judge
    also noted the addresses that the Appellant used did not match  any  of
    the addresses that were on file in respect of Ms [L].  In  the  absence
    of attendance by Ms [L], and in the absence of any further  documentary
    evidence having been filed from her, it is impossible to  see  how  the
    Appellant could have succeeded in discharging the burden  of  proof  on
    the basis of his oral testimony alone,  particularly  bearing  in  mind
    that the fact of this relationship was a key issue in the refusal.

18.  Similarly, there was no updating information in respect of the  claimed
    relationships with the Appellant's children and no supporting  evidence
    from any of their mothers that were contemporaneous  with  the  appeal.
    Accordingly, the materials were considerably out of  date.   The  Judge
    embarked on a careful analysis of the available materials  and  reached
    entirely sustainable conclusions that the documentary evidence did  not
    support the notion of a contemporaneous relationship or an ongoing  and
    subsisting parental relationship with  the  children.   Again,  in  the
    absence of further documentary evidence, it is  not  apparent  how  the
    Appellant's  oral  testimony  alone  could  have  established  to   the
    requisite standard of proof that he was in subsisting relationships.

19.  In the circumstances the Judge's evaluation that the Appellant had  not
    demonstrated a satisfactory reason  for  his  non-attendance,  and  the
    judges further implicit evaluation that the Appellant's  oral  evidence
    would not materially add to the available written materials, are not to
    be impugned. Such matters were the core reasons for not adjourning  the
    appeal and deciding to proceed  in  the  Appellant's  absence.  In  the
    circumstances I identify no error of law and no  procedural  unfairness
    in the Judge's approach.

20.  It cannot escape comment that it is still the case that  the  Appellant
    has not filed any further evidence in respect of any of the substantive
    issues in the appeal. In such circumstances his case has no discernible
    merit. Further, it continues to be the  case  that  he  appears  to  be
    unprepared to engage appropriately with the appeal proceedings.  Had  I
    been of the view that there was unfairness in the First  Tier  Tribunal
    proceeding in  the  Appellant's  absence,  I  would  have  declined  to
    exercise the discretion in section 12(2)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 to set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.

22.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

23.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 17 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
