
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12691/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House in London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 09 September 2019                 |On 18 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                 NABIL KETFI
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 30 September 2016 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  grant  the
    claimant leave to remain in the United Kingdom  (UK)  on  human  rights
    grounds. The claimant appealed that  decision  and  argued  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) that he satisfied  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276 (ADE) (1) (iii) of the  Immigration  Rules  (20  years
    continuous UK residence) and that he ought, in any  event,  to  succeed
    under Article 8 on the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)
    outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal,
    deciding that although he had had more  than  20  years  continuous  UK
    residence he could not benefit  from  paragraph  276  ADE  because  his
    presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good so that he fell
    foul of the suitability requirement  at  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6.  of  the
    Rules. The tribunal also decided he did not succeed outside  the  rules
    under Article 8 of the ECHR. So, it dismissed his  appeal.  But,  in  a
    decision of 12 March 2019, I set aside the tribunal's decision.  I  did
    so because I thought the tribunal had erred in law through misdirecting
    itself as to the correct legal test it  was  required  to  apply  under
    paragraph S-LTR.1.6 and through conflating the  content  of  that  rule
    with that of S-LTR.1.5. I decided that the decision would be re-made in
    the  Upper  Tribunal,  after  a  further  hearing,  with  none  of  the
    tribunal's findings preserved.

 2. The matter, therefore,  came  before  me  on  09  September  2019.  The
    claimant was not represented. That was surprising because he  had  been
    represented before the tribunal and at the error of law  hearing  which
    had led to my setting aside the tribunal's decision.  But  he  told  me
    that he was not in a position  to  pay  for  legal  representation.  He
    clarified that he did not think he would be in  a  position  to  do  so
    within  the  relatively  near  future.  He   agreed   that   in   those
    circumstances matters should proceed. Accordingly, with the  assistance
    of an  interpreter  whom  he  appeared  to  understand  throughout  the
    proceedings, he represented himself and gave evidence before me.  Ms  S
    Jones,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  represented  the
    Secretary of State. I am grateful to each of them.

 3. The Secretary of State had confirmed, in a response to directions I had
    issued when setting aside the tribunal's decision, that she  would  now
    wish to rely upon the content of S-LTR.1.5 as well  as  S-LTR.1.6.  So,
    that clarified the issues under the Immigration Rules. There  remained,
    of course, a consideration under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  outside  the
    rules. But as to the rules, put  simply,  a  claimant  will  ordinarily
    succeed if able to show continuous residence in the UK for at least  20
    years under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii). But that  is  not  so  if  the
    applicant falls foul of any of the suitability grounds  in  Section  S-
    LTR1.2 to S-LTR.2.3 as contained in  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules. Those relevantly provide:

         S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because, in view of the Secretary of State their
         offending has cause serious harm or they are a persistent  offender
         who shows a particular disregard for the law.

         SLTR.1.6. The presence of the presence of the applicant in  the  UK
         is not  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  their  character
         (including convictions which  do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-
         LTR.1.3-1.5, character, associations,  or  other  reasons  make  it
         undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.

 4. By way of background, the claimant, who is a national of  Algeria,  was
    born on 18 March 1968. He entered the UK illegally in 1993. It  appears
    that at some time relatively shortly afterwards he  had  sought  asylum
    but had been unsuccessful. On 06 June 2012  he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of long residence  but  that  application
    too was unsuccessful. However, he appealed and on 23 May  2014  he  was
    notified that his appeal had been allowed. After that  he  was  granted
    leave to remain for a period  of  six  months.  That  relatively  short
    period of leave was given because when the tribunal allowed his  appeal
    in 2014 it explained it was doing so with a view to his being  given  a
    period of limited leave solely for the  purpose  of  allowing  him  the
    opportunity to institute proceedings to  regain  contact  with  his  UK
    based son (see below). But the claimant did not apply for an  extension
    of leave within the currency of that period of leave and it  seems  did
    not take steps  to  commence  any  contact  proceedings.  When  he  did
    eventually apply for further leave he was out  of  time.  The  claimant
    told me that he had  completed  all  the  relevant  paperwork  for  the
    application to have been made in time but seemed to  suggest  that  his
    legal representatives had simply failed to send it.  But  there  is  no
    corroborative evidence of that. In any event, he made his out  of  time
    application in November 2015 and it was that application which  led  to
    the refusal of 30 September 2016 and, ultimately, to this appeal.

 5. As the claimant was unrepresented I confirmed with him that  he  wished
    to rely upon various documents previously submitted on his  behalf,  by
    his now former legal representatives. He said that he did. Two  witness
    statements had previously been submitted on his behalf but he  told  me
    he could not recall the content of them. Those statements are dated  16
    October 2017 and 18 September 2018 respectively. So, I took him through
    them. He confirmed that he agreed with the bulk of what had  been  said
    in those  statements  but  made  some  corrections.  Putting  his  oral
    evidence and his written  evidence  together  and  incorporating  those
    corrections, the claimant's case as presented to me was as follows:  He
    had left Algeria in 1993 because there was then a  civil  war  in  that
    country and he felt unsafe. He had entered the UK  unlawfully  but  now
    regrets doing so. On 11 October 1997 he had married a  British  citizen
    and, in May 1998 a child was born to the couple. That is his son Karim.
    However, the marriage ran into difficulties and  the  claimant,  for  a
    time, lost touch with Karim and Karim's mother. But he has two brothers
    who live in the UK and who are citizens of the UK and they assisted him
    in tracing Karim. This led to his meeting Karim and Karim's  mother  in
    2015. But there has been no meaningful contact with  Karim  since  that
    time and Karim's mother is reluctant for there to be any such  contact.
    The claimant has  committed  a  number  of  criminal  offences.  Whilst
    acknowledging that  is  so,  he  says  that  it  is  primarily  if  not
    exclusively because he has no right to work in the UK, has no right  to
    claim benefits and, whilst he does some occasional cash in  hand  work,
    he is unable to support himself. So, he has had to offend  to  survive.
    But he says he does have respect for the law and that it is simply  his
    circumstances that have led to his offending.  He  also  says  that  he
    suffers from diabetes and depression. As to  connections  in  his  home
    country of Algeria, his father passed away many years  ago  and  whilst
    his mother is still alive she is elderly and infirm. He has two sisters
    in Algeria but they have their own husbands and children and would  not
    be able to assist him if he were to return to  that  country.  He  asks
    that his appeal be allowed so that he can remain in the UK.

 6. If the claimant is to succeed either under  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    under Article 8 of the ECHR outside  the  rules  he  must  show,  to  a
    balance of probability, that he satisfies the relevant requirements. He
    must do so on the basis of matters as they stand as at the date of  the
    hearing before me. In considering  whether  the  claimant  is  able  to
    succeed I have taken full account of his oral evidence, the documentary
    evidence which was before the tribunal when it heard the  appeal,  some
    further documentary evidence in the form of an updated  record  of  the
    claimant's criminal convictions and the submissions which were made  to
    me by Ms Jones for the Secretary of State and by the  claimant  on  his
    own behalf.

 7. The Secretary of State accepts that  the  claimant  has  the  requisite
    twenty years continuous  residence  to  enable  him  to  succeed  under
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii) if he does not fall foul of the suitability
    requirements as contained in Appendix FM. But the  Secretary  of  State
    argues that he does fall foul of those requirements  specifically  with
    respect to S-LTR1.5 and S-LTR1.6 as set out above.

 8. S-LTR.1.5 focuses upon the claimant's offending. There is no dispute as
    to the fact of his convictions. A 'summary  of  convictions'  revealed,
    prior to  28  March  2019,  14  convictions  relating  to  16  specific
    offences. This included offences  of  failing  to  surrender  to  bail,
    shoplifting, theft, disorderly behaviour, failing to  comply  with  the
    requirements of a community order and failing to surrender to  custody.
    The offences, it is fair to say, are far from being at the more serious
    end of the scale but they do span a long period of time commencing,  as
    they do, in 2001 and ending (so far) in March 2019. For the  most  part
    the claimant has received non-custodial sentences though on 28  January
    2005 he was sentenced to 18 days imprisonment and on 24 January 2014 he
    was sentenced to  32  weeks  imprisonment.  On  24  July  2014  he  was
    sentenced to 12 weeks imprisonment and on 13 May 2016 he was  sentenced
    to 16 weeks of imprisonment suspended for 12 months.  The  more  recent
    offence of 28 March 2019, which I was only told about on the day of the
    hearing, was one of failing to surrender  to  a  warrant  issued  by  a
    Magistrates Court. The claimant explained that that was because he  had
    failed to pay a fine previously imposed upon him.

 9. Ms Jones did not argue that, with respect to  S-LTR.1.5,  the  claimant
    had, through his offending, caused serious harm. Rather, she  contended
    that he is a persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard  for
    the law.

10. In Chege v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  considered
    the meaning of the term 'persistent offender'. It made  it  clear  that
    persistence, by its nature, required some continuation of the behaviour
    concerned and  said  that  the  behaviour  or  offending  need  not  be
    continuous or even regular. The Upper Tribunal accepted that  a  person
    who had acquired a persistent offender status might  subsequently  lose
    it through not repeating the offending behaviour. It was said that, put
    simply, a persistent offender 'is someone who  keeps  on  breaking  the
    law'. But it was also said that much will depend upon the  facts  of  a
    particular case and the nature and circumstances of the offending.

11. I have concluded that the claimant is a  persistent  offender.  He  has
    committed a number of offences over an extensive period  of  time.  His
    most recent offence, whilst not a serious one,  does  demonstrate  that
    the behaviour continues. I note the claimant's frank acceptance of  his
    offending record (and it is to his credit that he was frank about  this
    before me) but the offences started a long time ago, there have been  a
    lot of such  offenses,  and  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    offending behaviour has ceased. So, as I say,  I  find  that  he  is  a
    persistent offender as the term is used  in  S-LTR.1.5.  But  there  is
    further limb to the test. The Secretary of  State  has  to  demonstrate
    that not only is he a persistent offender but that he is a person  'who
    shows a particular disregard for the law'.

12. As to that aspect, the claimant himself says that he respects the  law.
    It is just that his circumstances have  been  such  that  it  has  been
    necessary for him to commit some  offences  in  order  to  be  able  to
    survive in the UK. I appreciate that, inevitably, if a  person  is  not
    able to work and is not entitled to benefits and is not  able  to  call
    upon regular family support, there will probably come a  temptation  to
    commit low-level crime in order to acquire  life's  essentials  or  the
    means to purchase them. But that does not explain, for example, use  of
    disorderly behaviour in respect of which the claimant was convicted  on
    25 February 2013. It does not explain the failure to  comply  with  the
    requirements of a community order in respect of which the claimant  was
    convicted on 28 August 2013. It does not explain the offence  of  using
    threatening, abusive, insulting words/behaviour or disorderly behaviour
    to cause harassment/alarm/distress in respect of which he was convicted
    on 17 January 2016. Further, although the claimant says he respects the
    law it does not seem to me that he has demonstrated that he is not able
    to return to Algeria. He has not secured  international  protection  in
    the UK so, on the face of it, there is no reason why he  cannot  return
    there, where he has family members, and seek to make  a  new  life  for
    himself there though I do not pretend that doing so would be very easy.
    But the point I make here  is  that,  in  effect,  he  has  elected  to
    continue to live in the UK in circumstances where he feels  he  has  to
    commit crimes to survive, rather than to return to  Algeria  where,  on
    the face of it, he might not or would not have to do so. At  least,  in
    Algeria, he would be permitted to work and generate an income  thereby.
    So, I have concluded that the claimant has  demonstrated  a  particular
    disregard for the law through the commission of a range of offences and
    through an election of a lifestyle incorporating what he says is a need
    to commit such offences, in circumstances where, he could  have  simply
    returned to Algeria. I conclude, therefore, that the Secretary of State
    has successfully demonstrated that the requirements  of  S-LTR.1.5  are
    satisfied.

13. As to S-LTR.1.6, it is not  now  necessary  for  me  to  consider  that
    provision. But if the convictions did not fall within the scope  of  S-
    LTR.1.5 I would have considered that they were  relevant  to  S-LTR.1.6
    and that his commission of the range of offences would bring him within
    its scope too.

14. The upshot of my above findings is that the claimant  is  not  able  to
    take advantage of paragraph 276 (ADE) (iii) of the Immigration Rules.

15. That  then  leaves  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  outside  the  rules.  In
    considering that I bear in mind the five-fold test set out in the  case
    of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. I have also  taken  into  account  the
    content of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.

16. I would accept that Article 8 is engaged bearing in mind the claimant's
    very extensive residence in the UK and bearing in  mind  that  he  does
    have an adult son in the UK as well as two brothers. Since it is  clear
    that any interference with  Article  8  rights  is  lawful  and  is  in
    pursuance of the legitimate aim of  immigration  control,  I  must  now
    consider the question of proportionality.

17. As to that, I am statutorily mandated to give only little weight to the
    claimant's private life in the UK. But that does not mean I should give
    no weight to it and, as  I  say,  the  period  of  residence  has  been
    unusually lengthy and is a period which, ordinarily, had there been  no
    suitability issues, would have led to the claimant receiving a grant of
    indefinite leave to remain. But  the  offending  history  is  relevant.
    Further, although the claimant does have an adult son, Karim,  residing
    in the UK, his own evidence before me was to the effect that  there  is
    no current meaningful contact between the two. I do  have  two  witness
    statements, one from each of the claimant's UK  based  brothers,  those
    statements having been prepared for the original tribunal hearing.  But
    they are strikingly brief and do not tell  me  anything  regarding  the
    depth of the family relationship the claimant has with either of  them.
    Although the claimant's father is sadly deceased, the claimant's mother
    is in Algeria and will, at least, notwithstanding her infirmity, be  of
    some emotional support and comfort to the  claimant  if  he  is  to  be
    returned to Algeria. He will be returning to a country  with  which  he
    will still have some familiarity and  he  does,  of  course,  speak  an
    appropriate language. In the circumstances I have concluded  that  this
    is a case where  requiring  him  to  leave  the  UK  would  be  clearly
    proportionate.

18. In the circumstances, whilst I do have some sympathy for  the  claimant
    and whilst I am grateful to him for his frankness before me, I have  to
    dismiss his appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been  set  aside.  In  re-making
the decision I dismiss the claimant's appeal from the Secretary  of  State's
decision of 30 September 2016.

Anonymity is not directed. The First-tier Tribunal did not  grant  anonymity
and there does not appear to be any reason to do so.


      Signed
            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                   Dated                                11 September 2019



To the respondent
Fee award

Since the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


      Signed
            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                   Dated                                11 September 2019
