
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12966/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 February 2019              |On 13 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                        Mr ERONMOSELE BLESSED OGBEWI
                        (NO ANOMYMITY DIRCETION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Lanlehin, Counsel
      (instructed by Jeff-Leonard, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1.     Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Garratt on 22 November 2018 against the  decision  to  dismiss  the
         Appellant's Article 8  ECHR  appeal  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judges Beach and Krish in a decision and reasons promulgated on  19
         October 2018.  The Appellant is a  national  of  Nigeria,  who  had
         sought a variation of his existing leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
         (General) Student to that of a partner of a United Kingdom  settled
         person under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


    2.     Judges Beach and Krish found that the Appellant and his  sponsor
         had not shown that they had a genuine and subsisting  relationship.
         Appendix FM thus could not be met.  As to paragraph 276ADE  of  the
         Immigration  Rules,  the  Appellant  faced  no   very   significant
         obstacles reintegrating  in  Nigeria.   His  ex-partner  and  their
         daughter (not a qualifying child)  had  no  status  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  There was no Article 8 ECHR  disproportionality  in  such
         circumstances. Hence the appeal was dismissed.


    3.     Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the panel had overlooked  or  misunderstood  material
         evidence and  had  drawn  the  wrong  inferences  about  particular
         events.


    4.     The Respondent filed a rule 24 notice in the form  of  a  letter
         dated  10  December  2018  opposing  the  appeal.   There  was   no
         procedural unfairness and adequate reasons had been given  for  the
         findings reached.


    5.     Ms Lanlehin for the Appellant who had not appeared below) relied
         on the grounds submitted and the grant  of  permission  to  appeal.
         The panel failed to ensure that the inconsistencies of  concern  to
         them in the evidence were raised with the witnesses.  The panel had
         misunderstood the  evidence  about  the  Appellant's  culture,  the
         Appellant's working hours and the sponsor's  holidays.   The  panel
         had  given  inadequate  reasons.   A  dialogue  with  the  tribunal
         followed. It was submitted that the appeal should  be  allowed  and
         the decision  either  remitted  for  rehearing  or  remade  in  the
         Appellant's favour.


    6.     Ms Isherwood for the Respondent relied on the  rule  24  notice.
         The panel were entitled to draw the adverse inferences  which  they
         had done.  The Appellant was represented.   There were numerous and
         multifaceted reasons given for the  adverse  credibility  findings.
         The appeal should be dismissed.


    7.     There was no reply as the submissions for the Appellant had been
         fully canvassed.


    8.     The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's  view  a
         liberal one, particularly given the confused  and  largely  generic
         onwards grounds of appeal which had been  served,  and  which  were
         directed against the First-tier Tribunal's findings of  fact.   The
         tribunal  accepts  Ms  Isherwood's  submissions.   There   was   no
         misunderstanding of the evidence  by  the  panel,  led  by  a  very
         experienced judge. Matters such as the Appellant's  route  to  work
         and its timings were drawn directly  from  his  witness  statement.
         The Appellant was represented at the hearing  and  there  had  been
         ample time to prepare and  submit  evidence:  indeed,  a  113  page
         bundle of evidence had been served.  As Ms Isherwood  pointed  out,
         the Home Office's reasons for refusal letter had set out  a  number
         of difficulties  with  the  case  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant (see, e.g., the section headed "Eligibility"), as well as
         serving copies of the marriage interview  records,  so  he  was  on
         notice  long  before  the  hearing  that  the  genuineness  of  the
         relationship claimed was heavily contested. The panel's task was to
         assess and evaluate the evidence placed before them, not to  engage
         in quasi cross-examination of the Appellant.  The panel  raised  no
         new matters and there was nothing to take the Appellant by surprise
         so as to cause procedural unfairness.


    9.     In the tribunal's judgment, the First-tier Tribunal  panel,  led
         by  a  very  experienced  judge,  produced  a  full  and   balanced
         determination, which securely resolved the  issues.   Nothing  more
         than disagreement with  the  decision  has  been  identified.   The
         tribunal finds that there was no  error  of  law  and  the  onwards
         appeal must be dismissed.


    DECISION


    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 7 February 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
