
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/12945/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 15th January 2018                      |    On 8th February 2018         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                           Mr Khawaja Farhan Qayum
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel, instructed by SAJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter was originally listed for hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gill on 6th October 2017.  After hearing the parties, the learned
    Judge concluded  that  the  matter  needed  to  be  adjourned  and  the
    Respondent Secretary of State was directed to serve  certain  evidence.
    It was said in her directions as follows:

         "1.      There was insufficient material before the Upper  Tribunal
             at the hearing on 6th October 2017 for it  to  decide  whether
             Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mays made  a  mistake  as  to
             fact, as contended in  the  grounds.   Having  regard  to  the
             overriding objective, it was necessary for the hearing  to  be
             adjourned and for the Respondent to be redirected to serve the
             documents described at paragraphs 2(ii) - (v) below.


         2. The Respondent is directed to serve the  following  as  soon  as
             reasonably practicable and, in any event, no  later  than  the
             date which is six calendar weeks from the date on which  these
             directions are sent to the parties:


             (i) A full copy of the decision letter  that  was  subject  to
                  this appeal, together  with  written  confirmation  as  to
                  whether the said decision was dated  18th  April  2016  or
                  21st April 2016.


             (ii)      A copy of the  Appellant's  application  dated  23rd
                  December 2008 for leave to remain.


             (iii)     A copy of the decision letter  dated  16th  November
                  2009.


             (iv)      A clean copy of the decision  of  Immigration  Judge
                  Entwistle promulgated on 28th April 2010.


             (v) In relation to the Appellant's previous conviction, a copy
                  of  the  MG11  or  sentencing  remarks   or   such   other
                  document(s) as makes clear the facts of  the  offence,  in
                  particular, whether the offence that was  the  subject  of
                  the  conviction  was  committed  in  connection  with   an
                  application for leave to remain or an attempt  to  open  a
                  bank account."

2.    Mr Duffy, who appeared before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill  and  indeed
    appears today, responded to that order  for  directions  by  way  of  a
    letter of 14th November 2017 and he said in part as follows:

         "Unfortunately, I have only been able to locate the  ECO's  refusal
         decision, dated 18th April 2016, and the RFRL [reasons for  refusal
         letter] dated 17th November 2009; (directions (i) & (iii)).


         The other documents identified are not on any of  the  Home  Office
         files that I have access to.


         The determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Entwistle  is
         also not available on Home Office systems, as  determinations  were
         not stored electronically until 2011."


3.    Mr Duffy also referred to a part of the refusal letter when  he  said:
    "However the following passage in the refusal  letter  seems  to  imply
    that the 322(1A) refusal was on the basis that the Appellant failed  to
    disclose his conviction rather than the use of a false document in  the
    application.  ..."

4.     Following  that  correspondence  from  Mr   Duffy   the   Appellant's
    solicitors, SAJ Law Chambers, sent a letter to the Tribunal dated  10th
    January 2018 and there it is said that there were other documents  that
    the Secretary of State was not able to provide.  It says in that letter
    amongst other things the following:

         "4.      The UKVI in their letter dated 14/11/2017 has argued  that
             since the Appellant failed to disclose his  conviction  rather
             than the use of a false  document  in  the  application  dated
             23/12/2008, hence, the refusal was justified  under  paragraph
             322(1A).


             In this regard, it is respectfully submitted that the  offence
             of possessing a false/improperly  obtained/another's  identity
             document to open a bank account was committed  on  03/09/2009,
             as  also  recorded  by  the  Home  Office  in  one  of   their
             supplementary UKBA's bundle apparently served  on  19/08/2011,
             as exhibited on pages  21  -  23  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
             already submitted to the Upper Tribunal as part of his current
             appeal.


             ...


             The above said chronology of evens makes  it  clear  that  the
             application  in  question  was  made  on  23/12/2008  as  also
             recorded by the Home Office in their  RFRL  dated  17/11/2009,
             whereas the actual offence was committed on 03/09/2009  or  on
             04/09/2009.


             In the circumstances, in our respectful  submissions  this  is
             bizarre to say that  the  Appellant  failed  to  disclose  his
             conviction (which was months  after  the  application)  rather
             than the use of a false  document  in  the  application  dated
             23/12/2008, and that the refusal was justified under paragraph
             322(1A)."

5.    During oral submissions today it has been very clearly and  eloquently
    argued on behalf of the Appellant that, really, there are  two  aspects
    that cannot be ignored.  Firstly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did clearly make an error of fact in relation to whether or  not  there
    was the use of false documents for an application for leave to  remain.
    There was no such use of false documents, as has been made clear by the
    failure of presentation of any documents, but, more importantly, by the
    chronology itself.  Secondly, it is said that, in any event, the  judge
    at paragraph 38 of her decision also erred.  It was submitted  that  it
    was not inevitable that the judge would have come to the same  decision
    if she had not made those errors.  It was submitted that the  error  of
    law was material and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  has
    to be set aside.

6.    Mr Duffy in his submissions, no less eloquently explained that on  the
    last occasion when the matter was before Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  he
    provided the guidance for  Entry  Clearance  Officers  in  relation  to
    paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Rules  and  he  explained  the  aggravating
    circumstances aspect and Mr Duffy said that even if  the  decision  was
    wrong to say that deception had been used in a previous application and
    even though it may be harsh to take a point against  the  Appellant  in
    terms of the date of  conviction  and  the  date  of  application,  the
    Appellant had overstayed since 2010 and that he  has  used  an  assumed
    identity and the criminal court had found that to be the case.  The use
    of false documents undermines the good order of society and it would be
    in effect perverse for such use of documents and the criminal manner to
    be seen as lesser offence when  the  documents  are  submitted  to  the
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  or  indeed  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

7.    It was clear that on the facts it was  the  Appellant's  own  accepted
    behaviour which had led to the decision having been  made  against  the
    Appellant.  Here it was clear that the mistake of fact was not material
    and thereby I should uphold the judge's decision.

8.    When I look at the judge's decision itself,  I  firstly  observe  that
    there are various other aspects  in  respect  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's refusal  which  the  judge  did  accept  but  it  was  almost
    immediately within her decision that the judge considered the  case  on
    the wrong basis. That is because the judge said at paragraph 2:

         "...  In particular, the ECO was not satisfied that  the  Appellant
         met the suitability requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   This
         was on the basis that the ECO was of the view  that  the  Appellant
         had previously used false documents in support  of  an  application
         seeking leave to remain in the UK ...",

    and then at subsequent paragraphs the judge had said as follows:

         "47.     ...  In using false documents in an application for  leave
             to remain the Appellant's conduct is conduct which strikes  at
             the very heart of the system of  immigration  control  in  the
             United Kingdom ...",


    and at paragraph 53:


         "...  The Appellant does not, however, meet the requirements of the
         Immigration Rules as I have found that his  application  should  be
         refused having regard  to  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.  The Appellant has committed an offence which strikes at the
         heart of the system of immigration control in seeking to use  false
         documents to obtain leave to remain in the United Kingdom."

9.    There is no doubt that the judge made a mistake of  fact  because  the
    Appellant had not used false documents to obtain leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  He had used false documents to  open  a  bank  account
    here.   The Appellant's behaviour in that  regard  is  inexcusable,  is
    reprehensible and I clearly see that such behaviour has to be  deplored
    in the clearest way. The point being though that the deceit was nothing
    to do with using false documents to seek leave in the UK.

10.   The question for me, however, is whether  in  the  circumstances  that
    mistake of  fact  was  such  that  the  judge  erred  in  the  ultimate
    conclusion that she reached.  Coupled with that is the consideration of
    paragraph 38 of the judge's decision where the judge said at  paragraph
    38 in part as follows: "...  The Appellant does not  therefore  in  his
    application form appear  to  have  accepted  that  he  used  the  false
    documentation in an application for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom", the point being that it  was  simply  not  possible  for  the
    Appellant to put in his application form such details but in any  event
    there was reference to these matters when he undertook an interview.

11.   Mr Duffy in effect seeks to rely on  the  general  guidance  to  Entry
    Clearance Officers to say that there is an  all-encompassing  catch-all
    provision which requires the utmost honesty from applicants but also  a
    continuing disclosure from applicants.  Although I have  sympathy  with
    that, in the particular circumstances of this case though,   the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision is not nuanced in  the  way  in  which  Mr
    Duffy now seeks to submit.   In my judgment, Appellants are entitled to
    know the basis on which a decision against them has come to be refused.
     That then enables such Appellants to respond to  the  refusal  and  to
    make appropriate applications. Therefore although I imagine that  at  a
    different stage Mr Duffy or an Entry Clearance Officer  would  seek  to
    raise the points now being raised that  was  never  the  basis  of  the
    Respondent's decision.

12.   Having reflected on the matter, I do conclude that the error  of  fact
    made by the judge in this case is such that it amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.  It is more than likely, in my judgment, that  the  judge
    would have come to a different decision had she not made the  error  of
    fact.

13.   Having reflected as to the appropriate course  as  to  what  ought  to
    occur now that I have found a material error of law, namely whether the
    matter should remain  here  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  before  me  or  a
    different judge or whether the matter ought to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal, in my judgment, it is appropriate for  the  case  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  There  will  be  a  rehearing  in
    relation to the paragraph 320(11) aspect only.   The  other  favourable
    findings which were made in respect of the Appellant meeting the  other
    aspects of the Immigration Rules shall remain.  There is  no  error  in
    respect  of  those  aspects.   It  will  give  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent an opportunity to present their cases.

14.   I do not make any further directions.  That will be a matter  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For today's purposes  I  find  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the judge's decision.  The issue in respect of
    paragraph 320(11) is remitted for rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.
There shall be a re-hearing of the matter at the First-tier Tribunal on  the
basis referred to above.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: A Mahmood                            Date: 15 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
