
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12858/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|with parties attending by Skype      |                                     |
|On 6th October 2020                  |On 19th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               MR KARAMJIT [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A Khan, SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs. H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

    1. The hearing before me on 6th October 2020 took the form of a remote
       hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  At the
       outset, I was informed by Mr Khan that the appellant and sponsor are
       aware of the hearing but the sponsor does not have the facilities to
       join the hearing remotely. Had a request been made for a simultaneous
       BT conference call to be facilitated so that the appellant and/or
       sponsor could hear the proceedings, I would have acceded to such a
       request.  Mr Khan confirmed the appellant is happy for the hearing to
       proceed in his absence. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre
       and the hearing room and building were open to the public. The
       hearing was publicly listed, and I was addressed by the
       representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been, if the
       parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that
       this constituted a hearing in open court; that the open justice
       principle has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and
       that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or
       interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was
       satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
       with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing
       because of the present need to take precautions against the spread of
       Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing
       would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that
       is proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
       issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
       parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
       had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


    2. The appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  E  M
       Smith promulgated on 9th March 2020, in which he dismissed the appeal
       against the decision of the respondent of 5th July 2019 to refuse the
       appellant leave to enter the UK on private and family life grounds.


    3. The appellant advances two grounds of  appeal.   First,  Judge  Smith
       unfairly refused an application for an adjournment that had been made
       by the sponsor. Second, in reaching his decision Judge  Smith  failed
       to have proper regard to  the  evidence  regarding  the  age  of  the
       appellant's child who is a British citizen and failed to have  proper
       regard to the best interests of the child.  Permission to appeal  was
       granted by FtT Judge Scott-Baker on 13th July 2020


    4. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs  Aboni,  rightly  in  my  judgement,
       accepts that the decision of Judge  Smith  is  vitiated  by  material
       errors of law.  She properly  acknowledges  that  it  was  unfair  to
       proceed in the absence  of  the  sponsor  in  circumstances  where  a
       written request for an adjournment had been made.   The  sponsor  had
       sent a letter to the Tribunal dated  2nd  March  2020  requesting  an
       adjournment  of  the  hearing  because  her  daughter  had   a   high
       temperature and the sponsor was looking after her.  The  sponsor  had
       been advised to stay at home  until  her  daughter  recovered.   That
       advice was perhaps unsurprising, as  matters  stood  in  early  March
       2020, and the precautions that were being advised to avoid the spread
       of Covid-19.  Although the application had been refused by a Tribunal
       Caseworker, it appears that  decision  might  not  have  reached  the
       sponsor.  Judge Smith notes in his decision that on  the  morning  of
       the hearing, a copy of the letter requesting an adjournment had again
       been left with the Tribunal.  Mrs Aboni also accepts the decision  of
       Judge Smith is entirely perfunctory notwithstanding the very  limited
       information that was before the Tribunal.


    5. The issue of fairness in the context of adjournments  was  considered
       by the Upper Tribunal in the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)
       [2014] UKUT 418.  The President gave the following reminder;


         "7.  If a Tribunal refuses to accede  to  an  adjournment  request,
         such decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally. In practice, in  most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment  refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably. Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair  hearing?  Any  temptation  to  review  the  conduct  and
         decision of the FtT through the  lens  of  reasonableness  must  be
         firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in  law.  In  a
         nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.


         8.    The  cardinal  rule   rehearsed   above   is   expressed   in
         uncompromising language in the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
         SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:


             "First, when considering whether the immigration  Judge  ought
             to  have  granted   an   adjournment,   the   test   was   not
             irrationality. The test  was  not  whether  his  decision  was
             properly  open  to  him  or  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
             perverse. The test and sole test was whether it was unfair".


         Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both  tiers  will  serve  to
         prevent judicial error. Regrettably,  in  the  real  and  imperfect
         world of contemporary litigation, the question of adjourning a case
         not infrequently arises on the date of hearing, at the doors of the
         court. I am conscious, of course, that  in  the  typical  case  the
         Judge will have invested much time and effort  in  preparation,  is
         understandably anxious to complete the  day's  list  of  cases  for
         hearing and may well feel frustrated by  the  (usually)  unexpected
         advent of an adjournment  request.  Both  the  FtT  and  the  Upper
         Tribunal have demanding workloads. Parties  and  stakeholders  have
         expectations,  typically  elevated   and   sometimes   unrealistic,
         relating to the throughput and output of cases in  the  system.  In
         the present era, the spotlight on the judiciary is more acute  than
         ever before. Moreover, Tribunals must consistently give  effect  to
         the   overriding   objective.   Notwithstanding,   sensations    of
         frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how  legitimate,  must
         always  yield  to  the  parties'  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   In
         determining applications for  adjournments,  Judges  will  also  be
         guided by focusing on the overarching criterion  enshrined  in  the
         overriding objective, which is that of fairness."


    6. I am satisfied the decision to proceed in the absence of the  sponsor
       deprived the appellant of his right to a fair  hearing.   It  follows
       that the appeal is allowed.


    7. As to disposal, I accept that  the  appropriate  course  is  for  the
       matter to be remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh.


 Notice of Decision


    8. The appeal is allowed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge E
       M Smith is set aside.


    9. The appeal is remitted  for  hearing  afresh  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  The parties will be advised  of  a  hearing  date  in  due
       course.


   10. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


Signed        V. Mandalia               Date     6th October 2020


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
