
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12177/2018
                                                               HU/07956/2018
                                                               HU/12179/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 1 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                  AHSAN [H]
                                  SARAH [K]
                                    [Z A]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Aslam of counsel, instructed by Burnley Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms B. Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.    The  Appellants  are  nationals  of  Pakistan  and  the  2nd  and  3rd
    Appellants are dependent on applications made by the 1st Appellant. The
    1st Appellant entered the United Kingdom, as  student  on  7  September
    2008 and he was subsequently granted further leave to remain as a  Tier
    1 Highly Skilled (General) Migrant. On  9  June  2017  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1 Highly Skilled (General) Migrant
    and he then varied this application to  one  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residency.

2.   His application was refused on 20 February 2018  and  he  appealed.  In
    letters, dated 29 March and 1 June  2018,  the  Appellants'  solicitors
    confirmed that the basis of  the  appeal  was  an  assertion  that  the
    decision breached his family and private life rights for  the  purposes
    of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and  that  any
    interference with these rights could be  disproportionate.  The  appeal
    was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dineen  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 January 2019. The Appellants  appealed  against  this
    decision and permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING
3.   Counsel for the Appellant said that he was relying on the  grounds  for
    seeking permission to appeal and, in particular,  the  submission  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen had failed to make  adequate  findings
    on the evidence provided by HMRC. The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the grounds were no more than a  disagreement  with  the
    findings made by the judge and did not disclose any material errors  of
    law. I have  referred  to  the  details  of  their  submissions,  where
    appropriate, in my findings below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
4.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  did  not  give  the  Appellants
    permission to appeal in relation to paragraphs 12 to 17 of the  grounds
    of appeal. Instead, he granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen had "erred in relying on the  evidence
    of a witness statement from an employee of HMRC  of  2012,  which  said
    that Pattison Enterprises had not  participated  in  legitimate  trade,
    without further explanation when there  was  also  evidence  from  HMRC
    confirming that [the] company had employed the appellant".

5.   The Appellants had accepted that the 1st Appellant was not entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence.   Therefore,
    the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dineen  proceeded  on  the
    basis that they were entitled  to  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

6.   In paragraph 9 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen  found
    that it was clear that, if the Appellants were  removed  from  the  UK,
    there would be interference with the particular  form  of  family  life
    which they were pursuing in the UK. However, he  omitted  to  make  any
    findings in relation to any private life which they may  enjoy  in  the
    United Kingdom, despite the length of time they had been here  and  the
    employment undertaken by the 2nd Appellant.

7.   In paragraph  10  the  Judge  went  on  to  consider  the  question  of
    proportionality for the  purposes  of  Article  8(2)  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights. In paragraph 20 of his  decision,  he  also
    reminded himself of the need to  take  into  account  the  contents  of
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  When
    doing so, it was necessary for First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen to give
    weight to the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest. Therefore, the question of  whether
    the 1st Appellant had  relied  on  false  information  when  previously
    applying for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  Highly  Skilled  (General)
    Migrant on 29 March 2011 was a  crucial  part  of  the  proportionality
    assessment.

8.   In order to qualify for leave  in  this  category,  the  1st  Appellant
    would have had to establish that he  had  earned  above  the  necessary
    threshold in a specified period of time before making his  application.
    When seeking to establish that the 1st Appellant falsified evidence  in
    order to meet the necessary criteria, the Respondent relied in part  on
    a witness statement from an HEO employed by  HMRC,  dated  11  December
    2012.

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen referred to this witness statement  in
    paragraph 11 of his decision but did not reach  any  detailed  findings
    and, in particular, did not consider whether this statement was capable
    of confirming that the 1st Appellant had not been employed by  Pattison
    Enterprises between 1  March  2010  and  28  February  2011;  purported
    employment which came to an end a year and nine months before the  date
    of the witness statement.

10.   As  submitted  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dineen did not only rely on the witness  statement  from
    HMRC. He also relied on the contents of  the  1st  Appellant's  witness
    statement and interview. However, when doing so, he placed reliance  on
    the absence of other  evidence,  such  as  a  contract  of  employment.
    However, there was a letter from Pattison Enterprises,  confirming  his
    employment and a copy of this firm's Employee Pay Details for  the  1st
    Appellant and confirmation from HMRC that he  had  made  a  tax  return
    which reflected  the  recorded  earnings.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dineen failed to make any clear findings in relation to  this  evidence
    preferring instead to speculate about the manner in which the Appellant
    had been paid and the consistency of the money he was paid each month.

11. In addition, some of the inconsistencies said to have arisen in the 1st
    Appellant's evidence were not borne out and the Judge  failed  to  take
    into account other aspects of the 1st Appellant's  immigration  history
    which reflected positively on the credibility of his account.


12. The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the contents of paragraphs
    19 to 21 of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Dineen's decision  but  this  did
    not represent a  sufficiently  thorough  and  cogent  analysis  of  the
    evidence to make his proportionality assessment sustainable.

13.  For all of these reasons, I find that  there  were  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen's decision.

DECISION
(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gullick, Gumsley, Grimmett or Mill.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 26 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
