

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12358/2017
                                                               HU/12361/2017
                                                               HU/12366/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Listed at Manchester                    Decision & Reason Promulgated
On 24th August 2018                                                 On 5th
October 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

             SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   HAYA [A]
                                    [R A]
                                    [F A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms EA Mottershaw, Counsel, instructed by TM Fortis
                    Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction
1. Although it is a Secretary of State who is appealing in these
   proceedings for convenience I continue to refer to the parties as in the
   First tier Tribunal.
2. The first appellant came to the United Kingdom as a mature student on 26
   August 2008. She obtained a Doctorate and currently is employed
   supervising university students. The second and third appellants are her
   children, born respectively on 13 September 2000 and 19 October 2003.
   They came to the United Kingdom at the same time as their mother. She has
   three other adult children here who have leave as students and an elder
   child who is in the United States of America. All are nationals of Saudi
   Arabia. Her husband was also here and returned to Saudi Arabia on 25
   September 2016 to tend to his business. They are in regular contact.
3. On 13 November 2016 she made application for herself and her two
   youngest children for leave to remain based upon their family and private
   life. This was refused on 2 October 2017. The appeals were heard by Judge
   of the First tier Tribunal Lloyd on 8 February 2018. In a decision
   promulgated on 16 February 2018 the appeals were allowed.
4. The grant of permission to appeal held that it was arguable the judge in
   assessing the proportionality of the decision did not identify
   sufficiently compelling reasons to justify allowing the appeals. It was
   arguable that the judge did not take into account the guidance given by
   the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA 874.
5. A rule 24 response has been lodged on behalf of the appellants.
The Upper Tribunal
6. At hearing Mr McVeety very fairly referred me to paragraph 3 and an
   apparent factual mistake by the judge indicating that the second and
   third appellants had lived in Saudi Arabia until they were almost 5 years
   old and 12 years old. In fact the case was that they were aged 4 and 7
   when they came here. This means that their formative years have been
   spent in this country and they are now aged 14 and almost 18. He
   acknowledged that the family had always been here lawfully: they did not
   have an adverse immigration history. The family speak English, with the
   first appellant working at the University. They have been here now almost
   10 years. The issue arising was the reasonableness of expecting the
   family, especially the children, to leave. He fairly made the point that
   the decision of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA 874 related to non-
   qualifying children unlike here. He suggested it might well have been the
   error at paragraph 3 of the decision which prompted the application for
   leave to appeal by the Secretary of State.
7. Ms Mottershaw relied upon the detailed rule 24 response drafted by her
   colleague. Without wishing to detract from the rule 24 response and clear
   and concise submissions of Counsel I will not repeat them but find I can
   place reliance upon the arguments advanced.

Conclusion
8. It is my conclusion that no material error of law has been established
   in the decision. The focus in the appeals was upon the two children. At
   paragraph 29 the judge accepted all of the appellants had been here over
   nine years, with the children being qualifying children. The judge
   correctly identified the issue was whether it was reasonable to expect
   them to leave the United Kingdom albeit the mistake as to their ages when
   they came here is repeated. The judge had the benefit of social work
   report and the children's school reports. The judge concluded they were
   settled in their schooling and are at a critical stage in their
   education. At paragraph 36 the judge recorded that seven years is a
   significant milestone for the purposes of article 8. The judge
   acknowledged that the family still has strong links with Saudi Arabia and
   that the children's father lived there. They also have extended family
   there. The judge balanced these factors and concluded it would not be
   reasonable to disrupt the education of the children who have developed
   social, cultural and educational ties in this country and who are at a
   formative stage in their lives. The conclusion was it would be in their
   best interests to remain. The judge took into account the public interest
   considerations in section 117 B and noted in particular the provisions of
   section 117 B (6). The judge has recited the relevant case law. It is my
   conclusion that no material error of law has been established. Rather, I
   find the judge correctly evaluated the factors save for the factual
   mistake as to the children's age when they arrived.
Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of Judge of
the First tier Tribunal Lloyd. Consequently, that decision allowing the
appeals shall stand.
Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




