
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Numbers:
HU/12811/2018

                                               HU/12813/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 August 2019                       |On 06 September 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                       arpana kumari (First Appellant)
                   Salahuddin Mohammed (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Akhtar
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the outset of the hearing Mr Akhtar  informed  me  that  the  second
    appellant, Mr Mohammed, has withdrawn his appeal against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal because he has now made  a  new  application
    for leave to remain on the basis of long residence.  However, the first
    appellant's  appeal  continues  and  I  have  considered  Mr   Akhtar's
    submissions in relation to the first appellant.

 2. This is the first appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on 17  January  2019  dismissing  both
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State dated  24  April
    2018 to refuse their applications for leave to remain in the UK.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison refused permission, however in  the
    Upper Tribunal, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana granted permission on
    22 May 2019 on the basis that it was arguable the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to consider Article 8 making no findings under Article  8.



 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of that decision, such that it should be set
    aside and remade.

 4. The history is this: the first appellant came to the UK as a student in
    2013.  Her leave was curtailed to expire in 2014, however she was later
    granted leave but it appears she had not had  leave  since  2015.   The
    position is that her partner with whom she remains is also a citizen of
    India with no leave to remain in the UK.

 5. The grounds of appeal are that there were very significant obstacles to
    the first appellant's integration in India on the basis that her family
    had rejected her relationship with her partner and had threatened  her.
    As the judge pointed out very clearly, in essence the factual claim was
    an asylum claim, however despite the invitation to  do  so,  the  first
    appellant has never made a proper asylum application.  She claims  that
    she is integrated into life in the UK and that relocating back to India
    would be a great hindrance to the family, so reliance  is  placed  upon
    the opposition of her family in India, on the level of  integration  in
    the UK and also in a psychiatric report indicating that  she  has  some
    form of depressive disorder.  It is suggested that all  those  factors,
    either individually  or  cumulatively,  amounted  to  very  significant
    obstacles within the meaning of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 6. The judge went to great lengths  to  point  out  that  the  application
    should have been made for asylum and at paragraph 21  stated  that  the
    appeal put the Tribunal in a  somewhat  difficult  situation.   It  was
    clear, the judge said, that apart from this issue of a  mixed  religion
    marriage giving rise to opposition in India,  it  was  clear  that  the
    claim had little other prospect of success  under  any  aspect  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  They have had no valid leave for some time and they
    were overstayers and the judge concluded that other than that issue the
    claim did not in fact engage the Immigration Rules.

 7. Complaint is made that the judge did not go on to consider  the  matter
    under Article 8, either on the basis of paragraph  276ADE  facing  very
    significant obstacles to integration or outside the Rules on the  basis
    of Article 8 ECHR family and private life.  However, having looked more
    carefully at the decision I find that whilst the judge did not go on to
    make any detailed Article 8 assessment, I am satisfied  the  judge  has
    adequately dealt with all the issues put before the Tribunal in the way
    which they were.  As the judge pointed out it appeared to be an attempt
    to circumvent the asylum procedure by making a human rights  claim  and
    refusing to apply for asylum.

 8. Mr Lindsay directs my attention to paragraph 30 of the  decision.   The
    judge reached a conclusion that the appeal was without significance  or
    plausibility.  It was pointed out that the  first  appellant  is  well-
    educated and it was not indicated why the couple could not relocate  to
    a major city in India to avoid the alleged problems that they may face.
     The availability of relocation would, of course, would be  a  complete
    answer to an asylum claim.  On that finding the basis of the claim fell
    away in relation to the opposition from their families, as  they  could
    simply live elsewhere and it appears that both of them  could  work  in
    India, where there are many Muslims living within mixed marriages.  For
    those reasons the judge concluded that they would not face  significant
    difficulty in one of the major  cosmopolitan  cities  of  India.   That
    would be a complete answer to the claim under  paragraph  276ADE.   The
    judge also pointed out in paragraph 30 that the mental health  problems
    of the first appellant did not amount to  an  exceptional  circumstance
    under the Rules and certainly come nowhere near the threshold  set  out
    in the case of N in relation to Article 3 and that conclusion cannot be
    reasonably challenged.

 9. If there are no very significant  obstacles  to  integration  then  one
    would struggle to understand on what basis the  first  appellant  could
    succeed on Article 8 outside the Rules.  As Mr Lindsay has pointed out,
    because the first appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights
    grounds, she faces proving her case on the  balance  of  probabilities,
    whereas if she had applied  for  asylum  the  claim  about  the  family
    opposition would only have to be proved to the lower standard of a real
    risk.

10. The grounds refer to the case in the Court of Appeal of  Kamara  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813 in which the Court of Appeal considered  the  question  of
    integration and very significant obstacles to integration and stated it
    is not confined to the mere ability to  find  a  job  or  sustain  life
    whilst living in another country.  It is not appropriate to  treat  the
    statutory language as subject to some gloss  and  it  will  usually  be
    sufficient for a court or Tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms
    that Parliament has chosen to use.    The idea of integration calls for
    a broad evaluative judgment to be made as  to  whether  the  individual
    would be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the
    society in that other  country  is  carried  on  and  the  capacity  to
    participate in it so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted
    there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society  and
    to build up within a reasonable time a right of human relationships  to
    give substance to the individual, private or family life.

11. On the facts of this case the judge was satisfied that both  appellants
    could relocate to avoid any claim of opposition from the family,  which
    the judge did not find in any event to be plausible.   They  were  both
    able to work and the first  appellant  was  well-educated.   The  judge
    concluded there would be no significant difficulty.

12. Although the judge probably ought to have gone on to  formally  address
    Article 8 in more detail, when one considers the facts of the case  and
    the findings of the judge in relation to the claimed  very  significant
    obstacles, there are no compelling  circumstances  which  exceptionally
    would make the decision refusing leave to remain  unjustifiably  harsh.
    There was in reality no basis for  the  judge  to  go  on  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  The appellants had no leave to remain  in
    the UK, they should have both returned  to  India,  they  can  continue
    their family life in India even if they have  to  relocate  to  do  so.
    They have no legitimate entitlement to settle in the  UK  just  because
    that is what they want to do, or because they married here.  In all the
    circumstances, even if the judge went  on  to  consider  Article  8  in
    detail outside the Rules, it is clear that the outcome would have  been
    exactly the same, that the appeal would  have  been  dismissed  on  the
    basis that the decision was not  disproportionate  to  the  appellants'
    family and private life rights when again, in the  balancing  exercise,
    the public interest in enforcing  immigration  control  is  considered.
    The judge would also have had to consider  Section  117B,  that  little
    weight was to be accorded to a private life in which immigration status
    was precarious and latterly  unlawful.   The  family  relationship  was
    established in precarious circumstances.  In all the circumstances this
    is an appeal that could not possibly have succeeded  on  an  Article  8
    basis, either within or without the Rules.

13. In the circumstances I find that even if there is an error  of  law  in
    the judge failing to go on to consider Article 8, I am  satisfied  that
    had the judge done so the appeal would still have  been  dismissed  and
    therefore the error, if there is one, is not material.

Decision

14. In making the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
    making of a material error of law such that the decision  needs  to  be
    set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

                    No anonymity direction is made.

     [pic]
                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 2 September 2019


To the Respondent
Fee Award

The appeal is dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.




                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 2 September 2019

