
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/12228/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Fox Court                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th February 2019                   | On 13th March 2019                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    m S G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr MSG in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  27th
    April 2016 refusing his application for leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his private and family life in the  UK.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin  allowed  his  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 12th December 2018.  The Secretary of State now  appeals
    to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lever.

 3. The Secretary of State had refused the application on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  of  S-LTR
    because he had submitted a TOEIC certificate from  Educational  Testing
    Service (ETS) which was fraudulently obtained and that accordingly  his
    presence in the UK is not conducive to the public good.  The  Appellant
    had a child born on 29th March 2012.  He and the mother  of  the  child
    are separated and the Appellant has obtained a Child Arrangement Order.
     The couple separated in April 2013.   Since  then  the  Appellant  has
    lived with his sister and her husband.  The Appellant  has  obtained  a
    court order giving him contact with his child.

 4. In considering the appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  the
    TOEIC issue and found that the Appellant had  probably  not  undertaken
    the English language test and accordingly found that he  did  not  meet
    the suitability requirements of the Rules.   In  his  assessment  under
    Article 8 the judge considered the child's best interests at  paragraph
    26 noting that at the date of the hearing the child was  aged  6  years
    and 8 months, had been born in the UK and was  established  at  school,
    and that, although contact with his  father  was  initially  supervised
    because of the Appellant's violence within the family home,  the  judge
    accepted that it is in the child's best interests that he continues  to
    have regular contact with his father.  The judge noted that neither the
    child nor his mother is a British national or settled in  the  UK.  The
    judge noted that previous applications made by the mother for leave  to
    remain had been refused but that the she had made  a  fresh  claim  for
    asylum although there was no documentary evidence to  corroborate  that
    assertion.  The judge however found that the child's best interests are
    probably best served by him being able to stay in the UK  and  to  have
    regular meaningful contact with his father, which he could not do if he
    remains in the UK with his mother and his father returns to Pakistan.

 5. The judge considered proportionality at paragraph 27 acknowledging that
    it may be that the mother's time in the UK is very close to running out
    but that, given how  close  it  may  be  to  a  decision  it  would  be
    unreasonable and disproportionate to expect the Appellant to leave  now
    both for him and more particularly his son who is not  responsible  for
    any shortcomings on the part of his parents.  The judge said  that  the
    period of such leave is a matter for the Respondent who is best  placed
    to determine it based on what happens in the next few weeks.

 6. In his grounds the Secretary of State contends that the judge erred  in
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 and in doing so  he  utilised  this
    provision as a general dispensing power.   It  is  submitted  that  ETS
    deception has been found,  therefore  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules on  suitability  grounds  and  in  any  event
    neither his ex-wife nor child have  any  status  nor  is  the  child  a
    qualifying child.  It is contended that the judge was required to  deal
    with the situation at the time of hearing and not to  speculate  as  to
    what may happen in the future.  It is contended that the Appellant's ex-
    wife and child have no basis of stay in  the  UK  and  therefore  their
    natural expectation when examining the real world test would be for the
    child to accompany his mother to Pakistan.   It  is  further  contended
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  balance  the  Appellant's
    immigration history, fraudulent activity  and  propensity  to  violence
    adequately.  Moreover, it is contended that the Appellant's family life
    claim is based on a limited contact order with his son  who  lives  150
    miles away while he resides in London and that this has to be  balanced
    against the competing public interest for his removal on the  basis  of
    the ETS fraud.  It is contended further that  Section  117B(6)  is  not
    determinative of the issue in hand as the judge failed to consider what
    special factors would make it unreasonable for the child to be  removed
    and that no such factors had been advanced.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable that,
    in considering the case outside of the Immigration Rules, the judge did
    so briefly and was in some respects speculative as to the circumstances
    and this decision was arguably too heavily based on speculation  as  to
    future  events  and  did  not  fully  consider  Section  117B  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy contended that, in recommending  that
    a limited period of leave be granted, the judge may have  had  in  mind
    the decision in MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133 which  dealt  with
    the removal of a parent during contact order proceedings.  He contended
    that this was the wrong approach as in this case the Appellant  is  not
    seeking to  stay  to  resolve  proceedings  in  the  Family  Court.  He
    contended that, in considering the appeal under Article 8  outside  the
    Rules, the judge treated the child's best interests as determinative of
    the appeal.  In his contention the judge had not factored in  the  fact
    that the Appellant cheated in his English  language  test  nor  had  he
    considered the precarious situation of the family life.  He highlighted
    that no members of the family have a right to be in the UK and if  they
    do get leave then that would be a subject of another  application.   He
    clarified that the submission made in paragraph 5 of  the  grounds  was
    that, even if the child were here and settled, the Secretary  of  State
    would still contend that the Appellant could leave.  He relied  on  the
    test set out in the case of KO (Nigeria)  &  Others  -v-  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 which requires  assessment
    of the situation in the real world.

 9. Mr MSG submitted that his son and the child's mother have a case  going
    on and that they have an appointment in Liverpool in connection with an
    asylum  application  on  28th  February  as  the  previous  appointment
    arranged for December had to be cancelled due to a medical  issue  with
    his son.  He said that access was previously supervised but that he had
    unsupervised access to his son for the past year and a half.   He  said
    that he has access to his son every two weeks but sometimes every  week
    as he is not working.  He lives in London with his sister and  his  ex-
    wife and child live in Newcastle.

10. In response Mr Duffy said that the judge's consideration at the end  of
    paragraph 27 appeared to be with the decision of MS  (Ivory  Coast)  in
    mind.  He highlighted that in his view this was not applicable in  this
    case.

Error of Law

11. There is no challenge to the judge's findings in relation to the  TOEIC
    English language test and to the judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   Accordingly,
    the issue is whether the judge erred in his approach to the  assessment
    under Article 8.

12. The judge considered the best interests of the child  at  paragraph  26
    concluding that it was in the child's best interest to remain in the UK
    and to have regular meaningful contact  with  his  father.   The  judge
    acknowledged that that was not a trump card at paragraph 26.  The judge
    assessed proportionality at paragraph 27 of the decision.  However, the
    only issue the judge considered in looking at proportionality  was  the
    fact that the Appellant's ex-wife and  child  had  an  application  for
    asylum  pending.   The  judge  indicated  that  he  had  canvassed  the
    possibility during submissions that one possible  outcome  might  be  a
    grant of limited leave in order to allow a decision to be made  in  the
    application made by the Appellant's ex-wife and  child.   However,  the
    judge  accepted  that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence   of   any
    application.

13. In my view the judge's assessment of proportionality was inadequate. He
    failed to consider the Appellant's fraud in relation to the ETS test in
    line with his findings at paragraph 25 that those who abuse the systems
    established to demonstrate sufficient ability in the  English  language
    threaten the  willingness  of  the  authorities  here  to  continue  to
    encourage International Students to come the UK and "such abuse strikes
    at the heart of effective immigration control and is a serious matter".
     Further, although the judge set out paragraph 24 that he had regard to
    the considerations set out in Section 117 he failed  to  mention  those
    factors in any detail  and  did  not  refer  to  them  at  all  in  his
    consideration of proportionality at paragraph 27.

14. I have considered the prospect that the judge was endeavouring to apply
    MS (Ivory Coast) and the prospect of the grant of temporary  permission
    to stay whilst family proceedings are resolved. However,  in  my  view,
    there is no basis for consideration of the principles of that case here
    given that in this  case  the  family  proceedings  have  already  been
    processed and there is no indication that there are any further  family
    proceedings outstanding.  The judge's decision that a grant of a period
    of temporary leave to remain in this  case  is  based  instead  on  the
    speculative conclusion that the Appellant's ex-wife and child may  have
    an application for asylum pending with the Home Office.  There  was  no
    documentary evidence before the judge in relation  to  any  outstanding
    application.  In reaching a conclusion on proportionality based only on
    this speculative submission the judge erred in failing to consider  the
    other public interest requirements as set out in Section 117B  and  all
    of the factors relevant to the assessment of proportionality.

15. In these circumstances I consider that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.  There has been no challenge  to  any  of
    the findings of fact and I therefore preserve them.  I indicated at the
    hearing  that,  if  I  accepted  that  the  Grounds  of   Appeal   were
    established, I would go on to remake the decision on the basis  of  the
    findings of fact and the material before me and I do so now.

Remaking the Decision

16. In remaking the decision I follow the steps set out by Lord Bingham  in
    the case of R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that the Appellant has family life with his child  to  whom  he
    has access through  orders  of  the  court.   I  accept  that,  if  the
    Appellant's ex-wife and child do not return to Pakistan, this  decision
    may interfere with their family life.

17. In considering  proportionality  I  start  with  considering  the  best
    interests of the child.  The child was born on 29th March 2012  and  is
    accordingly 6 years and 10 months.  The child is attending school.  The
    child lives with his mother and has contact with his father on foot  of
    orders of the Family Court.  What is said to be the final  Court  Order
    is at pages 19 to 21 of the Appellant's bundle.  It sets out a  consent
    order which states that the child spends time with his father by  Skype
    each Wednesday and on alternate Saturdays from 10am to 5pm in the North
    East of England under arrangements whereby the Appellant's sister is to
    collect and return the child to the mother and  is  present  throughout
    contact. Provision is also made for such reasonable times and  on  such
    occasions as the parties may from time to  time  agree  to  vary  these
    arrangements giving priority to the needs of  the  child.   This  Court
    Order was made on 11th April 2016.  I accept that it  is  in  the  best
    interests of the child to continue to have contact with his father.

18. In considering proportionality I take into account that  the  Appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules because he cannot
    meet the suitability requirements based on the findings in relation  to
    the fraud he practised in obtaining the TOEIC certificate.

19. I take into account the domestic violence perpetrator  programme  final
    assessment report of 23rd September 2015 which notes that it  is  clear
    that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  forms  of  abuse  within   his
    relationship with his ex-wife  involving  some  physical  violence  and
    other forms of abuse, such as  emotional,  financial,  isolation,  male
    privilege and irresponsible parenting.

20. I take into account that the Appellant  states  that  his  ex-wife  and
    child are pursuing an application for asylum in the UK and that his ex-
    wife has an appointment with the Home Office  on  28th  February  2019.
    There is no documentary evidence before me to support  this  assertion.
    In any event it is clear that the Appellant's ex-wife and the child  do
    not have current leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

21. I take into account  the  factors  set  out  in  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  That provision set  outs
    that the maintenance of effective immigration control is in the  public
    interest and sets out various factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in
    assessing the public interest.  It appears that the Appellant can speak
    English.  He represented himself in English at the hearing  before  me.
    There is no evidence before me that he is financially independent and I
    take this  into  account  in  accordance  with  Section  117B(3).   The
    Appellant has been in the UK since December 2012 initially  with  leave
    to remain as a student. However it seems that further applications  for
    leave to remain were withdrawn, therefore it appears that  he  has  not
    had any leave to remain since May 2012.  Accordingly, any private  life
    he has developed and much of the family life he developed with his  ex-
    wife and child were formed at a time when he was in the UK  unlawfully.



22. I have considered Section 117B(6) however, the  Appellant's  child  has
    not been in the UK for seven years and is not  therefore  a  qualifying
    child within Section 117D(1).  In any event I have taken account of the
    guidance given by the Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  &  Others  -v-
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53.  Lord
    Carnwath said at paragraph  16  that  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  contains  no
    requirement to consider the criminality or misconduct of a parent as  a
    balancing factor and that it was impossible in his view to read  it  as
    importing such a requirement by implication. At paragraph 17,  he  said
    that section 117B(6) incorporated the substance  of  the  Rule  without
    material change, but this time in the context of the right of a  parent
    to remain. He inferred that it was intended to have  the  same  effect.
    The question again was what is reasonable for the child. Lord  Carnwath
    endorsed as a highly  relevant  consideration  the  following  guidance
    contained in an Immigration Directorate Instruction (IDI) of  the  Home
    Office cited at paragraph 10:

      "It is generally the case that it is in a child's  best  interests  to
      remain with their parent(s). Unless special  factors  apply,  it  will
      generally be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK  with  their
      parent(s), particularly if the parent(s) have no right  to  remain  in
      the UK."

23. At paragraph 18, he continued:

      "On the other hand, as the IDI Guidance acknowledges, it seems  to  me
      inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where  the  parents,
      apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be, since it  would
      normally be reasonable for the child to be with them. To that  extent,
      the record of the parents may become indirectly material, if it  leads
      to their ceasing to have a right to remain here, and having to  leave.
      It is only if, even on that hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for
      the child to leave that the provision may give the parents a right  to
      remain."

24. Lord Carnwath went on to say that the point was well expressed by  Lord
    Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) -v- SSHD [2007] SLT 1245 at  22,  and  also  by
    Lewison LJ in  EV  (Philippines)  -v-  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  at
    paragraph 58 where Lewison LJ said, inter alia: "If neither parent  has
    the right to remain, then  that  is  a  background  against  which  the
    assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate question  would  be:  is  it
    reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to
    remain to the country of origin?" Lord Carnwath said, at 19, "There  is
    nothing in the section  to  suggest  that  "reasonableness"  is  to  be
    considered otherwise than in the real world in which the children  find
    themselves."

25. Accordingly, even if section 117B (6)  applies,  I  must  consider  the
    situation of the Appellant and his ex-wife and child in the real world.
     There is no evidence before me that the Appellant's ex-wife and  child
    have any permission to reside in the UK at present.  Accordingly,  they
    too would be expected to return to Pakistan.  Any contact  between  the
    Appellant and his child could continue there.

26. Weighing all of these factors I conclude that the  decision  to  refuse
    the application for the Appellant to reside in the UK is  proportionate
    to the public interest.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 11th March 2019

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 11th March 2019

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




