
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12975/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 23 August 2019                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, Counsel instructed by Super Immigration
                    Services Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       Appellant or any of the children mentioned in this decision.  Breach
       of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
       order because the children are entitled to privacy.

    2. I see no  reason  for,  and  do  not  make,  any  order  restricting
       publicity about this appeal.

    3. This is an appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       by a Designated  Judge,  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the  appellant
       against the decision of the respondent on 8 June 2018  refusing  him
       leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The appellant  is  subject
       to a deportation order.  In the Decision to Refuse  a  Human  Rights
       Claim dated 8 June 2018 the respondent makes it clear that,  in  her
       opinion, "deportation is conducive to the public  good  and  in  the
       public interest because you have been convicted of an offence  which
       has caused serious harm".  The Secretary of State then explained her
       decision with reference with paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of HC 395.

    4. The appeal against the decision to  refuse  leave  on  human  rights
       grounds was  heard  on  2  November  2018.   The  Designated  Judge,
       appropriately, considered the Immigration Rules and decided that the
       appellant did not satisfy the requirements of any of the Rules to be
       allowed to remain.  I describe this  as  "appropriate"  because  the
       application  of  the  Rules  is  generally  a  very  good  guide  to
       determining the public interest in any Article 8 balancing  exercise
       but, as the Designated Judge was very aware, he was not deciding  an
       appeal under the Rules.

    5. The judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  with  reference  to  the
       Rules is criticised in the grounds but I see  no  justification  for
       the criticisms.

    6. There is a particular element to  this  case.   The  judge  said  at
       paragraph 15:

  "Since the beginning of the appeal, the parties agreed that the appellant
  was not a foreign criminal for the purposes of S.117C and that the appeal
  should proceed by adopting the reasons given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
  Andell (foreign criminal - para 398) [2018] UKUT  198,  when  considering
  the  issues  under  S.117B(1).   I  will  need  to  have  regard  to  the
  respondent's assessment that the appellant's deportation is conducive  to
  the public good because of his offending, and will have to have regard to
  paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules."

    7. The decision in Andell  confirms,  as  is  plainly  the  case,  that
       although  the  phrase  "foreign  criminal"  appears  both   in   the
       Immigration Rules (that the Secretary of State  has  to  apply)  and
       Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (that
       judges have to apply) when considering an appeal relying on  Article
       8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  the  phrase  "foreign
       criminal" is not defined in the Rules but there is a  definition  in
       the Act giving its meaning for the purposes of part 5A.

    8. The statutory definition appears  at  Section  117D(2).  It  can  be
       summarised as a person who is not a British citizen and who has been
       convicted of a criminal offence in the United Kingdom  and  who  has
       been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months
       or convicted of an offence that has caused  serious  harm  or  is  a
       persistent offender or, presumably, some  combination  of  the  last
       three qualifications.  In the absence of anything to the contrary it
       must be assumed that a "foreign criminal" for the  purposes  of  the
       Immigration Rules has the wider meaning of being a person who is not
       a British citizen who has committed a criminal offence.  There is no
       reason to infer any of  the  additional  requirements  necessary  to
       satisfy the definition that applies in the Act. Whilst there may  be
       room to argue over the precise definition when that is necessary  it
       was never suggested that the appellant in this case is other than  a
       "foreign criminal" for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.

    9. It is quite clear from the judge's decision  and  reasons  that  the
       case proceeded on the false premise that the  appellant  was  not  a
       foreign criminal as defined in part 5A of the  Act.   The  appellant
       was not someone sentenced to at least twelve  months'  imprisonment.
       The possibility that he might  be  a  foreign  criminal  by  another
       route, in this case by his having caused serious harm, according  to
       the judge, was overlooked by the parties.   Having  recognised  that
       possible error it was open to the judge to reconstitute the  hearing
       and hear further submissions.  The judge decided  not  to  do  that.
       Essentially he decided that the appeal had to be  dismissed  in  any
       event with regard to the  Immigration  Rules  and  so  returning  to
       consider the effect of part 5A would have been an entirely  academic
       exercise. The judge  decided  that  it  was  so  apparent  that  the
       appellant had committed an offence that  caused  serious  harm  that
       there was no need to permit argument specifically on the  point.   I
       do not think it controversial to describe this  approach  as  "bold"
       but it was made openly by an experienced judge and could be right.

   10. Against that explanation I look  at  the  decision  the  judge  made
       without regard to part 5A.

   11. The judge accepted that the appellant entered the United Kingdom  in
       May 2011 with entry clearance as a student migrant.  His  leave  was
       due to expire in August  2012  but  immediately  before  that  leave
       expired  he  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  husband.    The
       application was successful and he was given leave until 27 September
       2015.   Shortly  before  that  leave  expired  he  made  a   further
       application for leave as a husband but the application was  refused.
       He was deemed to  be  "unsuitable"  because  he  was  identified  as
       someone  who  had  obtained  an  English  language  certificate   of
       competence by deception.  That decision was not appealed.  In August
       2016 he was notified that he was liable to removal as an  overstayer
       and in December 2016 he applied again for leave as a  spouse.   This
       was treated as a "human rights" claim but it was not  decided  until
       the outcome of criminal proceedings was known.

   12. On 25 September 2017 the appellant was convicted on three counts  of
       an indictment relating to the  assault,  ill-treatment,  neglect  or
       abandonment of a child or young person in  circumstances  likely  to
       cause unnecessary suffering or injury.  These are not  the  children
       with whom he lives in a nuclear family. The appellant was  sentenced
       to nine months' imprisonment and made the subject of  a  restraining
       order for five years.  The offences were committed against children,
       to some extent in his  care,  and  they  were  the  subject  of  the
       protection and restraining orders. It was this conviction  that  led
       to the finding that his deportation was in the public good.

   13. The appellant was married to one KK a British citizen who lived  all
       her life in the United Kingdom.  They married in July 2012  and  had
       two children; the children were born in November 2012 and April 2015
       respectively.  They too are  British  citizens.   The  Secretary  of
       State conceded that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with his  wife  and  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
       relationship with his two children.  Nevertheless, the Secretary  of
       State, having regard to paragraph 399 of HC 395,  decided  it  would
       not be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife  and  children  to
       relocate to India with him or alternatively it would not  be  unduly
       harsh to remain in the United Kingdom without him after he had  been
       deported.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal looked at the Rules.   The  facts  suggested
       that the Appellant might have been entitled to leave to remain as  a
       partner but the Secretary of State found that someone  who,  in  her
       opinion, had caused serious harm, was not a suitable person.

   15. The Designated Judge agreed.  He had regard to  the  nature  of  the
       offences  and  the  sentence  and  the  judge's  sentencing  remark,
       including the observation that the offences were "so serious that an
       only an immediate custodial sentence can be justified for them."

   16. The judge was satisfied that the appellant could not  succeed  under
       the partner route because he was not suitable.

   17. The judge then looked at the Rules  relating  to  deportation.   The
       Rules provide exceptions to the normal provisions  that  deportation
       follows convictions of certain kinds and certainly where deportation
       is deemed to be in the public good.  The judge  particularly  looked
       at paragraph 399(a) which applies an exception to deportation where,
       as here, there is a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
       with a minor child who is a British citizen and where  it  would  be
       "unduly harsh" for the child to live in the  country  to  which  the
       appellant would be deported or it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  the
       child to remain in the United Kingdom without the person who was  to
       be deported.  Similar provisions remain when  the  effect  would  be
       unduly harsh on a partner.

   18. As far as the children were concerned the judge noted that the older
       child suffers from coeliac disease and is treated with a gluten free
       diet.  She also has a vitamin D deficiency  which  is  treated  with
       supplements prescribed by a medical  practitioner.   There  were  no
       relevant diagnoses in the case of the younger child.   The  evidence
       was that the mother ensured that her daughter  took  her  prescribed
       medication.  The judge acknowledged  there  was  evidence  that  the
       mother had difficulties and considered them later  in  the  Decision
       and Reasons.

   19. The children were the subject of a "Child in Need" plan and the main
       reason for that was that Social Services monitored  the  appellant's
       behaviour because of his criminal activity.  There were visits  from
       social workers to the family home.

   20. The judge decided that he had, broadly, been told  the  truth  about
       those visits and accepted there was Social  Service  involvement  in
       the lives of the family, although the independent evidence for  that
       was rather thin.  The judge concluded, unremarkably, that  it  would
       be unduly harsh for the children to go to  India.   The  judge  felt
       they needed the safeguards provided by Social  Service  involvement.
       The judge also considered expressly the consequences on the children
       of the deportation of their father.  Nevertheless, the  judge  found
       that it would be unduly harsh to expect them to  relocate  in  India
       with their father.  The appellant had not been  detained  in  prison
       for very long after his sentence.  It seemed it was reduced to eight
       or nine weeks and the additional time being made up  of  periods  on
       bail subject to electronic monitoring.  The judge accepted that  the
       appellant's wife had been supported during her husband's absence  by
       friends.  The evidence was that the daughter's behaviour had changed
       adversely when her father was away.  There  was  some  communication
       permitted by telephone.  The children were not aware of their father
       being in prison.  The judge noted there was no independent evidence.
        There was nothing external to go on to indicate anything about  the
       relationship.  The judge concluded at paragraph 40:

  "Taking this evidence and findings into consideration,  even  though  the
  appellant provides for his  children,  including  ensuring  his  daughter
  keeps to her diet, the evidence is insufficient to show that it would  be
  unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the  appellant.
  The high threshold is not met on the evidence provided."

   21. The judge then directed his mind expressly  to  the  impact  on  the
       appellant's wife that would flow from the appellant being  deported.
       The judge had in mind paragraph 399(b) of HC  395.   The  judge  was
       rather surprised that the Secretary of State had conceded that there
       was a genuine and subsisting marital relationship formed at  a  time
       when the appellant was  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   That
       appeared a surprising concession in the view of the  way  the  facts
       were presented but it was made unequivocally and the judge  did  not
       feel able to go behind it.  It seems that the appellant had leave as
       a student which did not give any basis  for  thinking  that  he  was
       entitled to remain.  The appellant's wife suffers from  a  condition
       that had led to epileptic seizures on occasions which can be managed
       by medication.  When the case was before the judge the last  seizure
       had been within a fortnight before the hearing.   She  also  suffers
       serious migraines and headaches which can last for  two  days.   The
       judge found that the appellant's  wife  had  significant  difficulty
       caring for the children on her own.  The judge  had  regard  to  the
       high  tests  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  referring  to   "compelling
       circumstances over and above those described  in  EX.2  of  Appendix
       FM".  The judge regarded this  test  as  "virtually  impossible"  to
       satisfy.  The judge said:

  "On the facts of this appeal, the medical evidence, although showing  the
  appellant's wife would face very serious hardship in India because of the
  loss of access to high levels of medical care  provided  by  her  current
  medical team the evidence does not demonstrate a compelling  circumstance
  over and above that level.  The appellant has not  provided  evidence  to
  show his wife would not have access to suitable medical care in India."

   22. However, the judge found that it would be unduly harsh to expect the
       children to relocate.  The judge was clearly of  the  view  that  it
       would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to remain in  the
       United Kingdom without  him.   This  conclusion  was  reached  after
       recognising the part he played in helping her manage her health  but
       also the judge's findings that other people were  involved  in  that
       process and she did not need her husband to do it for her.

   23. Having decided that the appellant could not benefit from  the  Rules
       the judge then also considered Section 117B(1) and 117B(2)  to  (6).
       The  judge  decided  that  the  appellant's  alleged  misconduct  in
       obtaining an English language certificate of competence was  neutral
       in this case.  It had not been relied upon by the Secretary of State
       as an aggravating factor and the judge did not  see  why  he  should
       rely on it either. The appellant had proved his competence in  using
       the English language by later passing an examination and  that  pass
       was not doubted.

   24. However the appellant had become  an  "overstayer"  by  not  leaving
       after his unsatisfactory test result came to light and thereafter he
       could not satisfy the rules.

   25. The judge considered Section 117B(6) but mainly to discount  it;  it
       applies to a person not liable to  deportation  (this  appellant  is
       liable to deportation) and assists such an appellant when  it  would
       "not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom".
        However, this appellant is subject to deportation and  that  status
       is not dependent upon his being a foreign criminal under part 5A  of
       the Act.  The judge found nothing in Section 117C that assisted  the
       appellant or supported the decision that he  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   26. The judge did not expressly have  regard  to  the  requirement  that
       deportation is in the public interest as provided by part 5A of  the
       Act when he conducted his balancing exercise but I do  not  see  how
       the most energetic consideration could have assisted the appellant.

   27. The judge found that the appellant enjoyed family life with his wife
       and their two children.  The family  received  support  from  Social
       Services  because  of  safeguarding  and  other   issues   and   the
       appellant's wife and daughter had medical conditions which  required
       particular support.  The judge also accepted that the appellant  had
       difficulty caring for the children on her own.  The judge  found  it
       unduly harsh to expect the  children  to  live  in  India  with  the
       appellant but also found the appellant  would  not  be  entitled  to
       remain under any Rules and the deportation was proportionate and  he
       dismissed the appeal.

   28. This decision was challenged.  In the first ground he complains that
       the judge should not have decided  that  the  appellant  had  caused
       serious harm because it had been  agreed  that  he  had  not.   This
       ground relies on Home Office  guidance  in  Article  8  cases  which
       asserts that it is "at the discretion  of  the  Secretary  of  State
       whether she considers an offence to cause serious  harm".   This  of
       course is appropriate when the Secretary of State is considering the
       Rules.  The Secretary of State cannot be the determinative authority
       on whether or not there is serious harm for the purposes of the  Act
       which, according to the terms of the Act, is to be considered by  "a
       court or Tribunal" determining a claim based on Article 8.  It would
       only be in the face of the clearest possible statutory terms (and no
       such terms exist here) that the plain meaning of the  Act  could  be
       subject to an extrajudicial interpretation  in  this  way.   It  was
       plainly a matter for the judge to decide if there was  serious  harm
       for the  purposes  of  part  5A  and  the  judge  made  his  finding
       rationally have regard to  the  sentence  of  imprisonment  and  the
       sentencing remarks.

   29. The grounds then complain that the judge erred  by  not  giving  the
       appellant an opportunity to say why there was not  serious  harm  or
       how the application of part 5A  might  have  affected  the  outcome.
       These grounds suffer from failing to explain the materiality of  the
       complaint; they content themselves with saying it was unfair.

   30. Next is the complaint that the  judge  should  not  have  found  the
       effects on the  family  other  than  "unduly  harsh".   The  grounds
       complain in effect the judge had not explained why he concluded that
       the appellant's wife would be able to manage the children on her own
       and why, possibly independently of that point,  it  was  not  unduly
       harsh for the children to remain in the  UK  without  their  father.
       The grounds assert that it was clearly unreasonable to  assume  that
       support for the nine weeks or so when the father was away  could  be
       assumed to be available throughout the minorities of  the  children.
       In short the decision was irrational.

   31. Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal and granted  by  a
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge on renewal.

   32. The Secretary of State, by Mr David  Mills,  a  Senior  Home  Office
       Presenting Officer, produced a Rule 24 notice.

   33. This was concerned to emphasise that there had not been a concession
       that the appellant was not a "foreign criminal". I do not understand
       the Appellant to disagree. He has not been sentenced to at least  12
       months imprisonment and the other ways of being a "foreign criminal"
       were overlooked at the hearing. The parties cannot agree the law and
       the appellant's status as "foreign criminal" is a matter of law. The
       judge was not bound by any such "concession" and the  appellant  has
       shown no material error in the judge's decision  to  apply  the  Act
       that he was required to apply.

   34. I agree with Mr Mills that "it is clear that the Presenting  Officer
       relied on the SSHD's decision letter, which very clearly treats  the
       appellant as being subject to deportation." That is not in  dispute.
       The argument is whether the appellant was a "foreign  criminal"  for
       the purposes of part 5A.  The grounds also assert that it  had  been
       the Secretary of State's consistent position that the appellant  had
       been convicted of an offence that had  caused  serious  harm.   That
       much at least is right although that plainly does  not  prevent  the
       judge taking a different view.

   35. I find that there is no material error in the decision to apply part
       5A or in the decision to do that without taking further  submissions
       or in the conclusion that there was serious harm.

   36. There is one point that concerns me.  Mr Vokes went straight to  and
       I have had to reflect on it.  The suggestion  is  that  the  finding
       that it would be not unduly harsh for the  children  to  do  without
       their father or indeed the spouse to do without the father does  not
       have proper regard for their  particular  circumstances,  especially
       their mother's illness.  I can see immediately how this could be the
       kind of argument which could lead to an appeal being allowed.  If it
       were then, as is almost always the case in appeals where deportation
       is involved, the decision would not be for the benefit of the person
       about to be deported but for those who depend on him in  the  United
       Kingdom.  The Designated Judge understood the point and ruled in the
       way that he did.  I cannot say that that  is  perverse.   It  was  a
       permissible conclusion that he reached on the evidence. Clearly some
       extra help and input is going to  be  needed  if  the  appellant  is
       deported.  Clearly such help  came  from  the  neighbours  when  the
       appellant was away.   The  point  featured  strongly  in  Mr  Vokes'
       skeleton argument before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  is  an
       argument that did not succeed.  I have also looked at  the  evidence
       that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  In his  witness  statement
       supporting his evidence in the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant
       said, "my children cannot live without me nor is  K  fit  enough  to
       care for them on her own" but the point was  not  developed  and  in
       particular it was not asserted in any detail, if at all,  that  help
       would not be available if he were not there.  I make a similar point
       about the witness statement from the appellant's wife.   She  writes
       appreciatively of his support and makes the  comment  that  "without
       him I'm lost" but the evidence is not  particularised  in  way  that
       would support a finding that she could not manage without  him.  The
       Designated Judge was entitled to reach the decision that he  did  on
       the evidence that was before him for the reasons that he gave.

   37. It is trite law, although something that must  never  be  forgotten,
       that deporting a person often breaks up nuclear families  and  is  a
       sad business.  It is not necessarily unduly harsh.

   38. In short no material error of law has been established.



Notice of Decision

   39. The appeal is dismissed.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 January 2020                |

