
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12079/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 19 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                      MF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to  the  appellant  or  his  child  being  identified.
Failure to comply with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 8 January 2019 dismissing  his  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision dated 16 May 2018 refusing him further  leave
    to remain on the basis of his family  life  with  his  British  citizen
    child.


Background.


2.    The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 December  1981.   His
    immigration history can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.   He  was
    initially granted leave to enter as a visitor on  20  July  2008  valid
    until 20 July 2009.  In 2008 he married his wife, but they separated in
    November 2010.  Their child, a daughter, was born on 12 June 2011.


3.    He last entered the UK on 13 September 2012 with a Tier 4 visa,  valid
    until 20 December 2013, and was subsequently granted  extensions  until
    31 December 2015.  However, on 13 August 2015 his leave  was  curtailed
    to expire on 25 October 2015.  On  23  May  2017  he  was  served  with
    removal papers.


4.    The appellant claims that he had irregular contact with  his  daughter
    when he was in the UK between 2012 until February 2017 when contact was
    stopped.  He applied to the Family Court for a Child Arrangement  Order
    on 20 September 2017 and then on 22 November 2017 made his  application
    for further leave to remain.  This was refused for the reasons set  out
    in the decision of 16 May 2018.  The respondent was not satisfied  that
    the appellant could meet the requirements of the Rules  or  that  there
    were exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave  under
    article 8.


The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


5.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it  was  submitted  that
    the sole issue at that stage was to seek further  leave  to  remain  so
    that the Family Court proceedings  could  be  completed  in  which  the
    appellant was seeking contact with his daughter [11].


6.    The judge referred to RS (Immigration and  Family  Court  proceedings)
    India [2012] UKUT 218 setting out at [12] the  guidance  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the issues to be  considered  in  immigration  cases  where
    family proceedings were pending.  At [13] the judge made the  following
    findings in respect of the questions posed in RS (set  out  at  12(1)).
    She was satisfied the outcome of the Family Court proceedings initiated
    by the appellant would be material to his appeal; she was not aware  of
    any public interest reasons  to  exclude  the  appellant  from  the  UK
    irrespective of the outcome and she found that the  appellant  had  not
    initiated contact proceedings to delay or frustrate his removal or  for
    a reason contrary to his daughter's welfare [13].


7.    The judge then said at [14] that RS required  her  to  consider,  when
    answering those questions, the degree of the  appellant's  interest  in
    and contact with the child.   She  said  that  the  appellant  had  not
    detailed what "irregular  contact"  meant  and  had  not  provided  any
    evidence to support his claim to have enjoyed access to his daughter or
    that he had a parental relationship with his daughter. Further, he  had
    failed to explain the seven-month delay before making  his  application
    to the Family Court.  He could maintain contact by telephone  or  Skype
    and pursue contact proceedings from abroad. The judge said that, taking
    these factors together, the appellant had  not  shown  that  he  had  a
    parental relationship with his daughter or that he could meet  Appendix
    FM of the Rules as a parent or the provisions of para EX.1.


8.    The judge went want to  consider  the  appellant's  private  life  and
    whether there were exceptional circumstances such that a refusal  under
    article 8 would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences for him or his
    child.  She found that there were no such circumstances.   Accordingly,
    the appeal was dismissed.


The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.


9.    In the grounds of appeal,  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in
    concluding that there was no evidence of  contact  as  there  was  such
    evidence in the appellant's own evidence and in  the  letter  from  his
    previous  representatives.   She  had  disproportionately  focused   on
    whether there had been previous contact and had failed to  give  proper
    weight to her finding that there was no public  interest  in  excluding
    the appellant, who, in any event, not been required to show that he was
    in a parental relationship.  She had also  erred  by  saying  that  the
    appellant could maintain contact by Skype and in finding that he  could
    engage in family proceedings from abroad.


10.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that in the light of the judge's positive findings  in  [13],  it
    was arguably perverse to proceed to determine issues relevant to family
    life under the Rules and article 8 when the Family Court  was  arguably
    in a better position to do so.


11.   Mr Chohan adopted those grounds.  He submitted that, having  made  the
    findings in [13], the proper course would have been either to allow the
    appeal so that a short grant of leave could be granted  to  enable  the
    family proceedings to be completed or, alternatively,  to  adjourn  the
    hearing until those proceedings were concluded.   Mr  Bramble  did  not
    seek to resist the appeal accepting that the judge had erred in law  as
    set out in the grounds and in particular by treating  the  factors  set
    out in [12(2)] as separate from those in [12(1)].


The Error of Law.

12.   I am satisfied that the judge erred in law as set out in  the  grounds
    and that Mr Bramble's concession is properly  made.   Having  made  the
    findings in [13], I am satisfied that  the  judge  erred  by  assessing
    separately the issues set out in [12(2)] when they were factors  to  be
    taken into account in considering how the questions set out in  [12(1)]
    were to be answered.  Once those findings had been made,  having  taken
    into account the  factors  in  [12(2)],  the  judge  should  then  have
    addressed the issues in [12(3)].  The error of law  is  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

13.   Both parties submitted,  and  I  agree,  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the  decision  to  be  re-made.
    Although it is a matter for the First-tier  Tribunal  how  the  hearing
    should proceed, on the evidence currently available, this appears to be
    an appropriate case for  a  case  management  review  to  consider  the
    position more fully in the light of  the  pending  proceedings  in  the
    Family Court.


Decision.


14.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration
    by way of a rehearing by a different judge.

15.   In the  light  of  the  fact  that  there  are  related  Family  Court
    proceedings pending,  I am satisfied that this is a proper case for  an
    order to be made under rule 14(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to lead to the  child  or  any  family
    member being identified.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 14 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
