
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/12212/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 16 July 2019              |On Monday 22 July 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                SUZANNE [L M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Osmans
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

     1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge N  M  Paul  promulgated  on  15  May  2018  ("the  Decision")
        dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
        dated 11 October 2016 refusing her human rights claim made  in  the
        context of an order to deport the Appellant to the US following her
        conviction of fraud by false accounting for which she was sentenced
        on 1 February 2016 to three years' imprisonment.

     2. The Appellant came to the UK  first  as  a  visitor  in  1999  and,
        following further visits, applied for  and  was  granted  leave  to
        remain as the spouse of a British citizen, [MR].  She  was  granted
        indefinite leave to remain  in  that  category  on  31  July  2002.
        Following the  conviction,  the  Respondent  served  the  Appellant
        notice of the deportation decision on  21  April  2016  and  on  11
        October  2016  refused  the  human  rights  claim  which  she  made
        resisting her deportation.

     3. The Judge found that the Appellant could not meet the exceptions to
        deportation based on her private life.  She was  not  socially  and
        culturally integrated in the UK and, even if she  was,  there  were
        not very significant obstacles to her integration in the  US  where
        she had lived until she was twenty-two years old.  The Judge  found
        that it would not be unduly harsh for Mr [R] to  accompany  her  to
        the US if he chose to do so; alternatively, he could remain in  the
        UK and it would not be unduly harsh for him to do  so  without  the
        Appellant.

     4. Permission  to  appeal  the  Decision  was  refused  by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Saffer on 11 June 2018 and by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
        Rimington on 16 July 2018.   The  Appellant  sought  permission  to
        judicially review Judge Rimington's decision. The  terms  of  Judge
        Rimington's refusal  of  permission  bear  setting  out,  not  only
        because it was her decision which was subsequently subjected  to  a
        "Cart" application for judicial review but also  because  it  deals
        with one of the issues discussed during the hearing before me which
        therefore enables me to deal with that issue  more  shortly  below.
        Her decision is as follows:

           "As the judge recorded, the  remarks  of  the  sentencing  judge
           illustrated  the  'extremely  serious  offending  with   minimal
           mitigating facts apart from a plea of guilty'.  The judge  noted
           that the appellant was a potential suicide risk but that, as the
           respondent identified, there were medical facilities in the USA.
            That is not contrary to AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64.   The
           judge did consider whether the impact on the partner should  the
           appellant be deported, and the judge was entitled to rely on the
           partner's own evidence that he would if required remove  to  the
           USA with his partner.  The judge when making this assessment was
           well aware of the psychiatric background of the  appellant.   It
           was open to the judge on the evidence to find that the appellant
           was not integrated into the UK.  Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC
           60 is not proposition for ignoring the Immigration Rules and  it
           was accepted that they have an important role to play in setting
           out the Secretary of State's position.  Nothing in the  decision
           suggests that the judge failed to go on  to  make  reference  to
           compelling circumstances or strong reasons or failed to  address
           the countervailing factors when assessing the proportionality of
           deportation."

     5. Permission was refused by HHJ Allan Gore QC  but  granted  by  Lord
        Justice Leggatt on 22  March  2019.   The  reasons  given  were  as
        follows:

           "In my view, the appellant has an arguable  case  which  is  not
           simply a disagreement with the factual determination of the  FTT
           and has not been properly considered  by  the  UT  or  the  High
           Court.  The argument which has a reasonable prospect of  success
           is that the FTT erred in law in failing to take into account  in
           balancing the public interest against the appellant's article  8
           claim  the  medical  evidence  of   the   appellant's   suicidal
           tendencies and the risk of deterioration in  her  mental  health
           (including an enhanced risk of suicide) if she is deported.  The
           FTT judge (at para 29) of his decision referred to the  emphasis
           placed by the appellant on this evidence but did not address  it
           at all in his reasons.  Amongst other things, he made no finding
           (contrary to what is suggested in the UT  decision)  that  these
           risks carried no weight because of the availability of treatment
           in the US.  The fact that  this  legal  argument  has  not  been
           properly considered by the UT is a  compelling  reason  for  the
           High Court to hear the claim.

           As to the individual grounds of challenge/appeal:

           1. Given the high threshold for the application of article 3  in
              medical cases, the omission of the FTT judge to  address  the
              article 3 claim is not, even arguably, material as  there  is
              no realistic possibility that  the  appeal  could  have  been
              allowed on this basis.

           2. Although the appellant's skeleton argument puts the point too
              high, taking into account the evidence of the  likely  effect
              of  deportation  on  the  appellant's   mental   health   and
              consequent impact on the appellant's partner could, at  least
              arguably,  have  made  a  difference  to  a  finely  balanced
              decision.

           3. Grounds 3 and 4 would not by themselves justify  interference
              with the FTT's decision but the points based on  Ali  add  to
              the  case  that   the   appeal   should   be   remitted   for
              reconsideration."

     6. Following that  grant  of  permission,  permission  to  appeal  was
        granted by the Vice President of the Tribunal on 29 May 2019.   The
        Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on  20  June  2019  seeking  to
        uphold the Decision

     7. I am therefore required to consider whether the Decision contains a
        material error of law and if I conclude that it does, either to re-
        make the decision or remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        for redetermination.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     8. Understandably,  given  the  terms  of  the  permission  grant,  Mr
        Nicholson did not  seek  to  argue  that  the  deportation  of  the
        Appellant would  breach  Article  3  ECHR.  I  therefore  begin  my
        consideration with ground two since that is the principal ground on
        which permission was granted.

   Ground Two

     9. The Appellant's grounds of appeal before the Court of Appeal  plead
        her case on ground two as a failure "to consider the consequence of
        the  Claimant's  committing  suicide  in   his   consideration   of
        subsection 117C (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
        2002".  That is the provision which required the Judge to  consider
        whether the effect of deportation would have an unduly harsh effect
        on Mr [R].

    10. The way in which this aspect of the case is argued is expanded upon
        at [14] to [15] of Mr Nicholson's very helpful document replying to
        the Respondent's Rule 24 statement as follows:

           "[14] ...The risk of the Appellant's  taking  her  own  life  is
           clearly relevant to the question of whether the  effect  of  her
           deportation (which is the trigger  identified  in  the  relevant
           report for both the existence of the risk and of the  likelihood
           of such an eventuality) is unduly harsh upon her partner.


           [15]  But the First Tier Tribunal took no account of the  effect
           of this.  The question of whether it is  unduly  harsh  for  the
           Appellant's partner to be confronted with the likelihood of  the
           Appellant's taking her own life is not reasonably to be regarded
           as the same as the question of whether it  is  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to leave the UK with her, or  to  remain  in  the  UK
           without her, if only because he is effectively contemplating the
           rest of his life without her and with no prospect of any further
           contact with her if she takes her own life as a  consequence  of
           her deportation.  Needless to say his own  experience  of  being
           bereaved in these circumstances would be capable on its  own  of
           demonstrating  the  undue  harshness  of  the  effect   of   the
           Appellant's deportation."


    11. The difficulty of the case being run in that way is, as I  observed
        during the hearing, because the Judge has dealt with  the  question
        of undue harshness on the basis that Mr [R] will return to  the  US
        with the Appellant.  That appears from the following paragraphs  of
        the Decision:

           "[11].      ...If she did return, it would be very difficult for
           her partner to find work - if he was able to get a visa to enter
           the country....


           ...


           [13]  [The Appellant's] partner gave evidence and explained that
           he had been working in IT for 20 years, and was on the verge  of
           being upgraded to a new level of IT/a  higher  status  with  the
           prospect of doubling his salary to about  �70-80,000.   He  also
           emphasised that it would be catastrophic were the  appellant  be
           forced to return to the USA.  He had not made any firm enquiries
           as to his employment prospects there, but accepted that  his  IT
           skills he might be able to find  work.   He  said  he  had  many
           friends who had moved to the United States of America for work.


           ...


           [32]  Mr [R] was an appealing and honest witness, whose love and
           affection for the appellant was manifest.  But,  as  he  himself
           said, and his father said as well, he would (if  required)  move
           to the USA to be with his partner.   He  himself  accepted  that
           friends of his had moved to the United States and that  he  also
           accepted that, with his IT background, he had the  potential  to
           find employment in the USA.  The real essence of  his  case  was
           that it would be disproportionately  disruptive  to  his  family
           life.


           ...


           [35]  It is my view, having heard the  evidence  and  indeed  it
           being accepted as such, that she would be returning  to  America
           with her partner that he would provide the necessary support for
           her to re-integrate into society..."


    12. I anticipate that it was on the basis of those paragraphs that  UTJ
        Rimington said as she did in her refusal of permission  to  appeal.
        There has been  no  challenge  to  those  findings.   Mr  Nicholson
        suggested that these findings were not that Mr [R] would  accompany
        the Appellant at the time of her deportation but that he might join
        her later if he could obtain a visa.  He submitted  that  this  was
        not certain as it would depend on whether the US authorities  would
        grant him a visa.  I  of  course  accept  that  but  there  was  no
        evidence before Judge Paul that they would not do so.  The  highest
        it is put is in the written statements that the Appellant did  "not
        even know whether he would be able to  seek  admission  to  the  US
        considering  [her]  financial  and  mental  health"  ([12]  of  the
        Appellant's statement at [AB/35]) and "it is  not  guaranteed  that
        America will allow me to move there to support [L] ..." ([11] of Mr
        [R]'s statement at [AB/38]).  It was for the Appellant  to  provide
        evidence if she relied on the inability to obtain a visa as being a
        factor which prevented Mr [R] from returning to the  US  with  her.
        It ought not to be difficult to obtain information of  this  nature
        which I anticipate is readily and publicly available.

    13. That though is not the end of the  matter.   I  do  not  accept  Mr
        Tufan's submission that, for this reason, the medical evidence  did
        not need to be considered  when  the  Article  8  claim  was  being
        assessed.  It is capable of being relevant not just to  whether  it
        would be  unduly  harsh  or  whether  there  are  very  significant
        obstacles to the Appellant's integration in the US but  also  to  a
        wider  Article  8   assessment   when   considering   whether   the
        consequences of deportation would be unjustifiably  harsh  for  the
        Appellant and for Mr [R].  That entailed the Judge considering what
        is likely to happen on deportation, particularly  when  considering
        the risk of suicide.

    14.  The  medical  evidence  consists  of  two  reports  from  Dr  Ruta
        Skrinskiene, psychiatrist ([AB/87-107]), and  Dr  Stephen  Kellett,
        clinical  psychologist  ([AB/112-127]),  the  pre-sentence   report
        ([AB/62-66])  and  a  more  recent   report   of   Susan   Pagella,
        psychotherapist ([AB/128-143]).

    15. The Judge summarised that evidence at [7] and [8] of the  Decision.
        There is however no reference to the risk of suicide as set out, in
        particular, in Ms Pagella's report.   I  accept  Mr  Tufan's  point
        that there would be treatment available for the Appellant's  mental
        health problems on return to the US (see  [25]  of  the  Decision).
        However, that does not answer the point made by Mr Nicholson  which
        I accept that suicide risk and to some extent mental health  issues
        are very different from physical health issues, particularly where,
        as here, the trigger is said to be  the  deportation  itself.   The
        Judge needed to say what he made of the evidence and what would  be
        likely to occur before, during and after deportation in relation to
        the suicide risk and to the Appellant's mental health. Whilst there
        is reference to the Appellant's ability to reintegrate at  [35]  of
        the Decision and  to  other  compelling  factors  at  [37]  of  the
        Decision, the assessments there made completely ignore the  medical
        evidence about the Appellant's mental health and suicide risk.

    16. For those reasons, I accept that there is an error of law made  out
        by ground two.  I do not accept  Mr  Tufan's  submission  that  the
        error is not material.  Whilst the evidence  might  not  ultimately
        lead to any different outcome depending on the assessment  made  of
        the medical opinions, and the factual findings reached as  to  what
        will happen if the Appellant is deported, I  certainly  cannot  say
        that the outcome is very likely to be the same.

   Grounds three and four

    17. As Lord Justice Leggatt indicated when granting  permission,  taken
        alone, these two grounds  are  not  arguably  material.   Strictly,
        having found an error of law on ground two, it is not necessary for
        me to deal with these grounds.  I deal with them  however  as  they
        are relevant to whether and to what extent I  should  preserve  any
        findings and as to next steps.

    18. Ground three is that the  Judge  "misdirected  himself  as  to  the
        applicable law (in respect of the appeal's being  governed  by  the
        Immigration Rules)".  Mr Nicholson submitted that the way in  which
        the Judge applied the law  was  contrary  to  the  Supreme  Court's
        judgment in Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
        UKSC 60 ("Ali") at [18] where the Court said that "[t]he  Secretary
        of State has a wide residual power under  the  1971  Act  to  grant
        leave to enter or remain in the UK even where leave  would  not  be
        given under the Rules...The manner in which that  power  should  be
        exercised is not, by its very nature, governed by the Rules.  There
        is a duty to exercise the  power  where  a  failure  to  do  so  is
        incompatible with Convention rights, by virtue of section 6 of  the
        Human Rights act 1998".

    19. That passage however is dealing with the Respondent's duty and  not
        the Tribunal's duty.  Paragraphs  [39]  to  [47]  of  the  judgment
        undermine the Appellant's case particularly the  reference  to  the
        need for the Court/Tribunal to "attach considerable weight" to  the
        Respondent's policy as to where the  proportionality  balance  lies
        ([46]).  It must also be remembered that Ali pre-dates  the  coming
        into force of Section 117C  of  the  2002  Act.   The  Tribunal  is
        therefore required to have regard to the exceptions set out in that
        section which are, to all intents and purposes,  the  same  as  the
        relevant Rules.

    20. The reference to Ali arises because, when  setting  out  the  legal
        framework, the Judge made reference only to the Rules  and  Section
        117D (which I accept should read Section 117C) and then referred to
        the case of Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  AJ
        (Zimbabwe) and another [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 ("AJ (Zimbabwe)").   Mr
        Nicholson said that AJ (Zimbabwe) is inconsistent with what is said
        in Ali.  AJ (Zimbabwe) itself is a case which makes no  mention  of
        Section 117C.  In any event, it has not been  overturned  nor  even
        disapproved and continues to be relied upon by the Courts (see, for
        example, Secretary of State for the Home Department v AB  (Jamaica)
        and another [2019] EWCA Civ 661).  In any event, it is  clear  from
        what follows [18] of the Decision that the Judge  has  adopted  the
        correct  approach,  namely  considering  whether  either   of   the
        exceptions are met and, if they are not,  whether  there  are  very
        compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions which enable
        the case to succeed. There is therefore no error of law established
        in this regard.

    21. Ground four  is  even  weaker.   It  relies  on  the  Judge  having
        "misdirected himself with regard to the weight to  be  attached  to
        'society's revulsion'".  The reference there  is  to  [36]  of  the
        Decision where the Judge acknowledges that "[p]art  of  the  public
        interest in deportation, as  being  part  of  the  public  interest
        exercise, is to deter criminals from committing such crimes and  it
        is also an  expression  of  society's  revulsion  of  such  serious
        crimes".

    22. Mr Nicholson relies on what is said by Lord Wilson at [70]  of  the
        judgment in Ali that "[s]ociety's undoubted  revulsion  at  certain
        crimes is, on reflection, too emotive a concept to figure  in  this
        analysis".  However, he goes on to say that he "maintain[s] that  I
        was entitled to refer to the importance of public confidence in our
        determination of  these  issues.   I  believe  that  we  should  be
        sensitive to the public concern in the UK about the facility for  a
        foreign  criminal's  rights  under  article  8  to   preclude   his
        deportation."  Whilst Judge Paul expressed  himself  in  accordance
        with the former articulation  of  the  public  interest,  there  is
        nothing to suggest that he gave any great weight to this aspect and
        he was in any event entitled to have regard to society's  views  of
        crimes such as  were  committed  by  the  Appellant.  There  is  no
        material error disclosed by ground four.

    23. In light of my conclusions, I have carefully considered whether any
        of the findings made by Judge Paul ought to be preserved.   I  have
        though come to the conclusion that they should not.  As I indicated
        at [13] above, the Appellant's mental health  issues  and  risk  of
        suicide are potentially relevant to all facets  of  her  Article  8
        case - her ability to integrate in the  US,  whether  and  to  what
        extent Mr [R] can support her on return  and  if  so  what  is  the
        impact on her health issues,  depending  on  the  answer  to  those
        questions, whether the effect of her deportation  would  be  unduly
        harsh for him, and finally whether the health issues  and  risk  of
        suicide  when  coupled  with  the  other  Article  8  factors   are
        sufficient  to  tip  the   balance   as   sufficiently   compelling
        circumstances to outweigh the public interest.  The  assessment  of
        the Article 8 case will therefore require to be reconsidered afresh
        in its entirety.  It is not simply  a  matter  of  considering  and
        making findings on the medical evidence.

    24. For that reason, I am also persuaded that this  is  an  appropriate
        case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Nicholson referred in
        support  of  his  request  to  that  effect  on  the  case  of   MM
        (unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  00105  (IAC).   He  said  that
        there  was  a  procedural  unfairness  in  the  previous   hearing.
        Ultimately, the same might be said of any error of law in a  First-
        tier Tribunal decision.

    25. I have regard to the Joint Practice  Statement  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of  appeals  in
        this Tribunal and the guidance there given  as  regards  remittals.
        This case is more akin to that of an appellant having been deprived
        of the opportunity to have a central part of their case  considered
        rather than there being any procedural unfairness, but  it  remains
        appropriate for the appeal to be remitted.

    26. I record also that Mr Nicholson indicated that the  Appellant  will
        wish to serve and file an  updated  medical  report  for  the  next
        hearing  (although  has  made  no  application  to  adduce  further
        evidence before this Tribunal). I also reiterate the point  I  made
        above and during the hearing that, if the Appellant wishes to argue
        that it would be unduly harsh or even simply unrealistic to  expect
        Mr [R] to accompany her to the US because of visa issues, it is for
        her to put forward evidence about those difficulties.

   CONCLUSION

    27. For the above reasons, there is an error of law  disclosed  by  the
        Appellant's ground two.  For the reasons given above, I  set  aside
        the Decision and I do not preserve any findings.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Decision  of  Judge  N  M  Paul
promulgated on 15 May 2018 contains a material error  of  law.  I  therefore
set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Paul.


Signed           [pic] Dated:  16 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
