
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12254/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2018                           |On 21 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                            mr Shahood Bin Dawood
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  was  born  on  15  January
    1988.  He appealed against the respondent's refusal dated 28 April 2016
    to refuse his application for leave to remain.

 2. The appeal was dismissed by Judge  Sweet  (the  judge)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on  10  October  2017.   The  judge  found  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to the appellant's return  to  Pakistan  or  that
    there were any  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  as  regards
    Article 8.  The judge found  the  respondent's  decision  proportionate
    that he should return to Pakistan.

 3. The grounds claim the judge erred.  That was because the  appellant  is
    disabled.  He is diagnosed with sensory  and  axonal  neuropathy.   The
    submission before the judge was that the appellant's  disability  could
    not be adequately treated in Pakistan and that the judge,  particularly
    at [21], failed to engage with the extent of the appellant's  claim  in
    that regard.  Further, whilst the  grounds  accepted  that  the  little
    weight provision in s.117B applied, it was still possible  for  private
    life to outweigh the public interest in  removal  and  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to properly recognise that at [22].  The judge  failed
    to assess the quantum of the weight to be attached to  the  appellant's
    private life and consequently failed to  properly  prepare  the  scales
    such   that   he   arguably   erred.    See   Kaur   (Children's   best
    interests/public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC).

 4. In a decision dated 10 November 2017, Judge Andrew  granted  permission
    to appeal.  She said:

         "I am satisfied there is an arguable error of law in this  decision
         in that the judge  did  not  give  sufficient  reasons  as  to  how
         adequate treatment for the appellant's condition could be  accessed
         in Pakistan.  I am satisfied, however, that the judge has  properly
         considered societal discrimination in Pakistan  and,  although  his
         reasons given for his findings in this regard are brief,  they  are
         sufficient as are his findings in relation to Article 8."

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 21 December  2017.   It  was
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  considered  the  appellant's  medical
    condition, noting the lack of an updated medical report  at  [19].   It
    was clear from  the  judge's  decision  that  he  was  aware  that  the
    appellant  was  currently  obtaining  rehabilitation  with  a  possible
    operation at a later date.  Whilst it was  accepted  that  no  specific
    findings were made  as  to  whether  the  operation  was  available  in
    Pakistan, the Rule 24 response submitted that it was  quite  clear  the
    judge did not foresee any medical emergency or risk from the  appellant
    returning to Pakistan.

 6. It was trite law that whilst the treatment in the UK might  be  better,
    it was not a reason to grant leave under  ECHR  Regulations  (paragraph
    276ADE) or outside the Rules.

 7. The appellant had family members in  Pakistan,  he  had  the  condition
    before he came here and the Pakistan-based uncle paid for some  of  the
    appellant's schooling.

 8. No Tribunal properly directing itself could find  on  those  particular
    facts that were based on the appellant wearing a caliper  and  becoming
    tired upon exertion, that the UK taxpayer should fund his treatment  or
    that the UK government had taken responsibility for his treatment.

Submissions on Error of Law

 9. Mr Coleman adopted the grounds.  He submitted that the issues were  the
    appellant's access  to  treatment  and  level  of  treatment  required.
    Whilst the judge had set out the medical evidence at  [7]-[17]  he  had
    not engaged with the same in an adequate manner.

10. Mr Mills submitted that Kaur was of assistance in  terms  of  what  was
    expected of the judge and how he discharged  his  obligations  in  that
    regard.  Given the limited resources of the NHS, the precariousness  of
    the appellant's circumstances here and the lack of evidence provided by
    the appellant in terms of treatment he is receiving here that would not
    be available to him in Pakistan, the judge did not err.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. The judge could only engage with the evidence put before him.  The only
    evidence from the appellant's treating doctors in  Pakistan  was  three
    handwritten paragraphs dated 23 January 2016 from Dr Akhtar  which  the
    judge referred to at [9] of his decision.  The judge engaged  with  the
    reasons the appellant put forward as to why he should not  be  expected
    to return to Pakistan.  He set them out at [17] of his decision.

12. The judge gave his reasons at [19]-[22].  I  accept  that  the  judge's
    reasons are brief.  Nevertheless, I find the judge engaged with what he
    was asked to consider.  Dr Akhtar had said that there was no  cure  for
    the appellant's condition and  only  limited  rehabilitation  could  be
    offered in Pakistan but there was no evidence before the  judge  as  to
    what that meant and the implications  for  the  appellant.   The  judge
    engaged with the fact that the appellant was undergoing  some  form  of
    rehabilitation and physiotherapy here.  Surgery was a future option but
    there was no detail with which the judge could engage.

13. The judge took into account the appellant's family circumstances.   His
    parents and siblings were living in Pakistan.  The evidence before  the
    judge was that he could not return to live with his family because they
    had financial difficulties and could not afford to look after  him  and
    care for him.  The judge found at [21] that he could resume living with
    his family.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  were  no
    exceptional or compelling circumstances made out.  He  clearly  engaged
    with the appellant's medical condition and the fact that rehabilitation
    in Pakistan did not appear to be as comprehensive as that offered here.
     See [19].

14. The judge engaged with s.117B.  He found as regards Article 8 that  his
    claim could not be made  out  because  there  were  no  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances.  The judge took into account the  appellant's
    precarious immigration  status  in  terms  of  the  balancing  exercise
    although he did not say so in terms.  The judge was  entitled  to  find
    that there was no presumption that life as a lawful student here  would
    lead to a protected private life claim under Article 8.



15. I conclude that the judge's decision does not contain a material  error
    of law such that the decision should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction made.






Signed                              Date 12 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

