

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12157/2018


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                                |Promulgated                  |
|on 21 February 2020                             |On 12 March 2020             |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                TOUQER ASLAM
                      (also known as Mr Tauqeer Aslam)
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Metzer QC instructed by Caveat Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms R Bassi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. On 16 April 2019 former First-Tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan ('the
        Judge') dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's
        decision of 9 May 2018 to refuse to revoke a deportation order made
        against him.



Background


     2. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  the  United  States  of  America,
        formerly a citizen of Pakistan, born on 15 April 1971.
     3. On 16 November 1994 the appellant was convicted and sentenced to 30
        months imprisonment on each count, concurrent, and the Crown  Court
        recommended his deportation. The offences were  'falsely  purported
        to insurance companies that his brother, Sahangeer, had died  in  a
        car crash on 20 February 1993 in Pakistan. He then commenced claims
        against  the  life-insurance  policies  in  an  attempt  to  obtain
        �498,000'. It is not in dispute that the appellant has never had  a
        brother called Sahangeer and that no other brother of his died in a
        car crash on 20 February 1993.
     4. The Judge notes the appellant was convicted in the name of Touqueer
        Aslam and that this was a sophisticated offence involving  the  use
        of false documents.
     5. The Judge notes the terms of the deportation  order  signed  on  20
        March 1995 are as followings:


             'Whereas a court has under section 6(1) of the Immigration Act
             1971 recommended that a deportation order be made  in  respect
             of Touqueer ASLAM a person who does  not  have  the  right  of
             abode within the meaning of the Act:


             And whereas the said Touqueer ASLAM is, accordingly, liable to
             deportation by virtue of section 3 (6) of the said Act:


             Now, therefore, in pursuance of section 5(1) of the said  Act,
             I by this order requires the said Touqueer ASLAM to leave  and
             prohibit him from entering the United Kingdom so long as  this
             order is in force.


             And in pursuance of paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 3 to  the  said
             Act, I hereby authorise him to be detained until he is removed
             from the United Kingdom.


     6. The Judge notes that notice of the deportation order and details of
        appeal rights were handed to the appellant  at  HMP  Brixton  on  3
        April 1995 in response to which the appellant confirmed in writing,
        on the same day, 'I do not want to appeal  against  my  deportation
        order to Pakistan' signing the  document  directly  underneath  his
        expressed stated decision not to appeal. The appellant was deported
        to Pakistan on 13 February 1996 under the name Touqueer ASLAM.
     7. The appellant relocated to the United States  of  America  in  1996
        following his marriage in Pakistan.
     8. In relation to the appellant's  subsequent  travel  to  the  United
        Kingdom the Judge at [31 - 37] writes:


             31.  The appellant travelled to the  United  Kingdom  in  2003
                  using a Pakistan passport in the name of 'Tauqeer  Alsam'.
                  He was issued with a transit Visa  for  24  hours  at  the
                  airport and took the opportunity to see his family.


             32.  He travelled to the United Kingdom with his family in May
                  2004 and stayed for approximately 2 to 3 weeks.


             33.  He next entered the United Kingdom  in  July  2005  while
                  returning to the USA from a holiday in  South  Africa.  He
                  visited his family in this country for  approximately  one
                  week.


             34.  Upon receiving his US passport  in  2007,  the  appellant
                  utilised this passport  when  subsequently  travelling  to
                  this country.


             35.  He entered this country with his own family in July  2007
                  having previously visited Pakistan. He visited  family  in
                  this country for approximately one week.


             36.  He travelled for pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia in  2010  and
                  before returning to the USA he visited his family in  this
                  country in June/July for approximately  one  week.  During
                  this time, he travelled to France  and  returned  to  this
                  country.


             37.  A UKBA minute sheet, dated 14 June 2012,  details,  inter
                  alia: '[the appellant's passport] showed that he had  made
                  5 previous visits  to  the  UK  on  the  current  document
                  (issued 2007) had been landed on C5N  on  each  occasion.'
                  This suggests that the appellant entered this  country  on
                  five  occasions  using  his  US  passport,  although   the
                  appellant refers to only two entries.  As  the  respondent
                  provides no further details as to entry, I proceed on  the
                  basis that prior to 2012 the appellant  had  entered  this
                  country six times, including his return from a short  trip
                  to France, whilst subject to a deportation order.


     9. The Judge notes that by 2012 a number  of  the  appellant's  family
        resided in the United Kingdom including his mother,  father  and  5
        siblings. The appellant arrived in the  UK  on  14  June  2012  and
        sought leave to enter as a visitor with his wife and  children.  He
        was travelling  on  his  US  passport.  The  appellant's  wife  and
        children were granted the requested leave, but  the  appellant  was
        refused entry as he remained subject to a deportation order and was
        returned to the USA on 18 June 2012.
    10. The appellant applied for the revocation of the  deportation  order
        on 19 November 2015 which  was  refused  by  the  respondent  in  a
        decision dated 19 January 2016 which was subsequently withdrawn  on
        7 August 2017. The respondent again decided to refuse to revoke the
        deportation order in a letter conveyed on 19 May 2018. It  is  that
        decision which is the subject of this appeal.
    11.  Having  had  the  benefit  of  considering  documentary  and  oral
        evidence, that of the appellant given via Skype from the  USA,  the
        Judge sets out its findings of fact from [73]. At [86] he writes:


             "Both parties before me concentrated on  the  appellant's  re-
             entry into this country on several occasions from 2003 to 2010
             and his unsuccessful effort to enter in 2012. Mr Eaton  refers
             to five such entries at airports, although it  is  appropriate
             to also include the appellant's return from France in 2010  as
             this  constitutes  an  'entry'  into  this  country.  On  each
             occasion he was lawfully permitted to enter,  as  a  Pakistani
             national and subsequently as  a  US  national.  The  appellant
             asserts that he was not aware that he was  subject  to  a  bar
             upon returning to this country until he secured the revocation
             of his deportation order as he  was  not  aware  that  he  was
             subject to such order,  or  at  the  very  least  the  precise
             requirements that arose from the order,  and  so  he  did  not
             deceive the United Kingdom authorities when he applied to  re-
             enter on these occasions. He further states that  he  is  pro-
             social, and that evidence  of  his  prosocial  nature  can  be
             identified upon consideration of several strands of  evidence,
             including his history of study and employment since 1996,  his
             attaining of US citizenship and that  he  has  accumulated  no
             further criminal convictions since 1994, a period of  some  25
             years.  The  respondent's  position  before  me  is  that  the
             appellant's continued re-entry was a flagrant  breach  of  the
             terms  of  his  deportation  order  and  the  maintenance   of
             effective immigration control is in the public  interest.  The
             decision of May 2018 notes the appellant's contention that  by
             entering the United Kingdom  on  several  previous  occasions,
             with permission from  the  British  authorities,  he  has  not
             breached any domestic immigration laws. It details:  'Although
             it is stated that you have abided by the laws  of  the  United
             Kingdom  when  you  have  travelled  to  the  United   Kingdom
             previously, it is evident from your offences and your  illegal
             conduct that you have demonstrated a total disregard  for  the
             laws of this country.'


    12. At [89] the Judge records that he is required to assess whether the
        appellant held the requisite knowledge of both  the  existence  and
        the requirements of the  deportation  order  when  he  entered  the
        United Kingdom between 2003 and 2010, and also when he attempted to
        enter in 2012.
    13. The Judge at  [103]  found  the  appellant's  explanation  for  his
        offending inconsistent in nature and that the  appellant  seeks  to
        minimise his actions  in  what  was  a  planned  and  sophisticated
        criminal act involving the use of false documents. The Judge  finds
        the appellant's motives were driven by personal greed and  that  he
        was being dishonest as to the true reasons for his acts.
    14. The Judge notes the appellant's position as stated  to  immigration
        officers in June 2012 differs to that presented at the hearing  and
        that he told an Immigration Officer that he had not informed the US
        immigration authorities as to his conviction when  he  migrated  to
        the USA, whereas in his 2019 witness statement the appellant denied
        having made any such  admission.  The  Judge  finds  the  appellant
        failed to disclose his conviction when seeking to initially  obtain
        admission to the USA and later when applying to naturalise as a  US
        citizen, and that he told the truth in 2012 of not having disclosed
        his conviction to US immigration officials [207].
    15. The Judge notes  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  witness,  his
        brother Mr Choudhury, was "notably silent in his evidence as to the
        circumstances of the appellant's conviction and also as to  whether
        he was  or  was  not  aware  that  the  appellant  was  subject  to
        deportation proceedings".  The  Judge  finds  that  it  was  wholly
        incredible that this witness would not have asked the appellant  as
        to what drove him to commit criminal acts and that Mr Choudhury was
        willing to lie when giving evidence;  meaning  very  little  weight
        could be placed upon the same [110].
    16. The Judge found weight could be  placed  upon  the  report  of  the
        Immigration Officer signed on the day of  the  interview  with  the
        appellant on 14 June 2012 and so being contemporaneous  in  nature.
        The gist of the appellant's statement is recorded in the report  to
        the effect the appellant was fully aware that he had been deported,
        accepted he had been presented with  relevant  evidence  connecting
        him to the decision to deport, and that the appellant was aware  of
        the existence of the deportation order against him.
    17. The Judge at [118] writes:


             "Upon carefully considering all of the evidence placed  before
             me, including the oral evidence presented at  the  hearing,  I
             find to the requisite standard that the  appellant  was  given
             notice that he was subject to a  deportation  order  in  April
             1995. He was made aware at the Crown  Court  that  deportation
             proceedings were likely, and I find, on balance, that he would
             have been informed by  the  sentencing  judge  and  his  legal
             representatives, both counsel and solicitor, as  to  the  true
             nature of the recommendation by the sentencing judge  that  he
             be deported. I find that the appellant is not  being  truthful
             in his explanation as to how he confirmed in writing  that  he
             did not wish to pursue an appeal against  his  deportation  to
             Pakistan, but was not aware that he was  subject  to  such  an
             order because he was in a 'traumatised state'  and  '[w]hen  I
             was given the opportunity to go home, I saw the light  of  and
             longed for that moment every bit of the time. In those moments
             of hope I may have signed a whole bunch of papers.  What those
             papers were, what each term meant, what I signed,  I  have  no
             memory of that, nor I recall I understood. I just wanted to go
             home, close this chapter in my life, put this behind  me.'  No
             evidence  has  been  presented  to  me  confirming  that   the
             appellant secured mental health care whilst in  prison  and  I
             have previously found that after some three months  in  prison
             the appellant had adjusted to the basic requirements of prison
             life on the day that he was served his deportation  papers.  I
             have further found above that the appellant was aware from the
             date of his sentencing that he would have to serve at least 12
             months of his sentence before he was eligible for his  release
             to be considered by the parole board and so he is not truthful
             when asserting that the  service  of  the  deportation  papers
             resulted in such a strong belief that he could go home that he
             simply signed papers presented to  him  without  understanding
             their content. I note that the appellant does not contend that
             his English language skills were so poor  that  he  would  not
             have understood the papers if he read them. I  find  that  his
             assertion that he simply signed papers  is  inconsistent  with
             the clear evidence that he  positively  confirmed  in  writing
             that he did not wish to  appeal  against  his  deportation  to
             Pakistan. The content of his waiver establishes,  on  balance,
             that he was informed as to his appeal rights and the nature of
             the deportation process. I conclude to the  required  standard
             that the appellant is not being truthful as to events when  he
             was served with his deportation papers. Rather,  I  find  that
             the appellant was wholly  aware  that  he  was  subject  to  a
             deportation order and its requirements, including the bar upon
             return. He fully understood the nature of such order  when  he
             confirmed in writing that  he  did  not  wish  to  appeal  the
             decision to deport  to  Pakistan.  I  further  find  that  the
             appellant was aware that the deportation order was made  under
             a different spelling of his name 'Tauqeer', namely 'Touqueer'.


    18. The Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  presented  at  the
        hearing that he had no knowledge  of  the  deportation  order.  The
        Judge found the appellant has a history of  acting  deceitfully  in
        relation to his criminal history [121].
    19. The respondent did not dispute before the Judge that the grants  of
        entry clearance and leave to enter were erroneously issued  as  the
        appellant was subject to an extant deportation order  meaning  they
        could not be validly issued in law. The Judge finds it appears that
        the respondents error in issuing  such  grants  was  based  upon  a
        deportation order being in the name of 'Touqueer Aslam', whilst the
        appellant presented passports in the name of 'Tauqeer  Aslam',  the
        name in which all of his passports have been issued. The Judge also
        notes at [124] having secured leave to enter/entry clearance  using
        his Pakistani passport the appellant proceeded to apply  for  leave
        to enter at ports of entry with his US passport again  being  aware
        that the deportation order was in the name of 'Touqueer Aslam'. The
        finding as to the use of the Pakistan  and  USA  passports  in  the
        above manner was not challenged before the Upper Tribunal.
    20. The Judge finds the appellant was aware he  was  returning  to  the
        United Kingdom in breach of an extant deportation order.
    21. The Judge does not find that  the  appellant  had  established  the
        required level of support for his parents to  establish  dependency
        pursuant to article 8 ECHR  [131]  although,  in  the  alternative,
        there is a strong public interest in  recognising  and  encouraging
        compliance  with  a  deportation  order  meaning  the  respondent's
        decision not to revoke the deportation order has not resulted in  a
        breach of a protected right.
    22. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  refused  by
        another judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.  The  application  was
        renewed to the Upper Tribunal but again refused on 3 July 2019, the
        operative part of which is in the following terms:


             2.   The grounds assert that the FTT erred by  speculating  on
                  the  appellant's  knowledge   of   the   terms   of,   and
                  consequences of, the deportation order made against him on
                  20   March   1995;   and   consequently   erred   in   the
                  proportionality assessment in relation to the  appellant's
                  human rights.


             3.   The grounds disclosed no arguable legal  error.  For  the
                  reasons set out by a Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,
                  Judge SPJ  Buchanan,  in  his  decision  of  28  May  2019
                  refusing permission to appeal to this tribunal, and  whose
                  reasons  I  adopt,  the  FTT  did  not  speculate  on  the
                  appellant's  knowledge  etc  of  the  deportation   order,
                  particularly  the  length  of  that  order.  The  FTT  was
                  unarguably entitled to make the findings he did,  as  well
                  as  reach  the  conclusions  that  he  did  (including   a
                  proportionality assessment) on the evidence before him.


    23. The appellant, not being content with these decisions,  applied  to
        the High Court by way of  a  'Cart'  judicial  review  application.
        Permission was granted by His Honour Judge Bird sitting as a  judge
        of that court resulting in the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  to
        refuse permission to  appeal  being  quashed  by  an  order  of  17
        December 2019. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted by the
        Vice President of the Upper Tribunal by an order of 9 January 2020.
    24. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal today to  enable  it  to
        assess whether the Judge has made an error of law material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal.




Grounds and submissions



    25. Pleadings drafted by  the  late  Mr  Ian  MacDonald  QC,  dated  20
        September 2019, raise four grounds of challenge being:


             a. Inference and speculation - asserting the  Judge's  finding
                the appellant was aware there was at least a 10  year  time
                bar before his deportation order could be revoked and  that
                he had to apply for the revocation of the deportation order
                before  it  could  be  revoked  are  speculations  and  not
                conclusions which can properly or  reasonably  be  inferred
                from the facts of what took place  at  the  time  when  the
                appellant was served with the deportation order on 3  April
                1995 or on 13 February 1996 when he was put on a plane  and
                removed from the United Kingdom.
             b. Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 - the  grounds  assert
                the Judge should have but failed to take into  account  the
                impact of the  Act  on  the  application  in  that  as  the
                appellant was convicted and sentenced on 16  November  1994
                and would have been rehabilitated on 16 November 2004  when
                his conviction became spent. The grounds assert  that  once
                the conviction has become spent it should be  an  important
                factor in the assessment required by paragraph 391(a) which
                the grounds assert had not been considered by the Judge  at
                all. The grounds  assert  a  non-existent  offence  can  no
                longer be held up as a deterrent  to  others.  The  grounds
                also assert challenge to the Judge's findings regarding the
                failure of the appellant to inform the USA  authorities  of
                his conviction is wrong.
             c. The failure of the Judge to consider the  reasons  why  the
                ECO in New York and immigration  officers  in  the  UK  had
                granted visas and leave to enter when it  was  accepted  by
                the Judge the appellant had not used any active  deceit  to
                obtain such visas and leave. The grounds assert  the  Judge
                without any backup evidence held  the  misspelling  of  the
                name explained the reason  for  the  immigration  officers'
                errors and led to the conclusion the  appellant  had  acted
                deceitfully.
             d. The Judge  was  wrong  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  claim
                pursuant  to  article  8  when  considering  the  issue  of
                proportionality arguing the positive factors in  favour  of
                the appellant at [85], regarding the appellant's ability to
                visit  his  parents  in  the  United  Kingdom,  make  it  a
                disproportionate  interference.  The  grounds   assert   in
                assessing proportionality the Judge speculated  about  what
                the appellant was being told before he was deported without
                any evidential basis for  doing  so,  fails  to  take  into
                account the impact of the appellant's rehabilitation, fails
                to deal with or consider the impact of  the  Rehabilitation
                of Offenders Act 1974 upon the appellant's failure to  tell
                the  US  Department  of  Homeland  Security  of  his  spent
                conviction, and refuses to  consider  or  accept  that  the
                appellants visits to the UK have been  allowed  every  time
                because of the negligence of  immigration  officers  rather
                than as a result of an irrelevant spelling mistake.


    26. Not all these grounds were pleaded before the First-tier  or  Upper
        Tribunal or leave sought to amend in accordance with  Ejiogu  (Cart
        cases) [2019] UKUT 00395 (IAC) in which it was found:
           1. An addition to the grounds of appeal requires the  permission
              of the Upper Tribunal.  That is so even if the case has  been
              granted permission following a Cart Judicial Review under CPR
              54.7A.

           2.  In  deciding  whether  to  grant  permission  to  rely  upon
              additional  grounds,  the  Tribunal  will  follow  the   same
              procedure as in relation to any other procedural default,  in
              particular considering the length  of  the  delay  (beginning
              with the date on which time for appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
              expired).

           3. It is becoming increasingly clear that a  substantial  number
              of  Cart   Judicial   Review   claims   are   succeeding   in
              circumstances where it is difficult to imagine that the  Full
              Court that decided Cart [2011]  UKSC  28  intended  that  the
              litigation should be prolonged in this way.



    27. Following the untimely death of Ian MacDonald QC, Mr Anthony Metzer
        QC has been instructed to represent the appellant's interests.
    28. Ms Bassi did not object to the hearing proceeding on the  basis  of
        Mr Metzer's skeleton argument which adopted  some  of  the  matters
        previously pleaded by Mr Macdonald as she was able to deal with the
        same.




Discussion



    29. The skeleton argument of Mr Metzer QC submits  the  issue  for  the
        Upper Tribunal is to determine  whether  the  Judge  erred  in  the
        proportionality exercise  when  balancing  the  appellant's  rights
        under article 8 ECHR against the public interest in continuing  the
        deportation order.
    30. As correctly recorded by the Judge, the relevant provisions of  the
        Immigration Rules are paragraphs 390 and 391 which provide:

             390.     An application for revocation of a deportation  order
                  will be considered in the light of all  the  circumstances
                  including the following:


                    i) The grounds on which the order was made;
                   ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
                  iii)  the  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
                       maintenance of effective immigration control;
                   iv)  the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including  any
                       compassionate circumstances.

             381  In the case of a person  who  has  been  deported  for  a
                  criminal offence, the continuation of a deportation  order
                  against that person will be the proper course:


                  a) In the case of a conviction for an  offence  for  which
                     the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                     less than 4 years, unless 10 years have  elapsed  since
                     the  making  of  the  deportation  order  when,  if  an
                     application for revocation is  received,  consideration
                     will be given on a case-by-case basis  to  whether  the
                     deportation order should be maintained, or
                  b) in the case of a conviction for an  offence  for  which
                     the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                     at least 4 years, at any time,


                     Unless,  in  either  case,  the  continuation  will  be
                     contrary  to  the  Human  Rights  Convention   or   the
                     Conventional  Protocol  Relating  to  the   Status   of
                     Refugees, or there are other exceptional  circumstances
                     that mean the continuation is outweighed by  compelling
                     factors.


    31. It is argued on the appellant's behalf that the Judge erred in  law
        at [76] where it is written:

             'This paragraph sets out the proper length of time for which a
             deportation order should continue before a deportee can  apply
             to  revoke  the  order.  In  this  matter,   the   appellant's
             deportation order was signed on 20 March 1995, over  24  years
             ago, and he was deported on 13 February 1976,  some  23  years
             ago. He therefore meets the 10-year requirement established by
             paragraph 391(a).'


    32. The relevant provisions provided a period  of  3  years  after  the
        deportation before the respondent could consider revocation, the 10-
        year period being introduced by paragraph 40 of  HC607  which  came
        into effect in July 2008. At the date  the  deportation  order  was
        signed in this case the relevant period  before  revocation  became
        possible was 3 years. It is not disputed the  Judge  was  wrong  to
        find the appellant knew revocation would not  be  possible  for  10
        years.
    33. Whilst the Judge was legally  incorrect  to  refer  to  the  longer
        provision  rather  than  the  period  in  force  at  the  date  the
        deportation order was signed, neither  provision  states  that  the
        deportation order would automatically be revoked or had  no  effect
        once such a period had been completed.  In  ES  (Togo)  and  Anr  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 230  the
        Court of Appeal held that it was a  clear  statement  of  principle
        that a deportation order could not be revoked by implication.
    34. A deportation order  will  remain  in  force  unless  a  successful
        application is made for it to be revoked. In cases involving either
        the three-year or ten-year period if no such application  is  made,
        with a successful outcome, the deportation  order  will  remain  in
        force as it did before the Judge. Any error made by  the  Judge  in
        relation to  the  10-year  period  is  therefore  not  material  in
        relation to the question of whether the deportation order  remained
        in force. It still does and the Judge was aware of  and  considered
        the period the order has remained in force.
    35. Mr Metzer QC also argues the Judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
        consider the provisions of  the  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act
        1974. It is submitted that paragraph 392 of the Immigration  Rules,
        which came into force in 1994 and which  reads:  "revocation  of  a
        deportation order does not entitle the person concerned to re-enter
        the United Kingdom; it renders him eligible to apply for  admission
        under the Immigration Rules" means  a  decision  on  revocation  is
        therefore  not  a  relevant  immigration   decision   or   relevant
        nationality decision within the exceptions to rehabilitation  under
        section 56(A) UK Borders  Act  2007,  entitling  the  appellant  to
        rehabilitation under the provisions of the 1974 Act.
    36. Section 56A provides:


             56A No rehabilitation for certain immigration  or  nationality
             purposes


                       1) Section 4(1), (2) and (3) of the Rehabilitation of
                          Offenders Act 1974 (effect of  rehabilitation)  do
                          not apply-


                            a) in relation to any proceedings in respect of
                               a  relevant  immigration   decision   or   a
                               relevant nationality decision, or


                             (b)    otherwise for the  purposes  of,  or  in
                               connection with, any such decision.


                       2) In this section-


                          "immigration officer" means a person appointed  by
                          the Secretary of State as an  immigration  officer
                          under paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration
                          Act 1971,


                          "relevant   immigration   decision"   means    any
                          decision, or proposed decision, of  the  Secretary
                          of State or an immigration  officer  under  or  by
                          virtue of the  Immigration  Acts,  or  rules  made
                          under  section  3  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
                          (immigration   rules),   in   relation   to    the
                          entitlement of a person to enter or remain in  the
                          United  Kingdom  (including,  in  particular,  the
                          removal of  a  person  from  the  United  Kingdom,
                          whether by deportation or otherwise),


                          "relevant   nationality   decision"   means    any
                          decision, or proposed decision, of  the  Secretary
                          of State under or by virtue of-


                           the British Nationality Act 1981,




                           the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act 1990, or




                           the Hong Kong (War Wives and Widows) Act 1996,


                           in relation to the good character of a person.


                       3)  The  references  in   subsection   (2)   to   the
                          Immigration Acts and to the  Acts  listed  in  the
                          definition  of  "relevant  nationality   decision"
                          include references to  any  provision  made  under
                          section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972,
                          or of EU law, which relates to the subject  matter
                          of the Act concerned.


    37. Paragraph 392 of the Immigration Rules in full reads:


             392.     Revocation of a deportation order  does  not  entitle
                  the person concerned to re-enter the  United  Kingdom;  it
                  renders him eligible to  apply  for  admission  under  the
                  Immigration Rules. Application for revocation of the order
                  may be made to the Entry Clearance Officer  or  direct  to
                  the Home Office.


    38. Whilst the particular rule does not satisfy  the  definition  of  a
        relevant immigration decision as defined in section 56A Borders Act
        2007  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  revoke  the
        deportation order is, arguably, a relevant immigration decision  in
        cases where that occurs, although as it is a decision in the favour
        of the person previously subject to the order for  his  deportation
        the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act would normally not be  pleading
        in any challenge to that decision. Paragraph  392  merely  confirms
        the legal effect of the decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to
        revoke a deportation order  on a right to re-enter the UK.
    39. When considering whether to revoke a deportation order a  decision-
        maker is entitled to consider the reason why the order was made  in
        the first instance. Paragraph 390(1) requires a decision  maker  to
        take into account  on  a  revocation  application  the  reason  the
        deportation order was made in the  first  instance.  This  requires
        specific reference to the conviction. The  Secretary  of  State  is
        therefore entitled to consider the appellant's conviction,  as  was
        the  Judge,  notwithstanding  that  for   other   situations   that
        conviction may be spent.
    40. Whilst the skeleton arguments and oral submissions referred to what
        are described as 'relevant provisions' of the 1974 Act, there is no
        reference to Section 7(3) which states:


             (3)  If at any stage in  any  proceedings  before  a  judicial
                  authority in (not being proceedings to which, by virtue of
                  any of paragraphs (a) to (e) of subsection (2) above or of
                  any order for the time being in force under subsection (4)
                  below,  section  4(1)  above  has   no   application,   or
                  proceedings  to  which  section  8  below   applies)   the
                  authority is satisfied, in the light of any considerations
                  which appear to it to be relevant (including any  evidence
                  which has been or may thereafter be put before  it),  that
                  justice cannot be done in the case except by admitting  or
                  requiring  evidence   relating   to   a   person's   spent
                  convictions or to circumstances  ancillary  thereto,  that
                  authority may admit or, as the case may  be,  require  the
                  evidence in question  notwithstanding  the  provisions  of
                  subsection (1) of section 4 above, and may  determine  any
                  issue to which the evidence relates in disregard,  so  far
                  as necessary, of those provisions.


    41. The Upper Tribunal considered this matter in the case  of  Ogundimu
        (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  (IAC)  in  which  the
        panel composed of the Honourable Mr Justice Blake, President of the
        Upper Tribunal, and Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor, find  at  [37  -
        40] of the judgement:


             Admission of the appellant's spent convictions


             37.  One of the appellants grounds of appeal before the  Upper
                  Tribunal was that  the  determination  of  the  First-Tier
                  Tribunal contained a further error of law in that  it  had
                  relied on convictions of the appellant that was spent  and
                  should have been excluded from consideration.


             38.      Section 7(3) of the Rehabilitation of  Offenders  Act
             1974 provides as follows:


                  "If at any stage in  any  proceedings  before  a  judicial
                  authority in Great Britain...  the authority is satisfied,
                  in the light of any considerations which appear to  it  to
                  be relevant (including any evidence which has been or  may
                  thereafter be put before it), that justice cannot be  done
                  in the case except  by  admitting  or  requiring  evidence
                  relating  to  a   person's   spent   convictions   or   to
                  circumstances ancillary thereto, that authority may  admit
                  or, as the case  may  be,  but  require  the  evidence  in
                  question notwithstanding the provisions of subsection  (1)
                  of section 4 above, and may determine any issue  to  which
                  the evidence relates in disregard, so far as necessary, of
                  those provisions"


             39.  It is for the  Secretary  of  State  to  satisfy  us  that
                  justice  could  not  be   done   without   admitting   the
                  appellant's  spent  convictions  (AA  (Spent  convictions)
                  Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00027. We conclude that she has done
                  so on the facts of this case.


             40.  In a case of this  sort,  where  the  Secretary  of  State
                  relies on a persistent course of  conduct  rather  than  a
                  single serious offence to justify deportation,  it  is  of
                  importance to look at the appellant's offending  behaviour
                  as a whole. It is the Secretary of State's case  that  the
                  appellant's  offending  behaviour  escalated   and   would
                  continue  to  do  so.  It  would  be  artificial  in  such
                  circumstances  to  consider  only  the  most  very  recent
                  convictions. We therefore directed that we would admit the
                  whole of the appellant's criminal record  when  we  remade
                  the decision, in order to obtain a complete  picture.  The
                  weight to be attached  to  spent  convictions  is  a  very
                  different matter, but their relevance is  the  information
                  they throw on the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
                  deporting the appellant for his most recent offending.


             41.  We also observe that where persistent criminal conduct is
                  relied on, it is important for the Judge to have the  full
                  Criminal Record Office printout rather than just a summary
                  of  the  dates  of  convictions.  The  full  list  assists
                  discovery of when the offending occurred, whether it was a
                  breach of a Community Order, whether the appellant was  on
                  bail at the time of the offending, and  other  data  about
                  the sequence of the  offending.  We  pointed  out  at  the
                  hearing that any suggestion that the Data  Protection  Act
                  restricted disclosure of such information to  a  court  is
                  misconceived.


    42. In the current appeal, whilst not a persistent offender case, it is
        of  equal  importance  that   a   decision-maker   considering   an
        application to revoke the deportation order imposed as a result  of
        an appellant's most recent conviction, including a judge,  is  able
        to consider the nature of that offence and the sentence handed down
        for the same.
    43. It is also important to note that during the proceedings before the
        Judge no submissions  were  made  that  the  Judge  was  unable  to
        consider the appellant's offending as a result of the effect of the
        Rehabilitation of Offenders Act or otherwise. This case is a  clear
        example of matters being raised on a 'Cart' application which  were
        never canvassed before either the First-tier or Upper Tribunal, and
        which the Judge was therefore unable to address, being  used  as  a
        vehicle to assert the Judge had erred in law in a  manner  material
        to his decision. Whilst it is submitted by Mr Metzer  QC  that  the
        Judge  should  have  taken  the  issue  of  the  Rehabilitation  of
        Offenders Act into account it is not establish why this  should  be
        so on the facts.  The  Judge  properly  notes  that  the  appellant
        himself referred to his offending and the  reason  the  deportation
        order was made. I find no arguable  legal  error  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal made  out  on  this  ground.  It  is
        arguable that justice cannot be done in relation to a revocation of
        a deportation  appeal  without  considering  the  reasons  why  the
        deportation order was imposed in the first place.
    44. Mr Metzer QC also submitted that the Judge erred in law in  finding
        as fact that the appellant knew he was required to  apply  for  the
        revocation of the deportation order before he made any  application
        for entry clearance with the British Consulate in New York, and was
        wrong to take this into account in the balancing exercise.
    45. A well-known legal principle is that 'ignorance of the  law  is  no
        defence/excuse'. This maxim imposes constructive knowledge  of  the
        laws of the land upon those to  whom  such  laws  apply.  A  person
        subject to a deportation order is such a person in relation to  the
        laws relating thereto. The principle means  that  a  person  cannot
        escape liability for violating a law on the basis of  an  assertion
        that the content of that law was in fact unknown to him.
    46. The Judge found the appellant is subject to deportation order which
        had no automatic cessation or revocation provision.  The  appellant
        failed to establish before the Judge how he credibly believed  such
        an order  would  have  come  to  an  end.  The  appellant,  a  very
        intelligent individual with IT skills, had not established that  he
        could not have sought advice or  undertaken  his  own  research  to
        ascertain the circumstances in which the  deportation  order  would
        have ceased to have effect. The evidence before the Judge  appeared
        to show the appellant made no  applications  or  enquiries  of  the
        respondent as to how the  deportation  order  could  be  ended.  He
        rather chose, as the Judge found, to employ other means of entering
        the United Kingdom using the Pakistani passport  with  a  different
        spelling of his name or passport issued by the authorities  in  the
        USA following his acquisition of citizenship of that country.
    47. The appellant does not dispute that  he  is  the  person  named  as
        'Touqueer Aslam' who was deported from the UK as a  result  of  his
        conviction and sentence. It is therefore relevant to note the terms
        of the deportation  order  which  specifically  provides  that  the
        appellant was required to leave  the  UK  and  is  prohibited  from
        entering the UK so long as the deportation order remains  in  force
        (my emphasis).
    48. The grounds fail to  establish  the  Judge  has  erred  in  law  in
        concluding that the appellant was aware the requirement  to  revoke
        the deportation order before he entered the United Kingdom.  On the
        basis of the appellant's actual knowledge as found by the Judge, or
        alternatively, in light of the fact the appellant appears  to  have
        consciously avoided making any such enquiries as to revocation,   I
        find it was not unreasonable for the Judge to find as he  did.  The
        weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge.
    49. Whilst the  appellant  asserts  he  never  attempted  to  hide  his
        identity and did not take advantage of the fact  he  was  convicted
        and deported under the alternative spelling of his  name;  he  also
        made no attempt to apply for the deportation order to  be  revoked.
        The submission in the  skeleton  argument  that  the  passport  and
        identity documents contained important features which  should  have
        enabled an immigration officer to identify  the  appellant  against
        the Home Office database  is  noted  but  such  submission  has  no
        arguable merit in relation to the claim the Judge's  findings  were
        not reasonably available to him.
    50. The Judge had the benefit of seeing and hearing oral evidence being
        given including how the appellant dealt with cross-examination. The
        conclusion of the Judge that the appellant  lacked  credibility  in
        relation to his claims has not been shown to be a  finding  outside
        the  range  of  those  available  to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence
        considered as a whole.
    51. A core aspect of the challenge is the appellant's disagreement with
        the Judge's adverse findings including that relating to the use  of
        deceit by the appellant. It is said this finding was  made  without
        giving the appellant the opportunity to address the same making the
        Judges conclusion unfair. Such a submission has no arguable  merit.
        Proceedings before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  adversarial  in
        nature. Parties are given the opportunity to  submit  the  evidence
        they seek to rely upon which is then tested before  a  judge.  Once
        the evidential stage of the proceedings is completed a judge  makes
        findings upon the relevant issues supported by adequate reasons for
        such findings. Judgment can be given either orally or  in  writing.
        That is what the Judge did. This is not a case in which  the  Judge
        considered evidence not disclosed to the parties or upon which  the
        advocates did not have the opportunity to  comment.  The  appellant
        received a fair hearing and the finding of deceit is  a  conclusion
        reached by the Judge on the evidence he received, and  view  formed
        of the appellants actions, from the same. It is a  finding  clearly
        within the range of those available to the Judge  on  the  evidence
        and has not been shown to be infected by arguable legal  error.  No
        procedural unfairness is made out sufficient to amount to an  error
        of law.
    52. The claim by Mr Metzer QC the appellant used his Pakistan  and  USA
        passports and  made  no  attempt  to  hide  his  identity  or  name
        disclosed in those documents is noted, but what he did  not  do  is
        make it known  he  was  the  same  person  as  that  named  in  the
        deportation order. The use of a different name and different  forms
        of travel documents further distanced the appellant from  his  true
        identity as the person who is the subject of the deportation order.
    53. The Judge notes at [125]:


             "Ultimately, I find that the appellant was aware that  he  was
             returning in breach of an extant  deportation  order.  Persons
             who engage, or who might be tempted to engage, in action which
             they know seeks to circumvent the  bar  upon  return  that  is
             consequential to the signing  of  the  deportation  order  and
             continues during its continued existence, needs  to  be  aware
             that such actions will have disadvantageous  consequences  for
             those who seek to benefit from such conduct. There  is  strong
             public interest in recognising and encouraging compliance with
             a deportation order"


    54. The Judge notes the appellant relies upon his family life with  his
        parents  who  are  in  poor   health   as   part   of   the   human
        rights/compassionate element of the revocation application. At  the
        time the appellant's father was unwell but has since  passed  away.
        The Judge notes the content of the medical evidence relating to the
        appellant's mother at [127].
    55. The Judge finds  at  [131]  that  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
        presented the appellant did  not  provide  the  required  level  of
        support to his parents to establish the  required  dependency.  The
        Judge makes a similar finding in relation to the appellant's sister
        in the UK concluding that it had not been established  that  family
        life recognised by article 8(1) had been shown to exist. It has not
        been shown this is a finding outside the range of  those  available
        to the Judge on the evidence.
    56. The weight to be given to the appellants conviction will have to be
        assessed in light of all the facts including its age if it had been
        found  article  8  was  engaged  and  the   issue   was   that   of
        proportionality pursuant to ECHR, although the length of time since
        the deportation order was made is clearly a  factor  that  is  also
        considered when assessing the merits of the claim pursuant  to  the
        Immigration Rules outside the ECHR, as the Judge did.
    57. The Judge in the alternative, considers whether the respondent  had
        established the decision was proportionate on the facts, concluding
        she had done so for the reasons set out at [132] in  the  following
        terms:


             132.     If I am wrong, I proceed to consider the  appellant's
                  article 8 rights both on family and private life  grounds.
                  I also proceed to consider the article 8  rights  of  both
                  the  appellant  and  his  parents,   in   light   of   the
                  deteriorating health of Mr Choudhury and Mrs Akhtar. There
                  is no right for  a  non-British  national  to  enter  this
                  country to visit British relatives. The public interest as
                  identified  within  the  Rules  and  though  there  is  no
                  presumption  in  favour  of  a  public  interest  in   the
                  continued bar upon entry in this matter, I am required  to
                  balance  the  public  interest  in  continuing  the  order
                  against the interference with the appellant's  family  and
                  private life rights: ZP (India). The evidence  before  the
                  Tribunal confirms  that  the  appellant's  parents  secure
                  appropriate support from their children  in  this  country
                  and from friends. I  further  note  that  the  appellant's
                  children are British  citizens  and  so  can  visit  their
                  grandparents with their  mother  in  the  absence  of  the
                  appellant. When assessing proportionality, I note that the
                  appellant has entered this country on six occasions  since
                  2003 in the knowledge that he is barred from  entry  until
                  his extant deportation order is  revoked.  The  last  such
                  entry was in 2010,  so  if  the  appellant  had  not  been
                  stopped and detained in 2012, I find that  he  would  have
                  continued to seek to enter without  seeking  to  apply  to
                  revoke the order. Such action was a flagrant breach of the
                  requirements of the deportation order  and  I  have  found
                  that the appellant  was  aware  of  such  requirements.  I
                  observed  that  there  is  a  strong  public  interest  in
                  recognising and encouraging compliance with a  deportation
                  order.


    58. The Judge clearly took into account  the  competing  arguments  and
        balanced the same in arriving at his conclusions.
    59. Whilst the Judge is  criticised  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
        actions concerning the authorities of the United States of  America
        and the citizenship application, that is a matter outside the ambit
        of this appeal. The requisite test in America  is  that  of  'moral
        turpitude'.  It was not made out  the  Judge  needed  to  make  any
        findings in relation to that issue which is within the jurisdiction
        of another sovereign  state.  That  is  not,  however,  a  material
        matter.
    60. The Judge clearly spent a considerable amount of  time  considering
        the merits of the appeal. The Judge's conclusion that the appellant
        had not made out that it was appropriate in all  the  circumstances
        to allow the appeal and that the respondent had established that it
        was not appropriate for the deportation order  to  be  revoked  has
        been adequately reasoned by the Judge. It has not been  shown  this
        is a conclusion  that  was  not  available  to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    61. Whilst  the  appellant  disagrees  with  the  Judge's  findings  no
        arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal
        is made out sufficient to warrant a grant of permission  to  appeal
        to the Upper Tribunal.


Decision

    62. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    63. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 March 2020


