
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/12673/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 March 2018                          |  On 3 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
                    Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (appellant)  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Flynn (the judge), promulgated on 20 July  2017,  allowing
        the respondent's appeal against a decision made by the appellant on
        16 November 2015 in respect of a human rights application  made  by
        the respondent.




     2. The principle ground of appeal relates to  the  judge's  conclusion
        that she had jurisdiction to entertain the  appeal.  The  appellant
        contends that the decision dated 16  November  2015  was  one  made
        pursuant to paragraph 353 of the  immigration  rules  and  did  not
        therefore constitute  a  refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim.  The
        respondent relies on the Upper Tribunal decision in Sheidu (Further
        submissions; appealable decision)  [2016]  UKUT  000412  (IAC)  and
        contends that the appellant's decision did amount to a refusal of a
        human  rights  claim  and  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  her
        conclusions for the reasons given.

     3. The respondent is a national of Afghanistan. He has a given date of
        birth of 1 January 1995. He entered the UK on 11 January  2008  and
        claimed asylum. This claim  was  refused  but  the  respondent  was
        granted Discretionary Leave to Remain as  an  unaccompanied  child,
        valid until 4 March 2011.  An  application  for  further  leave  to
        remain was refused on 15 August 2013 and a  decision  was  made  to
        remove the  respondent  to  Afghanistan.  The  respondent's  appeal
        against this decision, which was  advanced  on  Refugee  Convention
        grounds  and  human  rights  grounds,  including  article  8,   was
        dismissed on 22 October 2013. In dismissing the appeal, the  First-
        tier Tribunal  considered  and  applied  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
        immigration rules as  it  was  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
        decision.


     4. On 4 June 2015 the appellant submitted an application for leave  to
        remain on the basis of the private life he had established  in  the
        UK. It is important to set out in some detail the decision made  by
        the appellant on 16 November 2015 in response to this application.

     5. The decision was headed "Reasons for Decision". After outlining the
        reasons why the respondent did not qualify for a grant of leave  to
        remain, the appellant gave details  of  the  respondent's  previous
        applications under  the  heading  "Repeat  claim/application".  The
        appellant  set  out  the  requirements  of  paragraph  353  of  the
        immigration rules and  indicated  that  the  application  had  been
        considered on all of the  evidence  available,  including  evidence
        previously considered, but  that  it  had  been  decided  that  the
        matters  submitted  were  not  significantly  different  from   the
        material which had previously been considered and therefore did not
        amount to a fresh claim.


     6. The appellant then set out the details of the respondent's previous
        claim under the heading,


         Below is the list  of  points  that  you  have  raised  that  have
         previously been considered:


     7. The appellant noted that the respondent had an appeal dismissed  on
        20 October 2013 and that his application for permission  to  appeal
        to the Court of Appeal was refused. The appellant then stated,

         Your submissions are not significantly different from the  evidence
         that has previously be considered. Therefore they do not amount  to
         a fresh claim. Below is consideration of your submissions that have
         not previously been considered, but that taken  together  with  the
         previously considered material, do not create a realistic  prospect
         of success before and Immigration Judge: [my emphasis]

     8. The further  consideration  dealt  with  the  submissions  made  in
        respect of the respondent's family and private life. The  appellant
        noted the length of the respondent's residence and that he had  not
        spent over half his life in UK. The  appellant  considered  whether
        there  were  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   respondent's
        integration in Afghanistan. The appellant noted that the respondent
        had spent the majority of his life in Afghanistan,  that  he  spoke
        the language and understood the culture and social  values  of  the
        country. His  educational  qualifications  could  be  used  to  his
        advantage if he returned. The respondent would  be  entitled  to  a
        relocation package which would enable him to establish  a  life  in
        Kabul. The appellant then indicated that the 'application'  on  the
        basis of the respondent's private life under the immigration  rules
        was refused. The appellant then went on to consider  whether  there
        were any exceptional circumstances which, in line with  article  8,
        might warrant a grant of leave to remain in the UK outside  of  the
        immigration   rules.   The   appellant   noted   the   respondent's
        relationship with his cousin and his cousin's family  and  that  he
        had established strong friendships in the UK and had an offer of  a
        university place subject to exam results. The appellant also  noted
        evidence relating to the respondent's success in amateur boxing and
        achievements in  the  community.  Given  that  the  respondent  had
        benefited from an education in the UK and that this  would  improve
        his opportunities on return to Afghanistan, the appellant  was  not
        satisfied  that  there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances.  The
        appellant then stated,

         As your submissions do not create a realistic prospect  of  success
         before and Immigration Judge, they do not amount to a fresh claim.

     9. The appellant's decision was not accompanied by any  appeal  forms.
        The respondent nevertheless lodged an  appeal  asserting  that  the
        appellant's decision constituted a  refusal  of  the  human  rights
        claim. A Notice of Hearing was issued by the First-tier Tribunal on
        20 December 2016 listing a hearing for 16 June 2017.

    10. At the hearing the  judge  considered,  as  a  preliminary  matter,
        whether she had jurisdiction to  entertain  the  challenge  to  the
        appellant's decision. She  noted  in  her  determination  that  the
        Presenting Officer could not explain why the appellant  had  stated
        that the respondent had no right of appeal  since  there  had  been
        clear engagement with the human  rights  submissions  made  on  the
        respondent's  behalf.  The  judge  considered  submissions  by   Mr
        Blundell, the respondent's representative, to the effect that there
        had been a stark difference in treatment by the  appellant  in  her
        consideration of the protection  and  human  rights  matters,  that
        paragraph 276ADE had been amended since the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        decision in 2013, and that there had been no reference to paragraph
        353 when the appellant considered the  respondent's  private  life.
        The judge referred to the authority of Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department v VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255  and  the  Upper
        Tribunal decision in  Sheidu.  While  the  judge  agreed  that  the
        respondent had no right of appeal in respect of  protection  issues
        she concluded, at [13] and [14], that there was a right  of  appeal
        in respect of the human rights claim.

         13. However, the [appellant] took a completely  different  approach
         regarding the fresh submissions in respect  of  the  [respondent's]
         private and family life. She did  not  state  that  she  would  not
         consider his submissions, but clearly  evaluated  them  thoroughly,
         both within the immigration rules and under the  wider  aspects  of
         Article 8.


         14. The [appellant] did not give any reason  for  her  decision  to
         mark the [respondent's] claim as "NRA" nor did her  letter  discuss
         this point. I was accordingly satisfied that the  [respondent]  was
         legally entitled to a right of  appeal  against  the  [appellant's]
         decision solely in respect of his private and family life, but  not
         protection issues.

    11. The judge  proceeded  to  hear  evidence  and  concluded  that  the
        decision she regarded as a refusal of a human  rights  claim  would
        breach the Human Rights Act 1998. The purported appeal was allowed.


    12. The grounds contend that the judge  erred  in  law  in  relying  on
        Sheidu which, it was claimed, was clearly  distinguishable  on  its
        facts. In that case the language of the decision letter in question
        clearly had the effect of showing that there had been a substantive
        consideration of the human  rights  claim.  The  appellant  had  to
        engage with the  further  submissions  through  the  prism  of  the
        immigration rules as this was necessary in order for the  appellant
        to "consider" the further submissions and  determine  whether  they
        amounted to a fresh claim.


    13. At the 'error of law' hearing Mr Bramble relied on the  grounds  of
        appeal. Mr Dhanji provided me with a copy of the skeleton  argument
        before the First-tier Tribunal which relied heavily on  Sheidu.  Mr
        Dhanji  accepted  that  the  2013  First-tier   Tribunal   decision
        considered the respondent's article 8 based claims, and he accepted
        that  the  appellant's  decision  dated  16   November   2015   was
        effectively 'book-ended' at the beginning and end by  reference  to
        paragraph 353. He also accepted that the present case was  not  'on
        all  fours'  with  Sheidu.  He  submitted  that   the   judge   was
        nevertheless rationally entitled to conclude that  the  appellant's
        decision, despite the references to paragraph 353,  amounted  to  a
        refusal of a human rights  claim  and  noted  that  the  Presenting
        Officer  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  could   not   explain   the
        appellant's position that there was no right of appeal.


    14. Following the amendments to the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
        Act 2002 wrought by the Immigration Act 2014,  a  person  can  only
        appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against a refusal of a protection
        claim or a refusal of a human rights claim (s.82). Section 113  (1)
        of the 2002 Act describes a 'human rights claim' as a claim made by
        a person to the Secretary of State that to remove the  person  from
        or require him to leave the United Kingdom  would  be  unlawful  as
        being incompatible with his Convention rights.


    15. Paragraph 353 of the immigration rules reads, so far as material,
         When a human rights or protection claim has been refused or
         withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these
         Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no longer pending,
         the decision maker will consider any further submissions and, if
         rejected, will then determine whether they amount to a fresh
         claim. The submissions will amount to a fresh claim if they are
         significantly different from the material that has previously been
         considered. The submissions will only be significantly different
         if the content:
         (i) had not already been considered; and
         (ii) taken together with the previously considered material,
         created a realistic prospect of success, notwithstanding its
         rejection.


    16. In Sheidu the Upper Tribunal considered the appeal of a person  who
        had an asylum appeal dismissed in  2005,  and  who  had  an  appeal
        against a deportation decision dismissed in 2012. The  person  made
        further representations in May 2013 based on protection and article
        8 grounds. The Secretary of State's decision in  respect  of  these
        representations was headed,

         UK BORDERS ACT 2007
         CONSIDERATION OF FURTHER SUBMISSIONS
         DECISION TO REFUSE A PROTECTION CLAIM AND HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM
    17. Under the heading "Consideration of protection claim" the Secretary
        of State considered the appellant's protection claim  in  substance
        and concluded, given the previous adverse credibility  findings  by
        Tribunal judges, that there was no reason to take a different view.
        The letter then passed  to  issues  arising  under  article  8  and
        related immigration rules. Once again, the Secretary of State dealt
        in substance with the various arguments  raised  by  the  appellant
        before concluding, under a heading "Article 8 conclusion", that the
        appellant's deportation would not  breach  the  U.K.'s  obligations
        under the ECHR. A further short  section  dealt  with  "Other  ECHR
        claims". The Secretary of State finally  stated,  under  a  heading
        "Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules",  that  consideration  had
        been given to the appellant's submissions that had  not  previously
        been considered, but taken together with the previously  considered
        material, they did not  create  a  realistic  prospect  of  success
        before immigration judge.


    18. At paragraph 16 the Upper Tribunal observed that the references  to
        paragraph 353 of the immigration rules only appeared at the end  of
        the Secretary of State's decision, and  that  the  heading  of  the
        letter  indicated  that  it  contained  a  decision  to  refuse   a
        protection claim and a  human  rights  claim.  The  Upper  Tribunal
        concluded, in light of the  particular  decision  before  it,  that
        there had indeed been a refusal of a human rights claim  and  that,
        as there was an appealable decision, paragraph 353 had no  part  to
        play. It is apparent from paragraph  17  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
        placed great emphasis on  the  particular  terms  of  the  decision
        letter. The Tribunal noted that the decision  letter  started  with
        what was  described  as  a  human  rights  claim,  which  was  then
        substantively refused, and that the Secretary of State did so using
        wording in the heading and in the refusal itself that  was  clearly
        envisaged as a refusal of human rights claim by s.82  of  the  2002
        Act, and that the  subsequent  consideration  under  paragraph  353
        could not have the effect of removing the right of appeal.


    19. It will be apparent from my description of the  decision  dated  16
        November 2015, at paragraphs 5 to 8 above, that  that  decision  is
        very different to the one considered in Sheidu. The decision of  16
        November 2015 did  not  purport  to  be  a  decision  to  refuse  a
        protection claim or a human rights claim, unlike  the  decision  in
        Sheidu. At the very outset of the decision  of  November  2015  the
        appellant set out the provisions of paragraph 353 and made it clear
        that she  was  considering  the  application  as  a  repeat  claim.
        Contrary to the submission made by the respondent's  representative
        as recorded at [11] of the judge's decision, the Secretary of State
        made specific reference to the  fresh  claim  provisions  when  she
        considered article 8 (see paragraphs 7 and 8 above). Moreover,  the
        language used  throughout  the  November  2015  decision  spoke  of
        'applications' rather than 'claims'. It is also apparent  that  the
        references to paragraph  353  of  the  immigration  rules  were  an
        integral part of the November 2015 decision, and not simply 'tacked
        on' to the end, unlike the decision in Sheidu.

    20. I have no hesitation in accepting the appellant's submission  that,
        in order to lawfully "consider" any further representations, it  is
        necessary for the Secretary of State to engage with  those  further
        representations, often at length and in great detail, both  in  the
        context of the immigration rules and outside the immigration  rules
        in accordance with article 8 principles. Such an assertion would be
        no surprise to those dealing with 'fresh claim' judicial reviews on
        a daily basis. The fact that there has been detailed  consideration
        of submissions based on article 8 cannot mean that the rejection of
        those submissions amounts to a refusal of a human rights claim.

    21. Contrary to the judge's observation at [14], there was no need  for
        the appellant to give any further reason why there was no right  of
        appeal. It was abundantly clear, having regard  to  the  structure,
        content and language of the decision dated 16  November  2015  that
        the decision being made was  a  refusal  to  consider  the  further
        representations as a fresh human rights claim.


    22. I am therefore satisfied, for the reasons given, that the judge was
        not lawfully entitled  to  conclude  that  the  decision  dated  16
        November 2015 amounted to a refusal of a human rights claim.  As  a
        consequence, the respondent did not have a right of appeal and  the
        First-tier Tribunal did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  entertain  an
        appeal.


    23. I appreciate that the respondent now finds himself in  the  unusual
        position of having had a purported appeal allowed despite the  fact
        that appellant's conclusion that his  further  representations  did
        not create a realistic prospect of success in an appeal.  No  doubt
        this will be a relevant factor in any judicial review challenge.


Notice of Decision

The decision is vitiated by material error of law.  There  is  no  right  of
appeal  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal   and   Upper   Tribunals   have   no
jurisdiction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the respondent and to the  appellant.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               27 March 2018

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



