
`[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/12276/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 26 May 2017                        |         On 15 June 2017              |
|Determination given orally at the     |                                      |
|hearing.                              |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               bilal SEZGINER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright of Counsel, SM Oakfield Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have decided to give an oral judgment in this case.  It is an  appeal
    which came before me for an error of law hearing on  6  December  2016.
    At the end of that hearing,  having  found  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier  Judge  I  set  out  my  reasons  in  a
    decision which was promulgated on 25 January 2016.  I wrote:

         "1.  The appellant, a citizen of Turkey  born  on  26  August  1984
             appeals, with permission granted by Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Osborne against a decision of Judge of the First-tier
             Tribunal James who in a determination promulgated  on  4  July
             2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of
             the Secretary of State to refuse  leave  to  remain  on  human
             rights grounds.


         2.   The basic facts in this case are that the appellant met Ms K P
             when she was on  holiday  in  Turkey  in  October  2013.   She
             visited him in Turkey on a number of occasions thereafter.  Ms
             P became pregnant and their daughter, A, was born  in  Britain
             on 16 August 2014.   Ms  P  and  their  daughter  visited  the
             appellant in Turkey  in  November  2014  before  returning  to
             Britain for Christmas and then going back  to  Turkey.   After
             further visits Ms P and the appellant's daughter  returned  to
             Britain on 21 May 2015, the  appellant  came  to  Britain  the
             following day then returned to Turkey 6 days  later.   Further
             visits ensued but by the summer of 2015  Ms  P  had  indicated
             that she did not want to bring their daughter  to  Turkey  any
             more.  The appellant  came  to  Britain  in  August  2015  and
             decided to stay in Britain.


         3.   Although he and Ms P are  no  longer  in  a  relationship  the
             appellant lives with her and their daughter in a flat which Ms
             P rents.


         4.   On the basis that he wished to  remain  in  Britain  with  his
             daughter the appellant made an application for an extension of
             stay on 9 November 2015.  The appellant made it clear that the
             relationship between him and his girlfriend at that time  only
             revolved around their daughter and  that  he  wished  to  take
             responsibility for her.


         5.   The appellant was refused on the basis that he could not  meet
             the requirements of the Rules  and  nor  was  he  entitled  to
             remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   Reference  was  made  to
             paragraph E-LTRPT.2.3 of  the  Rules  which  referred  to  the
             necessity of an applicant having sole parental  responsibility
             for  the  child.   It  was  not  accepted  that  he  had  sole
             responsibility.  Moreover reference was made to  paragraph  E-
             LTRPT.3.1 which stated  that  an  applicant  must  not  be  in
             Britain as a visitor.  Moreover the appellant could not fulfil
             the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.


         6.   It was accepted both in the First-tier and before me that  the
             appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules.


         7.   In her determination the First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  the
             appellant's evidence and in paragraphs 31 onwards reached  her
             findings of fact.  She noted that the only issue  was  whether
             or not the provisions of Article 8 outside the Rules  applied.
             She clearly accepted that the appellant  had  family  life  in
             Britain  and  that  Article  8  was  engaged  because  of  the
             consequences of the interference with that family  life.   She
             noted that the appellant was not financially  independent  and
             stated that she took into account the decision  in  Treebhawon
             (Section 117(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674  (IAC)  stating  that  that
             decision confirmed where there was a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with a qualifying child  as  defined  by
             Section 117(D)(1) and where it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the child to leave the UK there was no public  interest
             in removal of the adult concerned.  The judge then went on  to
             say that it was important for her to consider whether  or  not
             the appellant had  established  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with his daughter.


         8.   The judge noted that the appellant asserted that Ms P  was  so
             immature that she was unable to look  after  their  child  and
             that he claimed to have sole responsibility for his  daughter.
             The judge did not accept that, stating that she did not accept
             that Ms P was unable to assume responsibility  for  her.   She
             accepted that they were living in the same household and noted
             that in a letter Ms P had  written  that  she  knew  that  the
             appellant would 'contribute to  the  upbringing'.   She  noted
             photographs and also referred to evidence from Ms P's  family.




         9.   Having stated that she  was  concerned  with  the  appellant's
             credibility she  concluded  that  'I  do  not  find  that  the
             appellant has produced sufficient evidence to  establish  that
             he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his
             daughter and for that reason I  do  not  accept  that  Section
             117B(6) applies in this appeal.'  She went on  to  state  that
             she should assess  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  to
             refuse  the  application.   Having  referred  to  the   public
             interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control  she
             stated that she is satisfied that the decision to  refuse  the
             application was proportionate and dismissed the appeal.


         10.  The grounds of appeal stated that the judge had erred  in  her
             construction of the case  of  Treebhawon  stating  that  where
             there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
             a qualifying child and where it would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the child to leave Britain there was no public interest
             in removal of the adult concerned.  The  grounds  stated  that
             there was evidence to  show  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship between the appellant and his daughter
             and that the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  the  best
             interests of the child.  It was asserted that  the  judge  had
             erred when finding that the appellant was not credible.


         11.  At the hearing of the appeal before me I  confirmed  that  the
             issue in this appeal relies solely on that of  the  rights  of
             the appellant  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   Mr  Coleman
             asserted that the judge should have found that  the  appellant
             was in a genuine parental relationship with a British  citizen
             child and that she had erred in not making a finding  on  that
             point and in not making a finding that the appellant  was  the
             father of a qualifying child.  Moreover the judge had erred in
             not properly considering the issue of Section 55 and the  best
             interests of the child which were to have her  two  biological
             parents live with her.  There was nothing to indicate that the
             Appellant was other than a caring parent.  Moreover the judge,
             he argued, had overlooked the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
             living with his daughter and ignored evidence from members  of
             Ms P's family  which  referred  to  the  relationship  -  that
             evidence included letters from Ms P's  mother  and  aunt.   He
             emphasised that he accepted that this was  not  a  case  where
             sole responsibility was being argued but stated  the  decision
             was perverse and irrational.


         12.  In reply, Mr Bramble relied  on  a  Rule  24  statement  which
             argued that the judge had reached conclusions which were fully
             open to her on the evidence as a whole.  It  also  asked  that
             the negative findings on the credibility of the appellant made
             by the judge should be upheld.


         13.  He pointed out that Ms P had not attended court and  indicated
             that I should find  that  there  was  a  lack  of  information
             relating to the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
             daughter.


         14.  In reply Mr Coleman argued that the findings of the judge were
             not open to her, they were factually  incorrect  and  perverse
             and that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  for
             findings relating to the relationship  to  be  made  as  these
             would affect any further application which the applicant would
             make.


         Discussion


         15.  The basic facts of this case are clear.  The child is now aged
             2 and lives with her mother and the appellant.  Her mother and
             the appellant are  not  in  a  relationship.   The  judge  was
             correct to conclude that the appellant had not proved that  Ms
             P was not capable of looking after the child.  Indeed it  must
             be the case as the mother of a 2-year old girl Ms  P  must  be
             the primary focus of the child.  It was not argued before  the
             judge that the appellant had sole responsibility for the child
             - that assertion came from the appellant's witness statement -
             but the judge was fully entitled to find that he did not  have
             sole responsibility.


         16.  It is difficult to see how given that the  appellant,  who  is
             not working and who lives in the same flat at the child  would
             not have a parental relationship with  her  and  it  would  be
             difficult to come to any conclusion other than that  it  would
             not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom.  I therefore consider that the provisions of  Section
             117B(6)(a) and (b) are met and I consider that the  fact  that
             the judge did not make a clear finding on that  point  was  an
             error of law.


         17.  I therefore set aside the decision of the judge in the  First-
             tier.  I consider that there should be a  further  hearing  to
             ascertain to consider the application of Section 117B in  this
             case.


         Directions


         1.   The decision in the First-tier is set aside.


         2.   There will be a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal at which
             both the appellant and the respondent may produce any evidence
             which they consider is relevant to the issue of whether or not
             the appellant is exercising parental  responsibility  for  his
             daughter here.


         3.   Both parties must, at least 14 days before the hearing of  the
             appeal, serve skeleton arguments relating to  the  application
             of Section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
             Act 2002 in this case."

2.   At the renewed hearing before me on 26 May  2016  I  heard  submissions
    from both parties.  Ms Ahmad referred to the terms of the  judgment  in
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  in  which  Lord  Justice  Elias  had
    referred to the provisions of Section 117A and 117B of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in particular to the provisions  of
    sub-Section (6) of the Section 117C.  It was the  submission  initially
    of Ms Ahmad that that judgment  indicated  that  when  considering  the
    provisions of Section 117B(6)  and  in  particular  the  provisions  in
    subparagraph (6)(b) a proportionality exercise should be undertaken  as
    to whether or not the parent could be removed.  In reply  Mr  Plowright
    on behalf of  the  appellant  referred  not  only  to  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions but also to the  determination  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SF and Others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT
    00120 (IAC) which considered the terms  of  the  IDI  and  reached  the
    conclusion that where a British  citizen  child  was  involved  it  was
    appropriate that a non-criminal parent should be allowed to remain.

3.   I have considered the terms of sub-Section (6)(b) of  Section  117B  of
    the NIAA 2002.  That reads:-

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

4.   As I stated in my decision  setting  aside  the  determination  in  the
    First-tier  it would not be reasonable to expect this  child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  I consider that that is  self-evident  given  that
    should this child leave Britain her mother would not be able to  follow
    and the child, who is British, would not be able to  benefit  from  her
    British nationality and would be separated from her main carer.  It  is
    also incontrovertible that the appellant has  a  parental  relationship
    with this qualifying child and that has  not  been  questioned  by  the
    respondent.  Although the mother  of  the  child  and  her  own  mother
    attended the hearing they  were  not  required  to  give  evidence.   I
    consider that the terms of Section 117B(6) are clear and  there  is  no
    proportionality exercise which is set out in that  Section.   While  Ms
    Ahmad referred to the issue of the term "reasonable" in sub-Section (b)
    that is a term that qualifies the  expectation  that  the  child  could
    leave the United Kingdom.  It is not a term that qualifies the issue of
    the removal or the  expectation  that  the  non-British  parent  should
    leave.

5.   I am fortified in my conclusion when I consider not only the  terms  of
    the Immigration Directorate Instructions family migration: Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0(b) of August 2015 and in particular Section 11.2.3 of those
    Immigration Directorate Instructions.  That Section is set out  in  the
    determination in SF and Others.  It is clear from the  IDIs  as  indeed
    interpreted by the Tribunal in that case that where there is a  British
    citizen child the person exercising a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship, as is the case here,  is  someone  for  whom  the  public
    interest does not require their removal.  That is the case  here.   The
    public interest does not require the removal of the  appellant  and  it
    follows from that that this appeal should be allowed.

6.   No anonymity direction is made.

Decision.
This appeal is allowed.




Signed        [pic]                     Date 14 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
