
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12598/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th March 2018                               |On 15th March 2018            |
|                                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                  ANKU PUN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, of Counsel, instructed by Sam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born in 1987.  She  applied  for
       entry clearance to come to the UK as the dependent  adult  child  of
       her mother, Mrs Krishna Kumari Pun, who is settled in the UK and  is
       the widow of a former Gurkha  Soldier.  Her  application  for  entry
       clearance was refused on 18th November 2015. Her appeal against  the
       decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 16th May 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in the findings  relating
       to dependency and also in failing to make clear findings relating to
       family life and Article 8 ECHR.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. It is argued in the grounds of appeal that the  appellant  had  only
       been separated from her mother and  sponsor  for  a  period  of  six
       months at the date of decision, as the appellant's mother arrived in
       the UK  with  indefinite  leave  to  enter  on  6th  May  2015.  The
       application was made on 13th October 2015, and was refused  on  18th
       November 2015. In these circumstances it is argued that family  life
       existed between them and that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
       in making a decision that failed to consider whether there was  such
       family life. The Court of Appeal case of Rai  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320
       clearly indicates it will be a key error of law to fail to  consider
       this issue.

    5. In oral submissions Mr Jaisri argued that there had been  a  failure
       to look at whether there was real, committed  and  effective  family
       life, as  required  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rai.  Mr  Jaisri
       criticised the conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal  with  respect
       to the financial aspect of dependency as he said that  the  evidence
       was consistent with the appellant being a financially  dependent  of
       her mother. She had not been asked to comment at the hearing on  the
       other people who  had  used  her  mother's  bank  account,  and  the
       analysis which led to the conclusion that the appellant was  working
       was not sound. Mr Jaisri accepted that it  was  reasonable  for  the
       First-tier Tribunal to conclude that the sponsor did not know  where
       the appellant lived as she had referred to a tenancy agreement where
       as the appellant had given a different address on  the  application,
       but insisted ultimately the accommodation picture was clear  on  the
       evidence before the First-tier.

    6. Mr Jaisri argued that family life ought to have been  found  as  the
       sponsor had funded the appellant's studies before travelling to  the
       UK and as the sponsor and appellant had lived together at all  times
       bar her period in Japan for studies and  had  financially  supported
       her prior to leaving for the UK. It was only a period  of  6  months
       before the appellant applied to join  her  mother,  and  since  this
       application there was evidence of financial transfers, of  telephone
       contact and a one month visit in March 2016.

    7. Mr Duffy argued that  the  case  had  been  put  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in terms of the appellant being dependent on her mother and
       the mother having made all the major  decisions  in  her  life.  The
       First-tier Tribunal had  made  rational  findings  on  the  evidence
       before it given that this was what was said to be the case.  It  was
       rational to find that this was not the case when the sponsor did not
       know where the appellant lived, despite the issue being put  to  her
       at the hearing. It was also rational to find that  the  totality  of
       evidence did not show that the sponsor fully supported the appellant
       financially when she was not aware of her expenses such as rent, and
       when the documentary evidence was not demonstrative of this. Lack of
       such basic practical knowledge was also a  rational  basis  to  find
       that although there was regular contact  there  was  not  more  than
       normal social/emotional ties between the appellant and the sponsor.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. It was accepted that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
       of the Immigration Rules for adult  dependent  relatives.  The  only
       question was  therefore  whether  the  freestanding  application  of
       Article 8 ECHR permitted the appellant to succeed in her appeal, see
       paragraph 16 of the decision.

    9. It is accepted by both parties, and myself, that  if  engagement  of
       Article 8(1) ECHR was found, and that thus if there was a finding of
       family life between the  appellant  and  sponsor,  that  the  appeal
       should have been be allowed in view of  the  historic  injustice  to
       Gurkhas  as  a  refusal  of  entry   clearance   would,   in   these
       circumstance, be disproportionate. The sole  question  is  therefore
       whether there were legal errors in relation to this assessment.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal identifies that the first issue  is  whether
       family life exists  between  the  appellant  and  her  sponsor,  see
       paragraph 40 of the  decision.  There  is  also  a  legally  correct
       direction that whether family life existed should be assessed on the
       particular facts of the case in accordance with Ghising (family life
       - adults) [2012] UKUT 160 in the same paragraph.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal clearly had in mind that the  appellant  and
       sponsor had only been separated for  six  months  at  the  point  of
       application for entry clearance  bar  a  period  of  time  when  the
       appellant had studied in Japan in 2013, as part of the chronology of
       the case see paragraph 44 of the decision. It  is  accepted  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal that there is evidence of some payments  between
       the sponsor and appellant, and also that it was likely that they had
       been in regular contact by telephone, see paragraphs 53  and  54  of
       the decision.

   12. The First-tier Tribunal looked in a rational and legally correct way
       for evidence that supported the contention that family life  existed
       between the appellant and sponsor because the sponsor took all major
       decisions in the appellant's life,  as  set  out  in  the  sponsor's
       statement at paragraph 26, see paragraph 46 of the decision. In this
       context the fact that the sponsor did not know where  the  appellant
       lived and could  give  no  details  of  how  she  budgeted  for  the
       appellant or how the appellant gained access to the  sponsor's  bank
       account, see paragraphs  46  and  47  of  the  decision,  formed  an
       entirely rational  basis  for  the  decision  that  any  contact  or
       financial support which was shown by the  documentary  evidence  did
       not show the contended  financial  or  emotional  dependency  beyond
       normal adult  ties  had  existed  at  the  point  of  the  sponsor's
       departure to the UK and endured beyond that time.

   13. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal were therefore  proper  ones
       that the appellant had not shown the sponsor to be  providing  real,
       committed and  proper  support  sufficient  to  show  the  level  of
       financial and emotional dependency which constituted family life.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  13th March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







