
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12696/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3rd November 2017                     |On 13th November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MISS MEITAL TZABRI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Oyediran (legal Representative from Chris
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  against  a
    Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Broe.  Following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor  House  on  24th  January  2017,  in  a  Decision  and   Reasons
    promulgated on 13th February 2017 Judge Broe dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to grant her leave  to
    remain under the long residence provisions and on Human Rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Israel who entered the  UK  on  17th  May
    2005 with leave to enter as a visitor. She left the UK on  9th  October
    2005 and returned on 26th  January  2006  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    student. She was then granted further leave  to  remain  as  a  student
    which finally expired on 30th November 2009. She then applied  for  and
    obtained an EEA  residence  card  as  the  unmarried  partner  of  Miss
    Amandine Grenier, a French national. That card had an  expiry  date  of
    24th May 2015. Her long residence application was submitted on 22nd May
    2015.

 3. Her application relied upon her presence as the family member of an EEA
    national exercising treaty rights who, she said,  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights as a worker from 24th April 2010 to 24th May 2015 working
    at a restaurant.

 4. The Secretary of State asked the appellant to provide evidence  of  her
    EEA national Sponsor's employment which she failed to do. The Secretary
    of State then gave the appellant a further opportunity to  provide  the
    evidence but all that was provided dated back to 2009 and 2010.

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant's  evidence
    was that her  relationship  with  Ms  Grenier  ended  when  Ms  Grenier
    returned to France in 2012.

 6. The Judge found that after  2012  when  Ms  Grenier  left  the  UK  the
    appellant no longer had a right to be in the UK. The Judge  also  found
    that when making her application, in saying that Miss Grenier was still
    exercising treaty rights until 24th May 2015, the appellant  had  lied.
    At paragraph 26 the Judge said:-

         "I note that in her application the appellant said that Ms  Grenier
         was still exercising treaty rights in this country on 24 May  2015.
         That was not true and she knew that it was not true. Her attempt to
         deflect the blame onto her adviser does her little credit. The fact
         is that she submitted an application which  she  knew  contained  a
         lie.  That  she  described  herself  as  single   provides   little
         mitigation."

 7. At paragraph 27 the Judge went on to say this:-

         "The problem was  highlighted  when  the  respondent  wrote  on  14
         September 2015 affording her the  opportunity  to  provide  further
         evidence of the exercise treaty rights by Ms  Grenier.  Instead  of
         taking the opportunity to put the cards on the table at that  stage
         she instructed her solicitors to write  to  the  respondent  saying
         that she had been "unable to complete evidence requested  from  you
         in your letter dated 14 September 2015 as she is waiting on HMRC to
         provide her partner's  employment  history."  It  seems  that  some
         additional documentary evidence was provided with a further  letter
         which is not before me. It is clear that the appellant was prepared
         to maintain the facade necessary, as she saw  it,  to  support  the
         application. This casual recourse to dishonesty does her no  credit
         and it inevitably affects my assessment of the rest of the evidence
         in this case."

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this was  granted  purely
    on the basis that the Judge's conclusion that she was dishonest,  which
    affected  the   entirety   of   the   findings,   in   particular   the
    proportionality exercise when considering Article 8 failed to take into
    account a letter from her then legal advisers to the Secretary of State
    dated 26th October 2016 which would have shown that she  had  not  been
    dishonest. A copy of that letter was attached to  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 9. The copy of that letter provided with the application for permission to
    appeal is not  signed  and  indicates  to  the  Home  Office  that  the
    appellant's relationship with her EEA partner broke down in 2012.

10. It is clear that it was that letter, which it  was  claimed  the  judge
    failed to take into account, was the sole justification for  the  grant
    of permission to appeal. I have made a careful search of the Tribunal's
    file and there is no other copy of that letter on the file or contained
    in the respondent's bundle or indeed the appellant's bundle. There  are
    other letters from those representatives and I note that all  of  those
    are signed.

11. I asked Mr Nath to make a careful search of the Home Office file and he
    had no copy of the letter either.

12. I have examined the record of proceedings of the hearing  before  Judge
    Broe and there is no reference in that to  a  letter  of  October  2016
    either. I am led therefore  to  the  inevitable  conclusion  that  that
    letter was not in fact before the Tribunal. If it was  not  before  the
    Tribunal then the Tribunal cannot be criticised for failing to take  it
    into account and the Judge was therefore entitled to find, as  he  did,
    that the appellant had acted dishonestly in seeking to suggest she  was
    residing in accordance with the EEA Regulations for several years after
    her partner had left the UK.

13. For the above reasons I find the first-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an
    error of law in its determination of this appeal.

Notice of Decision


    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


          There was no application for an  anonymity  order  and  I  see  no
reason to make one.




Signed                              Date 9th November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


