
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/12275/2016
     hu/12281/2016
     hu/12283/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd August 2018                           |On 9th October 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                 Tracey [A]
                                    [R S]
                                    [A S]
                     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not retained)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Grubb
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first Appellant born on 30th March 1984 is the mother of the second
    and third Appellants born on  8th  June  2010  and  10th  January  2007
    respectively.  They are all citizens of  Jamaica.   The  Appellant  had
    made an application for her and her children to remain in the UK on the
    basis of their family and private life.  That application made  on  2nd
    April 2014 was refused by the  Respondent  on  26th  April  2016.   The
    Appellant then appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal O'Rourke sitting at Newport on  25th  August
    2017.  He dismissed the appeals.  Application for permission to  appeal
    was made and that application was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Martins on 15th March 2018.  It was said that it was arguable that  the
    judge had failed to consider the third Appellant's appeal  in  relation
    to paragraph 276ADE or the application at paragraph EX.1(a) and  failed
    to consider the third Appellant's entitlement to  British  citizenship.
    Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal to firstly decide whether
    an error of law had been made by the First-tier and  the  matter  comes
    before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants

 2. Ms Grubb submitted that there had been no consideration by the judge of
    the second Appellant when the judge had considered matters under  EX.1.
    It was further said that the judge had failed to take into account  the
    length of residence in the UK of the third Appellant given that he  had
    been in the UK long enough to be entitled to British citizenship as  of
    right.  It was said that in this respect the judge had failed  to  give
    anxious scrutiny when he had considered matters outside the Rules under
    Article 8 and that further there had been no  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children  when  considering  matters  outside  of  the
    Rules.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 3. Mr Howells referred me to the  Respondent's  reply  letter  dated  27th
    April 2018 and provided submissions in  line  with  the  points  raised
    within that reply letter.

 4. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    made and the documentary evidence.  I now provide that decision with my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 5. The judge needed to consider  the  position  of  the  three  Appellants
    firstly within the Immigration Rules and  thereafter  it  is  necessary
    under Article 8 outside of the Rules.  Having set out a summary of  the
    evidence and the submissions made, that is what the judge did.

 6. In examination of the Appellant's cases under the Rules  the  judge  at
    paragraph 25 had looked at the first Appellant's position as  a  parent
    under EX.1.  Although the judge erred by referring  to  EX.1(b)  rather
    than EX.1(a), no point was or is taken on that matter as  it  is  clear
    the judge looked at the relevant law under EX.1(a).  He found  that  it
    would not be unreasonable for the third Appellant  (the  child  of  the
    first Appellant) to leave the UK.  The  judge  is  criticised  for  not
    considering the second Appellant  in  that  assessment  under  EX.1(a).
    Such criticism is misplaced.  EX.1(a)(cc) refers to the  child  who  is
    not a British citizen having lived in the UK continuously for at  least
    seven years immediately preceding the date of application.  The date of
    application is identified by the judge at paragraph  1  was  2nd  April
    2014.  The second Appellant was born on 8th June 2010 and therefore had
    not lived in the UK for seven years prior to the  date  of  application
    and accordingly did not fall within the terms of EX.1(a).  In terms  of
    the third Appellant when the judge did consider that case  he  provided
    an adequacy of reasons why return to Jamaica would not be unreasonable.

 7. He had considered the position of the first Appellant under  the  terms
    of private life namely  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  and  had  found  for  an
    adequacy of reasons given that it would not  be  unreasonable  for  the
    first Appellant to return to Jamaica.  It is true that he  did  not  as
    perhaps he should have, also  considered  the  position  of  the  third
    Appellant under paragraph  276ADE.   The  second  Appellant  was  again
    excluded from consideration because of paragraph 276ADE(1).

 8. However the judge having concluded the Appellants did not  fall  within
    the Immigration Rules had looked at the case of the Appellants  outside
    of the Rules under Article 8 and had applied the  appropriate  test  in
    Razgar.  He had also, as he was bound to do, considered all aspects  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.   In  that  regard  he  had  specifically
    considered Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act at paragraph 30(vi).  It  is
    clear that he was aware that at the date of hearing both the second and
    third Appellants had been living in the UK for  over  seven  years  and
    therefore both qualified for consideration under Section 117B(vi).   He
    applied the correct test required.  He  has  specifically  referred  at
    paragraph 36 to the guidance in MA (Pakistan) where it  was  said  that
    the court should not simply focus on the child but have regard  to  the
    wider public interest consideration  and  he  had  found  for  adequate
    reasons given that there were "powerful reasons"  for  considering  the
    wider public interest.

 9. He had further at paragraph 30(vii) had regard to the best interests of
    the children, noting correctly that  it  was  a  primary  but  not  the
    principal factor when balancing that against the public  interest.   He
    had quoted from the guidance given in EV (Philippines) and a  reference
    to AE (Algeria) [2014] EWCA Civ 653.  His quotation from  paragraph  60
    of EV (Philippines) was appropriate to the facts  of  the  case  before
    him.  He  thereafter  listed  factors  he  regarded  as  relevant  when
    applying the guidance.  Those were factors open to him to consider  and
    based on the evidence.

10. The central and significant part of the submissions made on  behalf  of
    the third Appellant was the judge  should  have  recognised  and  taken
    account of the fact that the third Appellant, given the length of  stay
    in the UK, was entitled to British  citizenship.   That  submission  is
    somewhat  misconceived.  Firstly,  and  as  a  side  issue,  it  was  a
    submission that did not appear within the Appellant's  bundle  prepared
    by solicitors nor raised by the first Appellant herself at the hearing.
     Importantly, whether a person is a British citizen or not is a  matter
    of fact.  Had the third Appellant been a  British  citizen  then  there
    would have been no case to consider in respect of that Appellant.   The
    third Appellant may well have been entitled to apply  for  registration
    as a British citizen under the British Nationality Act 1981.  Had  such
    an application been made it was at the Home Office  discretion  whether
    to grant under Section 3 of the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.   Any
    decision to refuse (which may have been unlikely) would not  have  been
    appealable to the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly the third Appellant
    was not a British  citizen,  the  initial  decision  to  grant  or  not
    citizenship was not for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  make  and  he
    would not have had any jurisdiction to hear an  appeal  if  citizenship
    had been refused.  The theoretical right  of  the  third  Appellant  to
    apply for citizenship therefore was not a relevant factor.  The  length
    of the third Appellant's time in the UK was  the  relevant  factor  and
    that was known by the judge and dealt with in his decision.

11. It was an error for the judge to have  failed  to  look  at  the  third
    Appellant's position under paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the  Rules,  however
    it was not material as he had considered the test of reasonableness  of
    return in the same way in his consideration of the case outside of  the
    Rules under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and had  provided  adequate
    reasoning based on the same  factual  matrix  indicating  no  different
    decision would have been reached had he  looked  at  the  matter  under
    paragraph 276ADE(iv).

Decision

12. No error of law was made by the judge in this case  and  I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
