

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/12764/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9th October 2017                        |On 19th October 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                           Johnson Oluwole Fadire
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim instructed by Chris Alexander Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    Secretary of State to grant him further leave to remain on  family  and
    private life grounds.  The appellant's claim relied on his relationship
    with his two daughters, both of whom  were  over  18  at  the  date  of
    hearing. The appellant is a Nigerian citizen.



Background

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in 1983 as a visitor, age  27,
    and overstayed when his visa ran out.  He was deported  to  Nigeria  in
    1994.  He claims to have re-entered the  United  Kingdom  illegally  in
    1998, in breach of his deportation order, and remained  without  leave.
    His case is that he came back to resume involvement with his  daughters
    because he was concerned about them.

 3. In 2013, the appellant was granted  3  years'  discretionary  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his relationship with  his  daughters.    On  25
    January 2016,  before  that  leave  expired,  he  applied  for  further
    discretionary  leave,  again  based  on  his  relationship   with   his
    daughters.  His younger daughter was still a minor when the application
    was made, but his elder daughter was then an adult.

 4. The appellant could not provide any evidence of his involvement in  his
    younger daughter's life because his relationship  with  his  ex-partner
    was very strained and he told the respondent  that  'it  has  therefore
    been difficult for him to be as  involved  in  his  younger  daughter's
    life'.  The appellant produced no residence or  contact  order  from  a
    United Kingdom Court, and no other evidence of  direct  access  to  the
    younger daughter.

 5. On 3 May 2016, by which time both of  the  appellant's  daughters  were
    over 18, the respondent refused to extend his  discretionary  leave  on
    the basis that the appellant's elder daughter was living  independently
    and there was no credible evidence of any ongoing relationship  between
    him and his younger daughter. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 6. The appellant told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he  was  educated
    to secondary school level in Nigeria and had worked there in  the  late
    1970s, doing surveying for a construction company. The appellant's  90-
    year old father still lives in Nigeria: the appellant's case is that he
    is not in contact with any other family members there.

 7. The appellant's evidence was that he had been  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a care assistant, and that he had obtained HND and financial
    qualifications during his time here.  He said that he had heard that it
    was difficult to find employment in Nigeria, but produced  no  evidence
    to support that assertion.

 8. The appellant's elder daughter gave evidence at the hearing.  She is at
    Birmingham City University, and the  appellant  helps  to  support  her
    financially there.  In her witness statement, the elder  daughter  said
    this:-

         "3.   I  am  currently  studying  accounting  at  Birmingham   City
             University.

         4.   I see him regularly and  he  has  always  been  supporting  me
             financially.

         5.   My dad will also be supporting me to fund my Master's  once  I
             graduate.

         6.   I love my father very much and I  want  him  to  stay  in  the
             United Kingdom.  As he hold [sic] a very important position in
             my life.  It would be devastating for  me  should  he  not  be
             allowed to remain in this country as I would not  be  able  to
             see him regularly.  He has  always  been  there  for  me  both
             physically and mentally since I  was  small.   He  has  always
             given me every support any father would give  his  child.   He
             has  financially  supported  throughout  my  studies  and  his
             support has been invaluable.

         7.   This is a crucial time for me and we  will  need  his  ongoing
             support.

         8.   For this reason I beg the judge to let our father stay in  the
             United Kingdom."

 9. The appellant produced bank evidence of regular payments to  his  elder
    daughter to support her in her University studies.  In  oral  evidence,
    the elder daughter  said  that  the  appellant  funded  her  University
    accommodation and topped up her student loan, and that she regarded him
    as a role model.  Her evidence was that they were very close.  She  had
    also written a letter of support, which she  asked  to  be  treated  as
    coming from both sisters.  If the appellant was  returned  to  Nigeria,
    she would be reluctant to visit him there,  as  'it  is  not  a  stable
    place'  and  although  she  would  continue  communication   with   the
    appellant, it would not be  the  same  as  having  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. The evidence concerning the appellant's relationship with  his  younger
    daughter is much  weaker.   The  appellant's  former  partner  and  his
    younger  daughter  refused  to  provide  any  witness  statement,  oral
    evidence, or medical evidence to support  the  appeal.   There  was  no
    letter from the younger daughter and the appellant's evidence was  that
    he did not see  her  much.  The  elder  daughter  explained  in  cross-
    examination that her sister was aware of today's hearing but was unable
    to attend because she was in the middle of examinations: there  was  no
    direct confirmation of that from the younger daughter  or  her  mother.
    The elder daughter said that from the money which she received from her
    father, he sometimes told her to pass some on to  her  younger  sister.
    The elder daughter said in her evidence that she was unsure  how  often
    the appellant saw her sister but that she "thought that they spoke once
    in a while".

11. The entirety of the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning is contained  in  4
    paragraphs at [35]-[39]:

         "35. I find that the Respondent was  right  to  conclude  that  the
         Appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
         through the parent route.  He has  a  good  relationship  with  his
         elder daughter but she is over 18 and lives independently.  He  was
         unable to show any relationship with his younger daughter  and  his
         explanation for the difficulties in getting documentation would not
         explain why she did not write a letter of support, which would have
         required minimal effort.  He does not qualify, therefore, under the
         parent route.

         36.  I find that there are no special elements of dependency beyond
         normal emotional ties with his elder daughter.

         37.  I find that removal from the United Kingdom would  not  be  in
         breach of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  as  the  only
         route which applies to him under that provision is that there would
         be very significant obstacles to his integration into  Nigeria.   I
         find that there would not be such obstacles.  He is  familiar  with
         Nigeria, has previously worked  and  studied  there,  and  has  the
         benefit of the qualifications  he  obtained  while  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

         38.  I go on to consider whether removal from  the  United  Kingdom
         would constitute an interference with his right to  a  private  and
         family life under Article 8.  I find that it would be a  breach  of
         this right.  I must then consider  whether  the  interruption  with
         this right is proportionate, taking into account  the  respondent's
         legitimate interest to maintain immigration controls.   I find that
         it would be proportionate to remove the appellant, as he  would  be
         able to maintain the relationship with his  children  from  Nigeria
         and carry on his private and family life in Nigeria."

Upper Tribunal appeal

12. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, arguing that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning was inadequate and the Article  8  ECHR
    assessment flawed  thereby.   The  grounds  of  appeal  challenged  the
    finding of fact that the elder daughter was not Kugathas  dependent  on
    the appellant, arguing that the finding at He relied on MK v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]
    UKUT 00641 (IAC).  Permission to appeal was granted on that basis.

Rule 24 Reply

13. The respondent in her Rule 24 reply says this:

    "...3.   The findings have to be read in the context  of  the  evidence
         presented and it is submitted that the basis for the  determination
         has been clearly set out in that the detail  in  the  evidence  was
         insufficient to establish family life as the  eldest  daughter  was
         living independently and there was insufficient  evidence  (on  the
         evidence presented) to establish  family  life  with  the  youngest
         daughter, bearing in mind the limited level of contact."

14. That is the basis on which the appeal  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Discussion

15. I had the benefit of oral submissions from Mr Karim for the  appellant,
    and Mr Melvin for the respondent.  I have had  regard  to  all  of  the
    material and arguments before me.  I accept that it  is  not  necessary
    for a First-tier Tribunal Judge to  address  every  argument  or  every
    factor which weighed  in  their  decision.   The  correct  approach  to
    questions of fact remains that set out in R (Iran) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

16. As regards reasons generally, I have had regard to the guidance of  the
    Upper Tribunal in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641
    (IAC), summarised in the judicial headnote thus:

         "(1) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
         reasons for a tribunal's decision.

           (2)  If  a  tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
         incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be  worth  no  weight
         whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and  for
         such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a
         witness was not believed or that a document was afforded no  weight
         is unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

17. It is not always necessary for there to  be  extensive  reasons,  in  a
    plain case, but the reasons given must always be adequate.  I am guided
    by the recent decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  AS  (Iran)  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1539 at [26]
    in the judgment of Lord Justice Irwin, with whom  Lord  Justice  Moylan
    and Lady Justice Rafferty agreed:

         "26. In approaching criticism of  reasons  given  by  a  First-tier
         Tribunal,  the  Respondent  correctly  reminds  us   to   avoid   a
         requirement of perfection. As Brooke LJ observed in the  course  of
         his decision in R (Iran) v The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982, "unjustified complaints" as to  an
         alleged failure to give adequate reasons are all too frequent.  The
         obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons in sufficient detail to
         show the principles on which the Tribunal has acted and the reasons
         that have led to the decision. Such reasons need not be  elaborate,
         and do not need to address every argument  or  every  factor  which
         weighed in the decision. If a Tribunal has not expressly  addressed
         an argument, but if there are grounds on which the  argument  could
         properly have been rejected, it should be assumed that the Tribunal
         acted on such grounds. It is sufficient that the  critical  reasons
         to the decision are recorded. In respect of each of  these  grounds
         of  complaint,  the  Secretary  of  State  submits  that  perfectly
         acceptable  reasoning  was  set  out  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision."

18. In this appeal, however, there is no proper reasoning for  the  Judge's
    rejection of the claimed Kugathas dependency between the elder daughter
    and the appellant. I do not find myself able to assume, on the evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that the Judge properly considered  the
    evidence about  the  support  received  and  dependency  of  the  elder
    daughter on her father.    On  the  contrary,  having  regard  to  that
    evidence and in particular given the previous grant of leave to  remain
    by reason of the appellant's relationship with both his daughters while
    they were not yet adults, a Kugathas analysis of the evidence  relating
    to the elder daughter was essential and the failure properly to  reason
    that part of the First-tier Tribunal's decision is a material error  of
    law.

19. I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision, with no finding
    of fact or credibility to be preserved, and remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

DECISION

20. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.
    The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on a date to be fixed.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Dated:        18 October 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


