
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12528/2019
                                                               HU/12520/2019
                                                               HU/12531/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on          |
|On 3 February 2020                   |On 11 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    r F M
                                     N M
                               I B M (a minor)
                                   (india)
                           (anonymity order MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Farhan Asghar, Counsel with by Asghar & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of RFM, NM, or  the  child  IBM  the  subject  of  these
proceedings or publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to
lead to the identification of them or of  any  member  of  their  family  in
connection with these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


 1. The appellants are a family of Indian origin, a husband  and  wife  who
    are both Indian citizens, and their son, born in the United Kingdom  on
    17 February 2017.  His birth has not  been  registered  at  the  Indian
    Embassy in London or elsewhere.

 2. This appeal concerns whether his parents' failure to register the third
    appellant's birth means that he is a stateless person and  whether,  in
    that case, they are all entitled to leave  to  remain  on  private  and
    family  life  grounds  with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and Article 8 ECHR.

Background

 3. The first two  appellants  came  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the  second
    appellant with a Tier 4  student  visa  in  March  2007.   The  parties
    married in India on 14 August 2009.  The first  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom in July 2010 as the second appellant's Tier 4  dependant
    spouse.

 4. The first and second appellants last had extant leave on 27  July  2015
    and  since  then  have  made  a  number  of  further  submissions   and
    applications, seeking to regularise their status, without success.

 5. The third appellant was born to the first appellant on 1 February  2017
    and is three years old.  On 9 July 2019, following a  compromise  of  a
    judicial review, the respondent made a decision refusing them leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  The statelessness issue in relation to
    the third appellant is not raised in the refusal  letter,  nor  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal hearing

 6. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Woolley,  in  a  very  full  and  carefully
    reasoned decision signed on  18  September  2019,  concluded  that  the
    respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain was lawful and did  not
    breach the appellants' rights under Article 8 ECHR.

 7. The appellants were represented before the First-tier Tribunal, as  was
    the respondent, but neither party argued  the  statelessness  question,
    nor drew to the Tribunal's attention the judgment of Mr C M G Ockelton,
    Vice-President of the Upper Tribunal, sitting as a  Deputy  High  Court
    Judge in MK  (A  Child  By  Her  Litigation  Friend  CAE),  R  (On  the
    Application Of) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    EWHC 1365 (Admin).

 8. On receipt of the First-tier Tribunal decision, the appellants appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal, raising statelessness for the first time.

Permission to appeal

 9. The grounds of appeal asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in finding that the third appellant was an Indian citizen, and referred
    to MK  (India).   They  asserted  that  the  third  appellant  remained
    stateless and that since the third appellant had not been shown to have
    any legal right to enter India, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  he
    directed himself correctly might have reached a different  decision  on
    the  proportionality  and/or  the  reasonableness   of   removing   the
    appellants  to  India  as  a  family,  with  reference   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, Article 8 ECHR outside the  Rules,  and  or
    the third appellant's section 55 best interests.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  in
    the following terms:

         "The Judge  is  deserving  of  considerable  sympathy  because  the
         authority of MK (India) Statelessness [2017] EWHC 1365 (Admin)  may
         not have been drawn to his attention at the hearing.   However,  in
         the light of that authority, the third-named appellant was arguably
         stateless, and in failing to accord weight  to  his  statelessness,
         the  Judge  arguably  failed  to  take  into  account  a   relevant
         consideration when considering the proportionality of the  decision
         under appeal.

         The grounds accordingly disclosed an arguable error of law but  for
         which the outcome of the appeal might  have  been  different.   The
         application for permission is granted."

11. That is the basis on which this appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal.



Discussion

12. The nationality of the third appellant is relevant to  the  outcome  of
    this appeal and is a question of  both  fact  and  law.   Although  the
    decision in MK (India) was not drawn to the attention of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, he is taken to know the law.

13. Paragraphs 36 and 37 of MK (India) say this:-

         "36. The conclusions from what is set out  above  are  as  follows.
             For the purposes of  the  statutory  provisions  in  issue,  a
             person is stateless if  he  has  no  nationality.  Ability  to
             acquire a nationality is irrelevant  for  these  purposes.   A
             child born on or after 3  December  2004,  outside  India,  of
             parents at least one of whom is an Indian  national,  and  who
             has not been to  India,  is  not  an  Indian  national  unless
             registration of the birth has taken place in  accordance  with
             the provisions of the Citizenship Act 1955 (India) as amended.
              If the child has no other nationality, the child is stateless
             for the purposes of paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to  the  British
             Nationality Act 1981 and, if the other  requirements  of  that
             paragraph are met, is entitled to be registered as  a  British
             citizen.  If, therefore, C's birth had  on  the  date  of  the
             decision under challenge not been registered, she is  entitled
             to British Citizenship.

         37.  I recognise of course that this conclusion  opens  an  obvious
             route to abuse. Indeed, the facts of the present case might be
             said to be an example of abuse. M and F are both  overstayers.
             Both have sought, and been refused, further leave.  They  have
             preferred to allow C to be stateless  all  her  life  to  date
             rather  than  to  register  her  birth   and   obtain   Indian
             nationality for her.  Yet C's  right  to  British  nationality
             (and the consequence that she will not be or become a national
             of India) will now immeasurably improve M and F's prospects of
             being  allowed  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.   But  the
             Secretary of State's position in this case on  the  one  hand,
             and the authorities on the other,  necessarily  lead  to  this
             result."

14. The facts of this case are on all fours with those in MK (India).   The
    third appellant is a stateless person and there was no evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal or  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  show  that  as  a
    stateless person he can enter India with his Indian citizen parents.

15. The third appellant is entitled to be registered as a British  citizen.
    On that basis, the proposed removal to  India,  even  if  it  could  be
    achieved, is disproportionate.

16. There is no alternative but to set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and allow the appeals of all three appellants,  as  the  child
    appellant cannot be expected to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without
    his parents.

17. The First-tier Tribunal decision was not anonymised, but given that  it
    turns on the circumstances of the third appellant, who is still only  3
    years old, the Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order.

DECISION

18. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.


   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake  the  decision  by  allowing
   these appeals.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     10 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


