
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12231/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2018                           |On 12 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 LINDA ANTWI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Talacchi, Counsel instructed by Waran & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
     of First-tier Tribunal Judge M. R. Oliver, promulgated  on  11  October
     2017, in which he allowed Miss. Antwi's appeal against the Respondent's
     decision to refuse leave to enter as the spouse of the Sponsor.


  2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  refer  to  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer as the  Respondent,  and  to  Miss.  Antwi  as  the  Appellant,
     reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "The grounds disclose arguable errors of law.  The  Judge  arguably
         fails to give adequate reasons for concluding that the relationship
         is a genuine and subsisting one and engage  with  the  Respondent's
         contentions in the notice of decision given that he identifies that
         the evidence from the Appellant was not substantial.  Further,  the
         Judge arguably fails to properly address the public interest in the
         light of the finding that the Appellant failed to satisfy the Rules
         and arguably further failed to consider whether family  life  could
         reasonably be continued elsewhere."


 4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    announced that the decision involved the making of a material error  of
    law and would be set aside.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Duffy submitted that the Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
    for his findings.  Paragraph [11] was the only paragraph where  reasons
    were given.  It was difficult to see the Judge's reasoning for allowing
    the appeal.


 6. Mr. Talacchi submitted that the Sponsor had given  oral  evidence.   He
    had given evidence in chief and had been cross-examined.  The Judge had
    referred to the onus being on the  Appellant  and  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  Taking the decision as a whole, the Judge had  accepted
    the evidence of the Sponsor.  He  had  found  the  relationship  to  be
    genuine and subsisting with reference to  the  Sponsor's  communication
    with the Appellant.  This evidence was consistent  with  the  Sponsor's
    evidence in his witness statement.  He had found that the Sponsor was a
    credible witness, and therefore the burden of proof had been discharged
    on the balance of probabilities.  He submitted  that  the  Sponsor  had
    impressed the Judge.  Reasons had been given.  Questions had been asked
    about the relationship, and the Sponsor had given reasons  for  why  he
    was not able to visit Ghana more frequently.  This was set out at [6].


 7. The Sponsor had two children in the United  Kingdom  which  is  why  he
    could not return to Ghana.  This added to the  evidence  regarding  the
    genuine and subsisting nature of the relationship.  In relation to  the
    evidence under Appendix FM-SE I was referred  to  paragraphs  [11]  and
    [3].


 8. In the event that the Judge had erred in  failing  to  give  sufficient
    reasons, this was not  material  in  the  context  of  the  case.   The
    Appellant could meet the financial threshold.  The  only  shortfall  in
    the evidence in Appendix FM-SE was that the employers' letters did  not
    show the gross salary.  I was  referred  to  pages  16  to  20  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  Mr. Talacchi accepted that the  decision  did  not
    set this out.


  9.  The  other  issue  relating  to  Appendix  FM-SE  identified  in   the
     Respondent's decision was the bank statements, which did  not  cover  a
     period within 28 days of the application.  He submitted that  this  had
     been rectified in the evidence provided to the First-tier Tribunal.   I
     was referred to pages 232 to 247 of the bundle.  It could  be  inferred
     that the defect referred to in [11] was in relation to  the  employers'
     letters.  He accepted that Appendix FM-SE  was  not  met,  but  it  was
     solely in respect of the employers' letters.  In the  context  of  that
     failure alone, refusal of the  application  was  disproportionate,  and
     interference in family life was disproportionate.


 10. In response Mr. Duffy submitted that the Judge had set out some of  the
     evidence, but it was only in [11] that  any  findings  were  made.   No
     reasons, or inadequate reasons, had been given for  his  findings.   If
     the rules were not met, then the assessment of Article  8  outside  the
     rules was clearly inadequate.  Nowhere had the  Judge  stated  how  the
     Appellant did not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules.   It
     was necessary to read between the lines, and  the  decision  could  not
     stand on that basis.  There was a lack of relevant findings.


Error of law


11. The decision is very short, amounting to only four pages in total.  The
    findings are set out in one paragraph, [11].  This states:


         "No photographic evidence  of  the  appellant's  wedding  has  been
         provided and the  certificate  was  not  in  the  bundle,  but  the
         genuineness  of  the  marriage  has  not  been  questioned  by  the
         respondent.  The public interest in the  maintenance  of  fair  but
         firm immigration is not substantially involved in  cases  where  an
         appellant satisfies the rules.  The reasons why the appellant fails
         to satisfy the rules are simply a shortfall  in  the  documentation
         required under appendix FM-SE to show that he meets  the  financial
         requirements so that the respondent can be satisfied that  he  will
         be able adequately to maintain  his  spouse  on  arrival.   He  has
         clearly shown that he can.  Although the burden of showing that his
         family life is based on a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         his wife  and  the  evidence  produced  in  support  has  not  been
         substantial, he  has  nevertheless  provided  sufficient  financial
         support to her ever since the  application  and  I  find  that  the
         relationship is genuine and subsisting and  the  interference  with
         their family life is disproportionate."


 12. In relation to ground 1, the lack of adequate reasons for  the  finding
     that the relationship was genuine and subsisting, the only reason given
     by  the  Judge  for  finding  that  the  relationship  is  genuine  and
     subsisting is that the Sponsor has provided financial  support  to  the
     Appellant since the application.  It was submitted by Mr. Talacchi that
     the Judge had found the Sponsor to be a credible witness, and  on  this
     basis found the relationship genuine and subsisting, but  there  is  no
     such finding.  The only reason given by the Judge for finding that  the
     relationship  is  genuine  and  subsisting  is  that  the  Sponsor  has
     financially supported the Appellant since the application was made.  He
     acknowledges that there has not been much evidence provided, and  rests
     his finding simply on the financial support.


13. The Judge refers to the evidence of money transfers at [8].   He  notes
    that these all post-dated the application.  It therefore  appears  from
    this that there was no evidence of any  financial  support  before  him
    which  pre-dated  the  application.   It  is  on  the  basis  of  post-
    application evidence of financial assistance alone that the  Judge  has
    based his finding that the relationship was genuine and subsisting.


14. It was further submitted by Mr. Talacchi that the Judge had taken  into
    account the communication between the Appellant and Sponsor, but  there
    is no reference to this at [11].  The Judge has set  out  the  evidence
    from [5] to [8].  However, while there is reference  to  the  "frequent
    telephonic exchanges" at [8], there is no reference to these  exchanges
    at [11], and it cannot be assumed that the Judge has relied on these in
    his findings, especially as he does not set  out  at  [8]  any  detail.
    There is also a reference in [5] to the Sponsor's  evidence  that  they
    spoke every other day,  but  the  Judge  has  nowhere  stated  that  he
    accepted the Sponsor's evidence.   Given  the  fact  that  he  has  not
    referred to the evidence of communication, it appears that he placed no
    reliance on this evidence when making the finding that the relationship
    was genuine and subsisting.


15. The Respondent set out numerous reasons in the decision to refuse entry
    clearance for not being satisfied that the relationship was genuine and
    subsisting.  The evidence as set out by the Judge does not address  the
    issues raised in the Respondent's decision.  Reading the decision as  a
    whole it cannot be assumed that the Judge has taken these other factors
    into account.  The Judge has acknowledged  that  overall  the  evidence
    provided was not substantial.  I find that the Judge has failed to give
    adequate reasons for his finding that the relationship is  genuine  and
    subsisting.


16. Regarding ground 2, and the consideration of the public interest  under
    Article 8, while it was submitted before me that the  only  reason  the
    Appellant did not meet Appendix FM-SE was due to the employers' letters
    not stating the Sponsor's gross salary, it is  not  clear  to  me  from
    considering these letters that this is the  only  information  missing.
    In any event, it was accepted by Mr. Talacchi that  the  Appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE because these  letters  did
    not contain the required information.  However, it is  not  clear  from
    the decision why  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM-SE.  It is not set out at all in  the  decision.   Although
    the deficiencies in the employers' letters are referred to in  the  ECM
    review, they are not referred to in the Judge's  consideration  of  the
    ECM review at [4].


17. In relation  to  the  public  interest  consideration,  the  Judge  has
    referred to the  need  for  "exceptional  circumstances  which  warrant
    consideration of the claim outside the rules" [10], yet he has not  set
    any out.  He has indicated that the  financial  requirements  have  not
    been met, i.e. the immigration rules are not met, but he has  not  then
    done what he states is necessary in [10].  There  is  no  reference  in
    [11] to anything described as exceptional.


18. The Judge states in [11] that "the public interest in  the  maintenance
    of fair but firm immigration is not  substantially  involved  in  cases
    where an appellant satisfies the rules."  This is not such a case.  The
    Judge is  therefore  required  to  do  more  to  explain  why,  in  the
    Appellant's  case,  not  satisfying  the  requirements  of  the   rules
    nevertheless justifies a grant of entry clearance.  He has failed so to
    do.


19. Further, it was submitted at the hearing in relation to the ability  of
    the Sponsor to go and live in Ghana in order to enjoy family life  with
    the Appellant, that he could not do so as he had two young children  in
    the United Kingdom.  They are not referred to at all in paragraph [11].
     There is a brief mention  of  them  in  paragraph  [6].   I  make  the
    observation that, if there are children affected by the decision,  more
    has to be done to consider the situation of any children than a passing
    reference to them in the summary of the evidence.


20. I find that the Judge has erred in failing to give adequate reasons for
    his finding that the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  He has erred  in  failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for why the decision is a disproportionate interference in  the
    Appellant's family life, given his finding that the Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules.


21. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    insufficient for me to remake the appeal.  Therefore given  the  nature
    and extent of the fact-finding necessary to enable this  appeal  to  be
    remade, having regard to the overriding objective, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


 22. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law, and I set the decision aside.


 23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


 24. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 11 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
