
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12504/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2019                     |On 1st May 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    D C S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms T Srindran, Counsel instructed by Crimson Phoenix
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the re-making of the decision in the appeal  of  the  Appellant
    following my earlier decision promulgated on 18 January 2019 in which I
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law when
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  refusal  of
    his human rights claim.  My error of law decision is annexed, below.

 2. In summary, I concluded that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in
    concluding that the Appellant did not have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his baby daughter  DZ,  a  British  citizen.   Having
    found a material error I set out what I considered to be the  two  core
    issues falling to be considered at this resumed hearing.  These are:

      a)  does  the  Appellant  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
         relationship with DZ within the meaning of  section  117B(6)(a)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended;

      b) if he does, is it reasonable to  expect  DZ  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom, with reference to section 117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act;

The evidence before me

 3. In re-making the decision in this case I have had full  regard  to  the
    following sources of evidence:

      a) the Respondent's original appeal bundle under cover of letter dated
         12 June 2018;

      b) the Appellant's original appeal bundle indexed and paginated 1-60;

      c) a supplementary bundle  indexed  and  paginated  1-20  provided  in
         compliance with my previous directions under cover of letter  dated
         12 April 2019.

    The supplementary bundle includes updated witness  statements  for  the
    Appellant and his partner LJ, together  with  supporting  letters  from
    members of LJ's family in the United Kingdom.

The hearing before me

 4. At the outset of the hearing, Mr McGirr confirmed that he had  received
    the Appellant's supplementary bundle and considered it in  the  context
    of the current case law relating to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, in
    particular KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, JG (s 117B(6):  "reasonable  to
    leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072  (IAC)  Rev  1,  and  AB  (Jamaica)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 661.

 5. Mr McGirr then stated the Respondent's position in this appeal in  very
    clear terms: he accepted that the Appellant and LJ are in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship and that the Appellant also has a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with DZ.  He accepted  that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect DZ to leave the United  Kingdom.   Finally,
    he accepted that in light of the previous  two  matters  the  Appellant
    must succeed in his appeal.

 6. In light of Mr McGirr's stated position I did not call on  Ms  Srindran
    for submissions.

Re-making the decision

 7. In light of Mr McGirr's very clear, and in my view properly  considered
    and correct concessions, I conclude that the Appellant's  appeal  falls
    to be allowed with specific reference to section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act.

 8. Although not strictly necessary in light of the Respondent's  position,
    I would add the following observations.  It is  abundantly  clear  from
    the evidence as a whole that the Appellant is and  has  been  for  some
    time in a perfectly genuine and subsisting relationship with LJ.   They
    have cohabited now for a number  of  years,  have  one  child  together
    already and another on the way (LJ is due to give birth to their second
    baby in June of this year).

 9. In my view it was also clear, even on the evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that the Appellant did have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with DZ.  Although she was  still  then  a  young
    baby, it was clear enough that he was a devoted father  and  was  doing
    all he could to care for her in the best way that a new parent can.  As
    matters now stand, almost a year after  DZ's  birth,  the  unchallenged
    evidence clearly shows that he continues to be what has been  described
    as "a hands-on dad".   The  requirement  under  section  117B(6)(a)  is
    satisfied.

10. In relation to the reasonableness test, the  guidance  provided  in  KO
    (Nigeria), together with the conclusions in JG and  their  approval  by
    the Court of Appeal in AB (Jamaica) clearly supports the position taken
    by Mr McGirr.  Whether or not DZ would in fact leave the United Kingdom
    is beside the point and the concession that it would  not  in  fact  be
    reasonable for DZ to leave  this  country,  even  if  that  was  not  a
    realistic prospect, is perfectly sound.

11. At the hearing I made it clear to the Appellant that the success of his
    appeal does not automatically lead to settlement and that  he  must  be
    fully aware that his status in this country will remain precarious  for
    some time to come.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and I have set it aside.

I remake the decision and allow the Appellant's appeal.

Signed        [pic]             Date: 25 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have remade the decision and allowed the appeal and because a  fee  has
been paid or is payable, I have considered  making  a  fee  award  and  have
decided to make  a  reduced  fee  award  of  �70.00.  This  is  because  the
Appellant's case evolved over time and it clearly required consideration  on
appeal.





Signed   [pic]                  Date: 25 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



ANNEX:  ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12504/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2018                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    D C S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms T Srindran, Solicitior from Crimson Phoenix
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup (the judge), promulgated on 19 October  2018,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the
    Respondent, dated 2 October 2017, refusing his human rights claim.

 2. In essence that claim had  been  based  upon  the  Appellant's  alleged
    parental relationship with two  British  citizen  sons  in  the  United
    Kingdom, D and E.  By the time the appeal  came  before  the  judge  in
    October 2018, the Appellant had entered  into  a  relationship  with  a
    British national, LJ, and the couple had had a baby daughter, DZ,  born
    in May 2018. She is also British.

The judge's decision

 3. It is right to say that the judge was unimpressed by  numerous  aspects
    of the Appellant's own evidence, particularly relating to a  number  of
    convictions in the United Kingdom and his  failure  to  have  disclosed
    those to the Respondent in the latest claim.

 4. The judge concluded that as a result of the convictions (and as set out
    in the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter) the Appellant  did  not
    meet the suitability requirements under Appendix FM to the  Immigration
    Rules.  Notwithstanding that conclusion the judge went on  to  consider
    EX.1 of Appendix FM (strictly speaking, this was unnecessary, given the
    conclusion on suitability).

 5. At paragraphs 69-71 he finds that the Appellant had some  contact  with
    his two sons, but that there was very limited financial support and  no
    involvement  in  important  decisions  relating   to   the   children's
    upbringing.

 6. Ultimately the judge finds that there was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the Appellant and his sons.

 7. The judge then turns to consider the Appellant's relationship with  DZ.
    At paragraph 74 the judge states as follows:

         "I accept that the Appellant lives with [LJ].  There is no evidence
         about his parental relationship with DZ and I cannot  speculate  on
         this.  She is now only 5 months old and her relationships are still
         developing.  I do accept, however, that as a general rule, it is in
         the best interests of children that they  are  brought  up  knowing
         both parents."

 8. Then at paragraph 84 the judge goes on to state:

         "DZ is British and she is therefore a  qualifying  child.   I  have
         already referred to the lack of  evidence  about  his  relationship
         with  her.   I  cannot  reach  conclusions  which  are   based   on
         speculation and in the absence of evidence I cannot find  that  the
         Appellant has yet developed a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
         with her."

 9. On the basis of the factual findings relating to the three children the
    judge concluded that the Appellant's appeal must fail.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. There are three grounds put  forward:  first,  that  a  number  of  the
    judge's findings relating to the two sons were wrong; second, that  the
    judge failed to have regard to the evidence relating to the Appellant's
    relationship with DZ; third, that the judge erred  in  respect  of  his
    consideration of LJ's position.

11. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Baker on 13 November 2018.

The hearing before me

12. Ms Srindran relied on the grounds of appeal.  She  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in respect of his findings on the two sons.  In respect
    of ground 2, she submitted that the judge had failed to deal  with  the
    Appellant's relationship with his baby daughter.  Ground 3 was not  the
    subject of any additional oral submissions.

13. Mr Lindsay relied on the Respondent's Rule 24 reply.  He submitted that
    ground 1 was really  only  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's  factual
    findings.   The  real  issue  related  to   the   Appellant's   claimed
    relationship with DZ.  Relying on what the judge said at paragraphs  74
    and 84, Mr Lindsay asked me to accept that  the  judge  was  concluding
    that there was no reliable evidence as to  his  relationship  with  his
    daughter.  There was no corroborative evidence from other sources  such
    as friends or a hospital.  The only evidence aside  from  that  of  the
    Appellant himself was that of  LJ  and  her  evidence  had  been  found
    wanting by the judge in other respects.

14. The burden was always on the Appellant to show a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship and it was clear that the judge  had  found  that
    the  Appellant  had  failed  to  discharge  that  burden.   Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that there needed to  be  evidence  of  direct  care  by  the
    Appellant for his daughter.  The judge had given adequate  reasons  and
    there was nothing perverse about his findings.

Decision on error of law

15. As regards grounds 1 and 3, I  conclude  that  there  are  no  material
    errors of law.  The findings relating  to  the  two  sons  set  out  in
    paragraphs 69-71 are properly reasoned and were  clearly  open  to  the
    judge.  Although as a matter of law he should not have been considering
    EX.1 because the suitability issue precluded the Appellant from getting
    that far along the Appendix  FM  route,  the  judge,  having  made  his
    findings, did apply the correct test in  respect  of  Section  117B(6),
    namely whether or not there was  a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship".  It was clear that he concluded there was not, and  this
    conclusion was open to him.

16. As regards LJ's circumstances there is no error here.  All other things
    being equal, there was nothing to indicate  that  the  Appellant  could
    have  succeeded  in  respect  of  her  circumstances  alone,  given  in
    particular that he was unable to rely on EX.1 for the  reasons  I  have
    set out previously.

17. I do however conclude that there is a material error of law in  respect
    of the judge's treatment of the Appellant's relationship with DZ.

18. In my view, the judge has either failed to consider  relevant  evidence
    or has failed to provide any or  any  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting
    relevant evidence in respect of this important matter.  My reasons  for
    this are as follows.

19. First, the judge had already accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  LJ  and  that  they  lived
    together.  The cohabitation had clearly existed before  DZ's  birth  in
    May 2018.  There was no issue as to paternity.  Therefore, the  reality
    of the situation before the judge, leaving aside the  particular  issue
    of "direct care", was that the Appellant was living under the same roof
    with his partner and that as from  May  2018  until  the  date  of  the
    hearing in October 2018, the couple were the cohabiting  parents  of  a
    baby.  Although there is of course no  presumption  as  such  that  the
    Appellant or indeed any father would necessarily  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with their new-born baby, it is  right
    to say that the common experience is that fathers have a  more  limited
    role or input into the  baby's  day-to-day  caring  than  that  of  the
    mother.

20. Second, in both paragraphs 74 and 84 the judge refers to  the  lack  of
    evidence.  He has not used the word "reliable" himself, and although Mr
    Lindsay has asked me to insert this term into the relevant sentences, I
    view this submission with caution.  I must of course read  the  judge's
    decision in a sensible way, but I am also concerned with  what  has  in
    fact been stated on its face as being the basis upon which an important
    aspect of the Appellant's case has been rejected.

21. I fully  appreciate  that  the  judge  regarded  the  Appellant  as  an
    unreliable witness.  However, in respect of LJ he had, at paragraph 58,
    already said that he preferred her evidence to that of the Appellant in
    certain respects.  Further, LJ had given evidence, in the form  of  her
    witness statement, that the couple had struggled to conceive, and  that
    DZ was loved and wanted by both of them.  In addition, in paragraph  14
    of that statement she had stated that the  Appellant  was  "an  amazing
    father" who was a "very hands  on  dad".   I  cannot  see  any  or  any
    adequate reasons that this particular evidence was  considered  by  the
    judge.  Alternatively, there are no reasons provided  as  to  why  this
    evidence was apparently rejected out of hand.  It did not emanate  from
    the unreliable source  of  the  Appellant  alone,  but  came  from  the
    partner, whom the judge had already found was in a genuine relationship
    with the Appellant.

22. Third, on my reading of paragraph 74 the judge appears to be suggesting
    that because DZ was so young her relationships were  still  developing,
    but it was still in her best interests to be brought  up  knowing  both
    parents.  If he was saying that the very young age  of  DZ  in  and  of
    itself precluded the existence of a genuine and  parental  relationship
    in respect of the Appellant, that must be wrong: a father can have such
    a relationship from  the  moment  of  the  child's  birth.   If  he  is
    accepting that DZ's best interests lay in being brought up by  both  of
    her parents (and given the fact that they all lived as a single  family
    unit, this would appear to be a sensible reading of what he intended to
    say) then this would not sit well with his conclusion that there was in
    fact no genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

23. Taking matters as a whole I conclude that the finding that there was no
    genuine and subsisting relationship between the  Appellant  and  DZ  is
    unsustainable.

24. This must be a material error, as the judge has not gone on to consider
    the issue of reasonableness under Section 117B(6)  in  any  alternative
    conclusion.

25. I set the First-tier Tribunal's decision aside.

Disposal

26. There is no reason whatsoever to remit this appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I do not do so.  I will retain it in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and set it down for a resumed hearing before me  in  due  course.   The
    judge's findings in respect of the  Appellant's  two  sons  are  to  be
    preserved (there has been no suggestion that this  should  not  be  the
    case).  The resumed hearing will in effect be concerned solely with  DZ
    and the following questions:

                i.  does  the  Appellant  have  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
                   parental relationship" with DZ?

               ii. if so, will it be "reasonable" to expect DZ to leave  the
                   United Kingdom?

I will set out relevant directions below.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

 I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a
date to be fixed.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 16 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Directions to the parties

 1. At the resumed hearing, the only live issue relates to the  Appellant's
    relationship with DZ and the application  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

 2. Updated witness statements for the Appellant and LJ are to be provided,
    together with any other evidence relevant to  the  live  issues.   This
    evidence shall be served on the Respondent and  filed  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal no later than 14 days before the resumed hearing;

 3. Oral evidence from the Appellant  and  LJ  will  be  permitted  at  the
    resumed hearing provided that  updated  witness  statements  have  been
    filed and served in accordance with the previous direction.
