
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12036/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2020                     |On 27 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Counsel, instructed by Alex Morgan
                    Immigration & Asylum
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Syria born in 1987.  She made an application
on 7 April 2019 for entry clearance as the adult dependent relative of her
sister, TM who, at the time of the application, had limited leave to
remain.  She now has refugee status and has a pending application for
indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.

Her application was refused and her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal
Judge Hussain ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 30 September 2019 which resulted
in the appeal being dismissed both under the Immigration Rules ("the
Rules") and under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The appeal of her nephew was
heard at the same time.  His appeal against the refusal of entry clearance,
in his case as a child dependant, was allowed. The present proceedings,
therefore, concern only the above named appellant.

In his decision the FtJ decided, in relation to the appellant before me,
that she did not have family life with her sister, TM, in the UK and, by
implication, no family life with any other person in the UK.

At the hearing before me, it was conceded on behalf of the respondent that
the FtJ erred in law in terms of his assessment of Article 8 because he
failed to take into account the evidence as to family life between the
appellant and her parents in the UK.  It was further conceded that that
error of law required his decision to be set aside.

After further discussion with the parties, it was agreed that the decision
could be re-made on the basis of the evidence that was before the FtJ. I
therefore heard submissions from the parties.  In the course of those
submissions, it was conceded on behalf of the respondent that the appellant
had established that she has family life with her parents and sister in the
UK.  The issue to be determined was one of proportionality.

In order to set my decision in context, it is necessary to refer in more
detail to the FtJ's decision and those of his findings which are not
infected by the error of law.

The FtJ's decision

The FtJ summarised the respondent's decision refusing entry clearance,
making reference to paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 (eligibility for entry clearance
as an adult dependent relative). The appellant needed to establish that as
a result of age, illness or disability she requires long-term personal care
to perform everyday tasks.  The Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") was not
satisfied that that requirement of the Rules was met and the FtJ agreed.

The FtJ referred to a medical report showing that the appellant underwent
cataract extraction surgery and a posterior lens transplant in her right
eye, and had laser correction surgery to her left eye, as well as the fact
that she may require corrective operations in the future.

He referred to a further medical report dated 17 February 2019 from a
psychiatrist which referred to the appellant suffering from various
psychological issues, including suffering from severe fits of weeping and
hysterical fits of unconsciousness.  Those problems are said to have begun
when the appellant experienced psychological pressures, including
witnessing death at close quarters, and marital problems that led to her
separation and having her children taken away from her.

The FtJ noted that the ECO did not dispute the evidence in relation to the
appellant's health.  However, the ECO also noted that the appellant had
been accompanied to some of her medical appointments by her mother.  The
ECO had concluded that it was likely that the appellant did require support
and medication but the appellant had not established that suitable
treatment was not available for her.

In his findings, the FtJ summarised the appellant's circumstances,
referring to her being one of many children of her parents.  She married in
2003 and has five children.  He noted the claim that she was repeatedly
physically and mentally abused by her husband throughout their marriage,
and that she suffered from such blows to the head that she needed eye
surgery and has been left with impaired vision.  The evidence was that her
husband was also psychologically controlling.

The relationship ended in divorce in December 2017.  The sponsor, TM, said
that despite being divorced from her husband, with whom all of her children
live, he refuses to allow her any contact with them and has started making
death threats against her.  Her evidence was that he tried to run her over
with a car a few months earlier and recently threatened to shoot her.  The
appellant's case was that the threats were very real, given that there was
little law and order in Syria.  Due to the war she had been moving from
relative to relative so that her ex-husband does not know where she is.
She is said to have fallen into a terrible depression which is getting
worse as time passes.

At [31] the FtJ said as follows:

"Whilst I make no finding in relation to the alleged physical and emotional
abuse by her former husband, I take them at face value."

He found that the appellant had not established that she needs assistance
with personal care to perform everyday tasks, or that such arises from age,
illness or disability.

At [36] he said that the medical reports seemed to suggest that the
appellant suffers from psychological issues as a result of her marital
problems and witnessing scenes of death.  He did not doubt the reliability
of that evidence.

At [39] he said that he appreciated the appellant's emotional needs may not
at the moment be adequately fulfilled because of her separation from the
rest of her family and her mental health condition.  However, he found that
that was not sufficient to meet the requirements of the Rules.

As regards Article 8, he found that the sponsor, her sister, has been in
the UK since 2014 as a refugee and would not be able to return to Syria.
He found that as siblings there are emotional ties between them but he did
not accept that the depth of their ties and dependency were such as to give
rise to a family life between them.  He then went on to consider the
situation for the other appellant before him.

It is also to be noted that he found in relation to the second appellant
the offer of financial support from that appellant's maternal uncle was
credible and that accommodation would be available for him.  At [50] the
FtJ referred to the appellant's mental health as "fragile" and finding that
she is her nephew's sole carer in the circumstances of an ongoing civil war
in Syria.

Submissions

In her submissions, Ms Everett, accepting that family life existed, also
pointed out that no credibility issues were identified in relation to the
witnesses before the FtJ.  She submitted that notwithstanding that family
life was engaged, the respondent relied on the fact that the appellant has
led an independent life in Syria, albeit that her mother in the UK visits
her.  Ms Everett accepted, however, that what the FtJ said at [31] in terms
of taking at face value the evidence in relation to the alleged physical
and emotional abuse by her former husband, implied that he found that those
events did take place.

In his submissions, Mr Moran argued that given that there was an existent
family life between the appellant and her parents, the respondent's
decision amounts to an interference with that family life in that family
life cannot be effectively conducted at present.  Her mother had returned
twice from the UK to be with the appellant in Syria, at considerable
personal risk, in 2018 for six weeks and for two months in 2019.

The appellant's father could not visit Syria at all, he having been
recognised as a refugee.  That is a further reason as to why family life
could not be continued anywhere than in the UK.

The appellant has quite serious mental health problems and is vulnerable.
It could not be proportionate for her to remain where she is and in the
circumstances in which Syria is at present.  Her mother's visits are not
sufficient to allow her to "vindicate" her Article 8 rights.

Furthermore, she has accommodation in the UK and her uncle has offered
financial support, as accepted by the FtJ in relation to the second
appellant.

It was further submitted that Rules for adult dependent relatives are very
specific and require specific evidence to be provided.  Whilst the Rules
are entitled to establish those requirements, the appellant's circumstances
fall into a wider category in terms of an adult child who is particularly
vulnerable, taking into account her specific circumstances, the civil war,
domestic violence and the fact that most of her family have left the
country.

Assessment and Conclusions

I agree with the concession made on behalf of the respondent as to error of
law on the part of the FtJ and the need for the decision to be re-made. In
re-making the decision I have taken into account not only the submissions
on behalf of the parties, as well as all the evidence before the FtJ, and
the appellant's skeleton argument, to be found from page 15 of the
appellant's bundle.

The fact that the appellant does not meet the requirements of the Rules for
entry clearance on the basis of the application she made, with reference to
E-ECDR.2.4, is a highly relevant factor in the Article 8 assessment. It
also brings into play paragraph GEN.3.2. which provides as follows:

         "GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application for
         entry clearance or leave to enter or remain made under this
         Appendix, or an application for leave to remain which has otherwise
         been considered under this Appendix, does not otherwise meet the
         requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-
         maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-paragraph (2)
         apply.

         (2)Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker must
         consider, on the basis of the information provided by the
         applicant, whether there are exceptional circumstances which would
         render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a
         breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,
         because such refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant child or
         another family  member whose Article 8 rights it is evident from
         that information would be affected by a decision to refuse the
         application."

In applying GEN.3.2.(2), it is clear that the appellant's Article 8 rights
would be affected by the decision to refuse entry clearance. In making an
assessment of whether the refusal would result in "unjustifiably harsh
consequences" it is really only the appellant's Article 8 rights that are
in play on the facts of this particular case, as distinct from those of her
family members, because she is the one most directly and significantly
affected by the decision, given her personal circumstances.

It is now accepted that there is family life between the appellant and her
family in the UK.  The issue is in terms of whether the decision to refuse
entry clearance is a proportionate response to the legitimate aim of
maintaining immigration control.

I bear in mind the findings of fact made by the FtJ which are not infected
by the error of law.  Thus, the medical evidence, summarised at [9] above,
was accepted, as was the evidence in relation to the physical and emotional
abuse suffered by the appellant at the hands of her former husband.  The
FtJ found that the appellant's emotional needs are not adequately fulfilled
because of her separation from the rest of the family and her mental health
condition.  Her mental state, as found by the FtJ, is fragile.

The evidence from TM in her witness statement dated 23 September 2019,
reveals that because the appellant and her nephew were unable to cope, they
both having lost their families, the appellant's mother had to fly to
Syria, putting her own safety at risk to look after them.  Her evidence is
also that her ex-husband continues to threaten her life and has attempted
to kill her.  She says that her depression at having to leave her own five
children and her fear for her own safety are overwhelming.

Her earlier statement dated 24 August 2019 refers to the repeated physical
and mental abuse suffered by the appellant from her husband throughout the
marriage.  The physical assaults were such that she needed eye surgery and
has been left with impaired vision.  That evidence is not disputed.

Her statement also refers to the appellant's ex-husband having taken the
children and refusing to allow her any contact with them, and at that time
started making death threats against her.  He tried to run her over with a
car when she was walking in the street in 2019.  He has also threatened to
shoot her.

The witness statement also refers to the appellant looking after their then
12-year-old nephew (the second appellant in the appeal before the FtJ), who
is his mother's only son from her previous marriage.  Both her parents had
since remarried and he has not been accepted into either household.

At [6] of TM's witness statement dated 24 August 2019 it refers to the
appellant having struggled to look after herself, let alone her nephew as
well.  As a lone woman in Syria she has no means of supporting herself
financially since the breakdown of her marriage except what is sent to her
from the UK.  It refers to her being alone and especially vulnerable due to
her poor vision and the circumstances in relation to her ex-husband.  Those
difficulties are compounded by the fact that they are living in a war zone
with ongoing shortages of food, water, electricity and fuel for cooking, as
well as other essentials.

At that time the appellant was said not to be eating or sleeping and was
deeply depressed, suffering from panic attacks.

Her witness statement dated 8 April 2019 refers to family in the UK having
pulled together to support the appellant, with their maternal uncle sending
money to her through unofficial channels in the Syrian community.

There is a witness statement from the appellant's father dated 23 September
2009.  It refers to the physical abuse that the appellant suffered at the
hands of her husband and the visible signs of injury.  He says that she had
to be admitted to hospital as a result of the beatings.  It gives various
examples of the controlling behaviour of the appellant's ex-husband.  He
refers to her ex-husband having punched her in the stomach whilst she was
pregnant, resulting in her having to have an abortion.

He refers to the lack of Social Services or support networks in Syria to
help victims of domestic violence and it is always up to the family to
provide that support.  The civil war had exacerbated their situation and
left the appellant in a desperate situation through no fault of her own.
He states that had it not been for the war the whole family would still be
in Syria and they would all have been there to support each other.

A witness statement from one of the appellant's other sisters, TKM, dated
23 September 2019, supports the evidence of the other witnesses.  Her
uncle, TW, gives evidence in his witness statement of the financial support
that he is able to offer and has been providing.

The appellant's mother's witness statement dated 8 April 2019 states that
she was so worried about the appellant that she risked her own safety to
visit her in Syria in August 2018 where she stayed there for six weeks.
When she left, the appellant's mental state deteriorated.

As I have indicated, the FtJ did not suggest that any of that evidence was
not credible.  Together with the medical evidence it supports the
contention that the appellant is very vulnerable and is heavily reliant on
the emotional support from her family in the UK.  The background evidence
in relation to the situation in Syria is well-known.

I take into account section 117A-B of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). There is no evidence that the appellant
speaks English and thus, as a result of s.117B(2), this is a matter that
weighs against her. As to financial independence (s.117B(3)), applying
Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58, as
referred to above, the appellant's uncle, TW, gives evidence in his witness
statement of the financial support he has been providing. That evidence was
found by the FtJ to be credible in relation to her nephew and was not
contested on behalf of the respondent in terms of his ability to support
the appellant financially in the UK.

I have considered what was said in Agyarko v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 in relation to the Secretary of State's then
guidance on "exceptional circumstances" and "unjustifiably harsh
consequences".

The family life that the appellant has with her parents in particular, as
submitted on her behalf, cannot be continued anywhere else than in the UK.
She has particular vulnerabilities, is the victim of domestic violence, and
is living in circumstances of a civil conflict. She feels under threat from
her ex-husband and the evidence indicates that she is at risk from him.

That combination of circumstances is particularly compelling. Whilst it is
the case that the appellant is not able to meet the requirements of the
Rules in terms of entry clearance as a dependant relative, and that that is
a significant factor, I am not satisfied that the decision to refuse entry
clearance is a proportionate response to the legitimate aim of maintaining
immigration control.  I am satisfied that refusal of entry clearance would
have unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant in terms of her
mental state and her vulnerability, taking into account all the
circumstances.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.  Its decision is set aside and the decision is re-made,
allowing the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek                             Date  27  March
    2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

