

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/12667/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th March 2019                         |On 20th March 2019            |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between
                            MOHAMMED LATIF AHMED
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani, of Counsel, instructed by Paul John &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1986. He arrived in
       the UK in 2010 as a student and had leave to remain in that capacity
       until January 2015. He then made an in time application to remain on
       family and private life grounds, which was refused  in  March  2015,
       and his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was  dismissed  in  August
       2016. He made a new application to remain on Article 8 ECHR  grounds
       in  February  2017,  which  was  refused  in  the  decision  of  the
       respondent dated 29th May 2018. His appeal against the decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton in a determination
       promulgated on the 17th January 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford
       on 7th February 2019 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in refusing to adjourn the  appeal
       when there was evidence in the form of a  GP  certificate  from  the
       previous day that the appellant was unfit for work due to  abdominal
       pain. It was, thus, an arguable error of law to have determined  the
       appeal on the basis of submissions only in the appellant's absence.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal contend that it was an error  of  law  not  to
       have adjourned the hearing on 11th January 2019 as the appellant had
       a right to be present at his appeal and give evidence,  and  further
       he had presented a sick note from his GP that  he  was  too  ill  to
       attend work for 7 days dated 10th January 2019 and provided an email
       which confirmed that he had vomiting.

    5. There was no Rule 24 notice.

    6. Ms Bustani and Mr Clarke agreed that there was an error  of  law  by
       the First-tier Tribunal as it was procedurally unfair  not  to  have
       adjourned the hearing to allow the appellant to  attend  his  appeal
       and that it was appropriate to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for remaking. Ms Bustani further explained that  the  error
       was material as the appellant would have given further oral evidence
       about his relationship with his unwell aunt and his caring role  for
       her.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The facts are as set out in the grounds of appeal and at paragraph 6
       of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal: there was  both  a  sick
       note and an email about the appellant being in unwell, in  pain  and
       vomiting on the day of the hearing. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
       that it was not unfair to refuse to adjourn as there was a statement
       from the appellant and no presenting officer  so  there  would  have
       been no cross-examination. However, I find, and it is agreed by  the
       parties, that as the appellant wished to give oral evidence  at  his
       appeal to elaborate on his written statement and was deprived of the
       opportunity to do so it was not fair to have refused to adjourn  the
       hearing given the cogent evidence of his being too unwell to  attend
       the hearing.

    8. In accordance with Practice Statement 7.2 of the Senior  President's
       Practice  Statements  of  10  February  2010  (as  amended)  as  the
       appellant has been unfairly deprived of his opportunity to  put  his
       case in full to the First-tier Tribunal I decide that  the  remaking
       process should take place by way of a remittal.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision and all of the  findings  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal

   3. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.





Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   18th March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley





