
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12674/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 9th January 2019           |
|Typed, corrected, signed and Sent to          |                              |
|Promulgation on 19th December 2018.           |                              |


                                   Before

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                        mrs Denise Claudette Fernando
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Johnrose, a solicitor with Ellen Court
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Singapore who was born  on  20th  August,
    1962.  On 20th March, 2018 she made application to the  respondent  for
    leave to remain on the basis of her private and family  life  with  her
    husband, [JC], a British citizen ("the husband").   The  appellant  and
    her husband were married in Singapore in  1995  and  have  two  British
    children who are now adults.  Between 1995 and 2006 they lived together
    in various companies where the husband had been sent to  work.   Sadly,
    the appellant and her husband were divorced in 2006, but they  remained
    close and in 2010 they remarried again in Singapore.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  2011  and  was  granted
    leave to remain as a spouse.  After two years she made  an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain and that was refused because she  failed
    to satisfy  the  English  language  requirements.   She  appealed  that
    decision and her appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.   Instead  of
    being granted indefinite leave to remain however the respondent  simply
    granted  her  discretionary  leave  in  2013  following   the   appeal.
    Ordinarily, she would have been granted indefinite leave to remain, but
    for reasons which are not clear, she  was  only  granted  discretionary
    leave for a period of three years.  The appellant sought to renew  that
    leave, but unfortunately forgot to pay the  required  fee  and  so  her
    application was then refused.

3.   The appellant claims that she instructed representatives to  apply  for
    indefinite leave to remain on her behalf, but claims that she  was  let
    down.  In September 2017, having  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain but before the decision was made, the appellant learnt that  her
    father who, was living in Singapore at the time, had  become  seriously
    ill with a heart complaint and so on  9th  September  she  returned  to
    Singapore to visit him.  Sadly, her father  died.   Her  representative
    however, it is claimed, let her down and did not  tell  the  respondent
    that she had left  the  United  Kingdom.   When  she  returned  on  7th
    November 2017, she was allowed leave to enter, but only for six  months
    on compassionate grounds.  She has remained in the United Kingdom  ever
    since and made application for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  her
    private and family life on 20th March this year. That  application  was
    refused by the  respondent  and  having  appealed  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal, the judge concluded that the appellant's  human  rights  were
    outweighed by the interests of the wider general public.  He  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.

4.   The appellant challenged the decision on several  grounds.   The  first
    is aa alleged failure by the judge to apply Devaseelan (Second  Appeals
    - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * UKIAT 00702, given  that
    there was in the file an  earlier  decision  allowing  a  human  rights
    appeal on behalf of the appellant.   The first  ground  suggested  that
    the judge had erred in failing to refer to Devaseelan.  The  fact  that
    the appellant won her  Article  8  appeal  showed  that  her  interests
    outweighed the public interest and the fact that the  judge  failed  to
    mention this amounted to a material error of law rendering the decision
    unsustainable, it was alleged.   The  judge  failed  to  consider  that
    family life had been strengthened following the earlier  decision,  and
    yet he made no mention at all  of  the  decision.   The  second  ground
    suggested that the judge failed to give sufficient weight  to  material
    evidence.  The judge considered the fact that the former adviser of the
    appellant had been the subject of a complaint because he had mishandled
    her application.  There was evidence before the judge of  a  letter  of
    complaint to  the  OISC  and  response  from  the  OISC  regarding  her
    complaint.   There  was  also  evidence  in  the  form  of   "WhatsApp"
    transcripts showing communication between the appellant and her  former
    representative where he acknowledges  that  he  did  not  categorically
    inform the Home Office as requested that the  appellant  had  left  the
    United Kingdom and the reasons for doing so.  It was suggested that the
    judge failed to take this evidence into account  when  determining  the
    behaviour of the adviser.  The grounds submitted that it  was  material
    evidence that the judge failed to give his mind to when determining the
    behaviour of the  appellant's  previous  adviser  and  considering  the
    decision  in  Mansur  (immigration  adviser's  failings:   Article   8)
    Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 00274 (IAC) and in particular paragraph 4,  this
    being a "blatant failure  by  an  immigration  adviser  to  follow  P's
    instructions".  The  third  ground  was  failing  to  undertake  proper
    assessment of the appellant's Article 8 rights and to some extent  this
    challenge was duplicated in the last challenge which asserts  that  the
    judge failed to take into account all the  compassionate  factors  when
    conducting  the  proportionality  exercise,  for  example  whether  the
    appellant met the financial requirements, the question of accommodation
    which had not been an issue as far as the refusal  was  concerned,  the
    fact that the judge found that private life had been  established  when
    immigration was precarious and the failure of the judge to engage  with
    the appellant's personal history and the circumstances surrounding  her
    application, namely:

    -    the failure of the judge to carry out an assessment  of  the  core
         issue of the appellant's family life under Article 8, as opposed to
         her private life;


    -    the failure of the judge to give consideration to the evidence  of
         the appellant's adult son;


    -    the failure of the judge  to  consider  the  appellant's  spouse's
         human rights; and


    -    factors arising including the requirement for him to leave the  UK
         and relinquish his rights as an EU national in  order  to  continue
         his family life and other factors which the  appellant's  solicitor
         dealt with in more detail in her submissions.

5.   Mr Bates pointed out that the judge had not erred in failing  to  refer
    to Devaseelan.  The decision made in country by the Secretary of  State
    was sustainable.  The decision made by the earlier judge  was  made  in
    2013 and was relevant then, but the facts have changed since  2013  and
    what was needed in this appeal was what the judge did, namely  to  make
    an assessment of the circumstances as they prevailed at the date before
    him.

6.   So  far  as  the  failure  of  the  appellant's  previous  advisers  is
    concerned, the judge did consider  the  question  of  Mansur,  and  her
    actually referred to it, but he points out that there is no finding  by
    a regulator, because although a complaint had been made to a regulator,
    no finding had been made by the time of the hearing.  As to  the  third
    challenge, the fact remained that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The fact that she had  been  in
    the United Kingdom was something built into the Immigration Rules,  but
    the length of her residence in the United Kingdom  alone  was  arguably
    irrelevant.  There was nothing exceptional about the appellant  or  her
    circumstances, save for the fact that she had been granted six  months'
    exceptional leave and that was given because of  the  circumstances  in
    which she left the United Kingdom.  Were the appellant now required  to
    return to Singapore and make an application for leave to  return  as  a
    spouse, there will be no reason at  all  why  the  appellant's  husband
    could not, if he wished to, travel with her.  The evidence  before  the
    judge was that they have savings and income and presumably  they  would
    be able to cope for the brief time it would take for the application to
    be made.

7.   Mrs Johnrose asked me to note the reason why  the  appellant  had  left
    the United Kingdom in the first place.  She originally came in 2011  as
    a spouse and after two years she made  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain.  That was refused because of her  failure  to  satisfy
    the English language requirements.  She appealed that decision and  the
    Immigration Judge allowed her appeal.  One would normally expect her to
    have been granted indefinite leave to remain by the Secretary of State,
    but for reasons which are not known and which appear never to have been
    challenged by her then advisers, she  was  only  granted  discretionary
    leave.

8.   In 2013 she made an in time application for leave to  remain  prior  to
    leave expiring.  The appellant made application for leave to remain  in
    June 2017 on the basis of her being a spouse of a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom, but sadly received news that her  father
    had suffered a heart attack and quite understandably decided  that  she
    wished to be with him.  Sadly he died.   On  returning  to  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant was granted six months' compassionate leave.

9.   Mrs Johnrose submitted that the judge had erred in law by not  properly
    considering the appellant's circumstances.  He failed to consider  when
    engaging in his proportionality exercise:-

       - that the appellant originally had leave in 2011 as a spouse;


       - that in 2013 the appellant  should  have  been  granted  indefinite
         leave  to  remain  and  the  fact  that  she   was   only   granted
         discretionary leave should have been  challenged  but  was  not  by
         those advising her at the time;


       - the circumstances surrounding why she left the United Kingdom  when
         her father died;


       - the reason why the respondent granted her compassionate  leave  for
         six months; and


       - lastly, the effect on her and on her  health,  and  indeed  on  her
         husband of the lengthy delays  and  circumstances  surrounding  her
         immigration status.

10.  The judge also made a mistake of  fact  at  paragraph  52(vii)  of  the
    determination in that he  refers  to  the  appellant's  parents  having
    accommodation available to her and her husband to live  in.   In  fact,
    the appellant's widowed  mother  lives  with  one  of  the  appellant's
    siblings.  Lastly, the judge also failed to take into account the  fact
    that the appellant had received medical treatment whilst  in  Singapore
    which prevented her returning to the UK sooner than she  did  following
    the sad death of her husband.

11.  I reserved my decision.

12.  I have considerable sympathy for this lady and her  husband.   Together
    they have been through a great deal of turmoil  in  their  attempts  to
    regularise  her  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.  However,   and   with
    considerable regret, I have concluded that the decision must stand.   I
    concluded that the judge did not materially err in law in his decision.
     It was not suggested in either the grounds of  in  submissions  to  me
    that the decision of the First Tier Tribunal Judge was perverse in  the
    public law sense.  It may not have been the decision I would have made,
    but that is not the test I have to apply.

13.  The judge did not make any material misdirection by  failing  to  refer
    to Devaseelan.  The 2013 decision was in respect of an application made
    following an earlier refusal.  It  was  not  in  respect  of  the  same
    refusal and the circumstances prevailing in 2013 were  hardly  relevant
    to the circumstances prevailing before  this  judge  when  he  came  to
    consider the appeal.  I simply do not believe that he  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to material evidence in respect of the  complaint  by
    the appellant to the OISC in respect  of  her  previous  advisers.   He
    noted the complaint, but correctly pointed out that there had  been  no
    finding by the regulator.  Indeed, during the course of  proceedings  I
    pointed out to the appellant's representatives that the letter  written
    by the appellant's previous adviser was addressed to  the  Home  Office
    (UK Border Agency) at Manchester Airport, and clearly advises the  Home
    Office that the appellant has travelled to Singapore.  The Home  Office
    must have been  aware  of  this  letter  because  on  her  return  from
    Singapore she was granted compassionate  leave.   The  judge  did  take
    those matters into account.

14.  So far as ground 3 is concerned, as set out in  the  application,  this
    suggests  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  there   were
    exceptional  circumstances  such  as  to  grant  leave  out  with   the
    Immigration Rules.  Ground 4 is really a further explanation of  ground
    3, but the judge did take into account everything he could  have  done.
    Mrs Johnrose referred me to her bundle and to various pieces of medical
    evidence, but the medical evidence in question comprised what  appeared
    to be doctors' notes made in 1993, a 2018  list  of  medication  (which
    does mean something to me, but only because of specialist  knowledge  I
    have, and probably would not have meant anything at all  to  any  other
    judge)  and  what  appear  to  be  the  appellant's   general   medical
    practitioner's computer records and a letter from a consultant  to  the
    appellant's general medical practitioner following a visit  by  her  in
    January 2018.  It would, frankly, be astonishing if  somebody  who  had
    experienced what this poor lady has experienced had not  been  affected
    by stress,  but  there  was  no  letter  from  a  medical  practitioner
    confirming that she was suffering from stress or being treated for  the
    effects of stress.  The appellant's immigration history  was  something
    that the Immigration Judge was very well aware of and while he may have
    erred in suggesting that the  appellant's  parents  have  accommodation
    available for her and her husband to live in and some savings  to  tide
    them over, it is a fact that  her  family  members  do  have  homes  in
    Singapore.

Notice of Decision

15.  Immigration Judges are required to give  very  considerable  weight  to
    the interests of  the  wider  general  public  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control and I believe that this judge  has  done  precisely
    that.  There is nothing perverse about his decision, and whilst it  may
    seem harsh, he has taken into account all  the  evidence  presented  to
    him.  I have concluded, therefore, that the making  of  a  decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne did not involve the making of an error
    of law and his decision shall stand.  This appeal is dismissed.

16.  No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

