
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12337/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2019                           |On 15th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              Miss Melissa [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel, Barar & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 11th September 1992.
     The Appellant's mother left the marital home after  domestic  violence
    from her father when the Appellant was 1 year old, and in December 1994
    her parents' marriage was dissolved  and  her  father  was  given  only
    supervised visitation rights.  In January 1999 he surrendered  all  his
    guardianship rights in respect of his daughter in favour of her mother,
    and in the event of her death to the Appellant's maternal  grandmother.
    In June 2001 the Appellant's mother was attacked by two  men  in  South
    Africa and as a result she left South Africa and came to  work  in  the
    UK, leaving the Appellant in the care of her maternal grandparents.  At
    that stage the Appellant was 8 years old.   On  4th  January  2012  the
    Appellant's mother naturalised as a British citizen.  In the same month
    the Appellant, then aged 19, was granted a visa to study in the UK  and
    "reconnected" and established her relationship with  her  mother  after
    their geographical separation.  She became emotionally and  financially
    supported by her mother thereafter.  In the same year her  grandparents
    relocated to New Zealand to be with their daughter [L]  and  their  two
    grandchildren.  In September 2012 the Appellant entered  the  UK  as  a
    student and in 2013  all  sporadic  email  correspondence  between  the
    Appellant and her father ceased.

 2. In 2015 prior to the expiry of the  Appellant's  study  visa  she  made
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  That application
    was refused by the Secretary of State on  17th  November  2015  on  the
    basis that the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    298(II) and (III), 300, 302  and  276CE  with  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 25th November 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged.  The  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal sitting at Taylor  House  on  11th
    July 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 14th July 2017 the
    Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

 4. The Secretary of State does not appeal that decision but the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under both the  Refugee
    Convention and Article 3 ECHR and consequently Grounds of Appeal by way
    of appeal against only that part of the judge's decision was lodged  on
    24th July 2017 by the appellant's solicitors.

 5. It is relevant to note that the basis upon which  the  Appellant  makes
    her claim is that she fears return to South Africa away from her  (now)
    British citizen mother on the basis that she  will  be  returned  as  a
    single, white female with no family support  in  a  country  with  high
    levels of crime and  violence.   That  basis  of  appeal  is  important
    because at paragraph 5 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  the
    learned judge has misrepresented the basis of the  application,  merely
    referring to the fact that the basis is that  the  Appellant  would  be
    returned as a single, white female in a country  with  high  levels  of
    crime and violence.  No reference is made therein to the fact that  she
    would be returning to a country without any family support.  It is  the
    failure to apply the appropriate criteria and examine the  issues  that
    constitutes the basis of the Appellant's appeal.

 6. On 8th March 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J  M  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Hollingworth  considered  that  it
    was arguable that the judge had set out an insufficient analysis of the
    available evidence in relation to the question of whether  there  would
    be a breach of Article 3, and that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    should have provided  a  fuller  analysis  of  the  available  evidence
    including expert evidence in this regard.  The breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention was specifically argued on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  and
    Judge Hollingworth considered that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    should have dealt with this  aspect  of  the  matter  and  should  have
    considered the question of relocation against the  background  of  that
    which had taken place and on the footing that the Appellant would  lack
    support if returned.

 7. At paragraph 20 of the decision the judge noted the  material  provided
    including the experts' reports in respect of violence towards women  in
    RSA.  The judge had stated that the Appellant could not  succeed  under
    Article 3 grounds.  This was based on the  conclusion  reached  by  the
    judge that there was no evidence to suggest that merely being a single,
    white female would amount to a very  significant  obstacle  to  return.
    Judge Hollingworth considered that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    should have set out a fuller analysis  of  the  available  evidence  as
    referred to at paragraph 3(i) in  the  permission  application  in  the
    light of the expert reports and the available objective  material,  and
    that it was arguable that the reference to the  absence  of  a  decided
    authority was insufficient in  disposing  of  the  remaining  available
    evidence in the absence of analysis.

 8. It was on that basis that the  appeal  originally  came  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In a decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 27th July 2018  I  found  that  there  was  and  I  gave
    directions for the further consideration of  this  matter  including  a
    reference to the committee who give consideration as to whether a  case
    is suitable for country guidance.  I noted that there  was  no  country
    guidance authority on South Africa and the  issue  that  the  committee
    would have been asked to consider was whether returning a single  white
    female woman without family support justified reaching the threshold of
    Article 3.  At paragraph 20 of my  error  of  law  decision  I  queried
    whether it would seem appropriate for the issue to be considered for  a
    woman of any colour  and  race  and  that  the  actual  colour  of  the
    Appellant's skin should not  itself  constitute  a  specific  basis  of
    appeal.  The Country Guidance Committee decided that this  was  not  an
    appropriate case and the matter was returned to me for rehearing.   The
    direction indicated that the appeal was reserved to myself in the Upper
    Tribunal and that there be leave to both  parties  to  file  and  serve
    bundles of such further objective and subjective  evidence  upon  which
    they seek to rely.  It is on that basis  that  the  appeal  comes  back
    before me. The Appellant appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Hodgetts.
     Mr Hodgetts is very familiar with this matter having  appeared  before
    Judge Lal in the First-tier Tribunal,  for  being  the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal and having appeared before me when  the  matter  came
    for consideration as to whether or not there was a  material  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Secretary of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Walker.   It  is
    agreed that the matter be dealt with by way of submission only but  the
    Appellant and her mother both personally attend the hearing.  Something
    that they have done on all  occasions  that  the  matter  has  appeared
    before me.

Documentation

 9. It having been agreed  that  this  matter  is  to  proceed  by  way  of
    submission I am provided  very  helpfully  by  Mr  Hodgetts  with  what
    effectively is a consolidated bundle of documents upon which  he  seeks
    to rely.  This bundle is paginated and consists of both subjective  and
    objective evidence along with an essential reading guide.  It  runs  to
    over 600 pages.  In addition, I have the two previous bundles that were
    produced before the First-tier Tribunal.   I  note  that  not  all  the
    papers in those bundles are duplications of what appears  in  the  core
    bundle before me in that a considerable amount of objective evidence is
    included therein from 2016 to 2017.  As Mr Hodgetts points  out  whilst
    this evidence is useful it has been supplemented  by  the  most  recent
    objective evidence and I note that all the objective evidence before me
    in the current bundle dates from 2018.  Overall, I anticipate there  is
    in excess of 1,000  pages  of  documentation  produced  to  me  and  in
    providing this decision I have given due consideration in particular to
    the evidence in the current core bundle concentrating predominantly  on
    the essential reading that Mr Hodgetts has directed me to.

The Issue in Law

10. The Appellant's claim is based on the seeking of protection pursuant to
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  which  prohibits
    torture, and  "inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment."   Mr
    Hodgetts reminds me that the old authority of Horvath v  the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2000] UKHL 37 remains  good  law  and
    that where an applicant fears persecution from  non-state  actors,  the
    home state can be judged to provide protection if it  has  in  place  a
    system of domestic protection machinery for the detection,  prosecution
    and punishment of such acts, and  has  the  ability  and  readiness  to
    operate the machinery.  Where of course the line is drawn  will  depend
    on the facts of each case.  Consequently, following the guidance  given
    by Lord Hope in Horvath the criterion to  be  applied  is  whether  the
    alleged lack of protection is such as to indicate that the  home  state
    is unable or unwilling to discharge its duty to establish and operate a
    system for the protection against persecution of its own nationals.

11. The correct approach is to examine the question as to  the  sufficiency
    of state protection at the first stage whilst considering  whether  the
    Appellant's fear  was  of  "persecution"  within  the  meaning  of  the
    Convention and thereafter an applicant's fear must be  well-founded  of
    being  persecuted  for  availing  him  or  herself   of   the   state's
    persecution.

12. It is further  pointed  out,  (and  I  totally  accept  this)  that  an
    Appellant cannot  achieve  complete  protection  against  isolated  and
    random attacks and that complete protection against such attacks is not
    to be expected of  a  home  state.   The  standard  to  be  applied  is
    therefore not that which would eliminate all risk and would thus amount
    to a guarantee of protection in the home state but rather  a  practical
    standard which takes proper account of the duty which the state owes to
    all of its nationals.

The Facts of this Case

13. It is against that generic background that I turn to assess  the  facts
    of this  individual  case.   Before  reciting  the  discussion  and  my
    findings it is appropriate to set out the facts of this case because as
    has been suggested in Horvath each case is fact specific and  certainly
    I consider that to be the correct approach in the instant case.

14. I am referred by Mr Hodgetts to Section C  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    which contains the detailed subjective evidence.  I am also referred to
    the witness statement  of  eight  family  members.   I  have  read  and
    considered all of these statements.

15. The Appellant is the daughter of a homesteader, a white farming family.
     Some of the violence experienced by members of the family that  caused
    them to leave South Africa are set out  in  the  witness  statement  of
    [LH].  Mrs [LH] is the sister of the Appellant's mother and  is  now  a
    citizen of New Zealand.  At the time of making her witness statement in
    January 2017 she had been a New Zealand  citizen  for  fourteen  years.
    She sets out at paragraph 4 very personal  family  experience  suffered
    that led to her and her family members to leave New Zealand:

         "My father [JH] was assaulted and robbed in his shop  in  Pretoria;
         my mother [EH] was held up  at  knifepoint  at  her  residence;  my
         brother [FH] was confronted and robbed of his car at  gunpoint;  my
         sister [TJ] managed to escape from an  attempted  rape  in  a  busy
         upmarket  shopping  centre.   My  mother-in-law   was   gang-raped,
         strangled and left  for  dead.   We  lived  in  a  state  where  we
         perceived continual threat, behind  high  electrified  fences  with
         guard dogs and security guards on 24 hour call.  We still  did  not
         feel safe."

16. Such evidence I acknowledge is not fact specific to the  Appellant  but
    reflects the level of violence to which other family members have  been
    subjected in South Africa including the Appellant's mother.

17. The Appellant's witness statement  details  the  family  history.   She
    confirms her parents separated when she was 9 months old, divorced when
    she was 2 and that she returned to live with her grandparents and  aunt
    and uncle.  They all lived together in a large house on a  smallholding
    in Midrand between Johannesburg and Pretoria.  When the Appellant was 9
    her mother suffered a violent attack subsequent  to  several  attempted
    but unsuccessful attacks and shortly after this she obtained  sponsored
    work in the UK and left South Africa leaving the Appellant to be  cared
    for by her grandparents and with visits both from her mother  to  South
    Africa and by her to the UK.  Other family members  left  South  Africa
    following attacks and no longer feeling safe in their own country.  Her
    uncle moved to Australia for a short period in 1999 prior to  returning
    and leaving again as soon as possible following a  hijack  at  gunpoint
    when returning home one night.  Her aunt left with her two children  in
    2002 and she wished to protect her children and their futures away from
    the growing violence and discord.  Another  uncle  who  visited  weekly
    left in 2005 following an attack at his workplace, a hospital,  by  his
    own patients.  By 2005 the Appellant's only family in South Africa were
    her grandparents and the family kept themselves to themselves  most  of
    the time.

18. The Appellant gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that  whilst
    she had always felt safe in the property this  changed  over  time  and
    their home was broken into twice with belongings stolen,  there  was  a
    car stolen and there were innumerable holes cut in the  fences  leaving
    the family unsure as to who was on the property at  night.   They  took
    the steps to reinforce and bar all  entries  and  exits  with  security
    gates and to place cages round the windows.  Incidents  of  threat  and
    violence became more frequent and the family had to resort  to  placing
    quarter inch steel bars around their windows to try  and  increase  the
    level of security.  The Appellant specifically recites as  an  incident
    that on calling the  police  when  the  burglar  alarm  had  gone  off,
    firstly, the police officers failed to arrive promptly and secondly  at
    the tender age of 15 one of the police officers  tried  to  flirt  with
    her.  She points out that this is just one incident that  reflects  her
    lack of trust in the South African police force.

19. I am referred to paragraphs 8 and 9  of  her  witness  statement  which
    factually is not challenged by the Secretary of State and which reflect
    a plethora of vile and horrible attacks on friends and contacts of  the
    Appellant and her grandparents.  The Appellant  has  advised  that  her
    health suffered as a result of the environment in which she was  living
    and following contracting glandular fever she suffered extreme  fatigue
    and depression.

20. Life became so bad that in 2010 her grandparents applied to emigrate to
    New Zealand to be closer to her aunt and uncle who had  young  children
    and to escape the imminent violence.  That application was approved and
    they moved to New Zealand in 2012.  The Appellant was then age  20  and
    she was granted a Tier 4 Student visa and came to London where she  has
    remained since.  She studied biomedical science at University  College,
    London and with the help of her mother settled into  life  in  the  UK.
    She has previously given evidence that she is  still  both  emotionally
    and  financially  dependent  upon  her  mother.   It  is  against  this
    background that the Appellant's appeal is brought.

The Seven Premises

21. Mr Hodgetts bases his submissions on seven premises:

      i) South Africa is the worst place in the world to be, barring  a  war
         zone, for sexual violence.

     ii) That the Appellant is at a heightened risk due to her lack  of  any
         family support in South Africa.

    iii) That her current daily risk is compounded because she is white.

     iv) That there is insufficiency of state protection.

      v) That whilst it is accepted that to a certain extent risk of  attack
         in a home could be obviated by 24 hour seven  day  a  week  guards,
         that risk would in itself not be totally eliminated  and  that  the
         risk is endemic.

     vi) That the Appellant's financial circumstances and economic prospects
         are such that she would  be  unable  to  pay  for  the  appropriate
         security.

    vii) That it is not reasonable to expect the Appellant to live her  life
         in fear and in isolation.

Discussion

22. Having made his seven basic premises it is Mr Hodgett's submission that
    this is not a case  that  would  involve  any  form  of  public  policy
    approach on the basis that he agrees and submits that each  case  turns
    on its individual facts and that he is certainly unaware of  any  total
    rush of South African white women coming to the  UK  to  claim  asylum.
    That however he submits does not in any way  diminish  his  Appellant's
    appeal and that it is important to  examine  the  Appellant's  personal
    circumstances.

23. Mr Hodgetts examines the medical  evidence  produced  relating  to  the
    Appellant's mental health and refers me to the report of Dr  Ragpal  in
    which he notes that the Appellant has a past  history  of  moderate  to
    severe depression and self-harm between the age of 16 and  18  and  his
    view that she would fulfil a diagnosis of anxiety disorder (moderate in
    severity) along with depression (mild to moderate severity)  with  risk
    of self-harm.   He  specifically  however  refers  me  to  Mr  Rajpal's
    conclusion at paragraph 10.4 where he states:

         "The impact of her moving to South Africa: it could cause worsening
         of her mental health and increase the risk of  self-harm.   If  she
         continues to  live  in  the  UK,  living  with  family  will  be  a
         protective factor for self-harm, difficulties  and  depression  and
         anxiety."

    He  consequently  emphasises  this  specific  factor  relating  to  the
    Appellant's mental health and indicates that that  would  differentiate
    it from the position relating to the general public.

The Experts' Reports

24. I am referred to two experts' reports:-

      1) The report of Adam Ashforth, professor of Afro American and African
         studies at the University of Michigan and  his  report  dated  19th
         August 2018.

      2) Professor M I Aguilar director of  the  centre  for  the  study  of
         religion and politics at the  University  of  St  Andrews  and  his
         report dated 17th May 2018 which is an  updated  report  previously
         prepared and dated 2nd January 2017.

    I have considered in detail these  reports.   The  knowledge  that  the
    experts provided are as experts in their field.  They  have  impressive
    credentials.   Both  experts'  CVs  are  attached  to  their   reports.
    Professor Ashforth specialises in research in South Africa where he has
    conducted extensive research into issues of insecurity in everyday life
    contexts.  He is a published author.  I note that the question that  is
    posed to him is as follows:

         "What, if any, are the risks involved of return to South Africa for
         a single, white female without any family support or social network
         of any kind and/or of the risk to any single woman,  regardless  of
         race, colour or ethnicity without family support or social network,
         returning to South Africa?"

    That of course is exactly the question that is  posed  in  the  current
    appeal.

25. Professor Aguilar specialises in the  socio-political  developments  of
    South Africa  and  in  particular  the  challenges  of  the  church  to
    apartheid and totalitarian regimes.  He is asked the following specific
    questions which again are pertinent to this appeal:

       . Whether there would be difficulties for a single white  female  age
         24 in relocating to South Africa and if so what?

       . To what extent a single white female age 24 without  family  living
         in  South  Africa,  would  be  able  to  secure  a  livelihood  and
         employment?

       . To what extent a single white female age 24 without  family  living
         in  South  Africa  would  be  at  risk  of   generalised   criminal
         acts/assaults/robbery etc.?

       . The extent that a single white female age 24 can freely and without
         risk, be at liberty in moving around South Africa.

       . The extent  to  which  any  problems  highlighted  above  could  be
         obviated or ameliorated by having an outside source of income  from
         a relative, and if so, in what way.

26. Again, the  report  of  Professor  Aguilar  addresses  specific  issues
    relevant to this appeal and I accept that the questions posed  although
    they have similarities to both experts ask each expert  to  concentrate
    on their own specific area of expertise.

27. In addressing the question as to whether there  would  be  difficulties
    for a single white female age 24 in relocating to South Africa  and  if
    so what Mr Hodgetts emphasises the response given by the expert  namely
    that she would face suspicion by communities  as  most  South  Africans
    live with their own families or their  extended  families  and  that  a
    single woman in South Africa could be accused of being a prostitute  in
    the urban context or a witch in the  rural  context.   He  goes  on  to
    emphasise that the risks involved for a single woman  in  South  Africa
    are social rejection, social isolation, attacks,  violent  attacks  and
    rape.

28. Mr Hodgetts cross-references this to the view  expressed  by  Professor
    Ashworth who expresses similar views with regard to  the  prospect  for
    the Appellant of socialisation  and  consequent  potential  hostilities
    from white families.  He acknowledges each case is  fact  specific  but
    emphasises that on the facts of this case that the Appellant  would  be
    at substantial risk.  At paragraph 31 he states:

         "It should also be noted that English speaking white South Africans
         have little love for their brethren, such as Miss [J]'s family, who
         were able to emigrate  and  seek  a  better  life  in  places  like
         Australia, New Zealand and the United  Kingdom.   Lacking  existing
         kinship and social networks in  the  country,  Miss  [J]  would  be
         viewed as a representative of people who have fled the country  and
         would experience difficulty in establishing new networks."

29. Mr  Hodgetts  thereafter  seeks  to  consider  the  position  that  the
    Appellant would find herself in due to her lack of financial  stability
    and the effect that this might well have on her mental health  and  her
    health generally.  He starts by taking me to Professor Aguilar's report
    pointing out that  Professor  Aguilar  considers  the  social  division
    between men and women and between white and black South African remains
    a marker and he evaluated the level of daily life a white  woman,  such
    as the Appellant, would  find  difficulty  of  not  being  able  to  be
    supported by the state and of being distrusted by the  black  majority.
    It would pose the question he submits as to how the Appellant is  going
    to live and where and what  her  social  role  would  be  within  South
    Africa.  Professor Aguilar answers this question at paragraph 10 of his
    report:

         "The choice of locality for habitation that a  single  white  woman
         has is limited.  Thus, the Appellant as a lone woman is  not  going
         to reside in black majority neighbourhoods if she does not  have  a
         social role.  Thus, the difficulty the Appellant faces  is  of  not
         having a family or a social role in a society in which borders  can
         only be crossed by having such a role. "

30. He consequently goes on to make the following conclusion:

         "The risks to a single woman returning to  South  Africa  are  very
         serious and tangible.  On the one hand in the socio-economic world,
         a single woman faces  social  rejection,  accusations  of  being  a
         prostitute,  and  social  vulnerability.   In  concrete  terms   of
         financial stability,  a  single  woman  arriving  in  South  Africa
         without financial assets faces  economic  destitution  because  the
         state of South Africa will not be able to support her  with  income
         benefits.  The Appellant's main problem of  returning  on  her  own
         comes from the fact that she does not have a social role  within  a
         society in  which  social  roles  within  a  family  and  within  a
         community define who a  South  African  is.   Thus,  networks  have
         become the only protection  against  violence,  by  men  and  gangs
         against women, in contemporary South Africa."

31. Mr Hodgetts accepts that the Appellant has a degree in  health  science
    and that this is acknowledged by both experts but submits, as Professor
    Ashworth  has  emphasised,  that  she  does  not  however  have  formal
    qualifications in this field and that lacking qualifications she  would
    find it extremely difficult  to  find  remunerative  employment  within
    South Africa.

32. Mr Hodgetts then turns to the statistics of crime and violence in South
    Africa including sexual  abuse.   To  a  certain  extent  I  previously
    addressed this at paragraph 9 of my error of law finding.  He refers me
    however to further extensive paragraphs relating thereto  to  be  found
    within the report of both experts.  As Professor Ashworth has stated in
    his summary at paragraph 17:

         "It is my considered opinion that were Miss [J]  to  be  forced  to
         relocate  to  South  Africa  she  would  face  considerable   risk,
         particularly from violent crime.  Moreover, since  Miss  [J]  lacks
         formal professional qualifications she will have  great  difficulty
         earning a living in South Africa, forcing her to take up  residence
         in locations subject to a greater prevalence of violent crime.  The
         fact that she is white will compound the risk she faces."

33.  Mr  Hodgetts  thereafter  takes  me  to  some  objective  evidence  in
    particular the Amnesty International  Report  of  2017  to  2018.   The
    statistics therein are appalling.  He notes that the report states:

         "Violence  against  women  and  girls,   including   gender-related
         killings, remain  widespread.   Over  39,000  cases  of  rape  were
         reported to the police between April 2016 and March  2017  although
         such  cases  were  believed  to  be  grossly   underreported.    In
         September, the Medical Research Council stated that  only  8.6%  of
         rape  cases  opened  by  the  police  in  2012  had   resulted   in
         convictions, citing a lack of resources  and  training  for  police
         officers, as  well  as  failures  to  investigate  the  crimes  and
         gathering forensic evidence."

34. Mr Hodgetts points out that these statistics are  reemphasised  in  the
    Human Rights Watch Report of  2018  which  gives  an  analysis  of  the
    general scale of risk pointing out that one in five women over 18  have
    experienced physical violence.   He  refers  me  to  further  objective
    evidence by considering in detail the Amnesty International  Report  on
    South Africa 2017 to 2018 and I note the general comment made  therein.
    He emphasises that the Human Rights Watch report of 2018 concludes that
    the government had yet to  introduce  a  national  strategy  to  combat
    violence against women and  I  note  and  take  on  board  the  general
    situation that is  clearly  expressed  both  in  his  submissions,  the
    expert's reports and the objective evidence as to the risk of  violence
    to women generally in South Africa.

35. Counsel thereafter takes me through a substantial amount  of  objective
    evidence to be found  at  paragraphs  A14  to  41  of  his  instructing
    solicitor's bundle.  These paragraphs relate to a  number  of  articles
    and studies from the internet.  They are all of recent  date  and  they
    emphasise the horrendous murder rate and the fact  that  49%  of  women
    felt unsafe walking in their own neighbourhood, both during the day and
    when it was dark.  I take on board all the general statistics  and  the
    evidence within these reports but note that  they  are  generalisations
    and of course not fact specific to this particular case.

36. I am referred to the manner in which the problems the  Appellant  might
    face on return being obviated  or  ameliorated  by  having  an  outside
    source of income from a relative.  I am again referred to the  expert's
    report and the view  expressed  therein  and  submitted  to  me  by  Mr
    Hodgetts that such a source would not be feasible  and  that  it  would
    have to be extremely substantial annually to buy/rent a home in a  well
    to do neighbourhood and to pay for the expenses  of  security  cameras,
    guards and dogs  within,  almost  certainly,  Pretoria,  Cape  Town  or
    Johannesburg.  It is submitted to me that these expenses  and  security
    apparatus would not give the absolute security  in  any  event  that  a
    single white woman would not be attacked on  the  streets  and  that  a
    single white woman of 24 in the view of Professor  Aguilar  remains  at
    very high risk of robbery and sexual  crimes  within  South  Africa,  a
    reality that we do not know in the UK.

37. Further Mr Hodgetts submits to me that there  is  a  complete  lack  of
    sufficiency of protection and that there is a lack of  support  by  the
    Criminal Justice System, something that is highlighted in  the  opening
    paragraph of Amnesty International's report on South Africa  2017/2018.
    Mr Hodgetts concludes by submitting that all the evidence  chimes  with
    the same resonance and that the Appellant's past experience  will  have
    an important part to play if she were to be returned  to  South  Africa
    and he submits she meets all the criteria that would put  her  at  risk
    pursuant to Article 3.

38. The response by Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State  is  much
    briefer.  His  starting  point  is  that  the  claim  based  herein  is
    hypothetical bearing in mind that the Appellant has been granted  leave
    pursuant to Article 8 and that this has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State on appeal.  Further he submits that there is a  high
    test for maintaining and succeeding in a claim under  Article  3,  that
    the guidance in Horvath is relevant and he  submits  that  there  is  a
    functioning police force in South Africa.  He  maintains  the  argument
    that the Article 3 threshold has not been reached.

39. He goes on to comment that the Appellant has been in the UK since  2013
    and it is unlikely that she would  be  returned  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  If however she were to be returned he submits  that  she  would
    have financial support from her mother via the UK and because  of  this
    he submits that the threshold is not reached.

40. In brief response Mr Hodgetts  comments  that  in  order  to  meet  the
    criteria that Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of  State  maintains
    it would be necessary for the Appellant to obtain employment  and  that
    Professor Ashworth's evidence is such that  it  is  unlikely  that  her
    income would remotely be capable of providing the resources  needed  by
    the Appellant and in any event it would be thereafter necessary for her
    to almost barricade herself in her property, something that  would  not
    be practical nor possible.  He asked  me  to  bear  in  mind  that  the
    question to be answered is how "the real risk test" to  this  Appellant
    plays out.

Findings and Conclusions

41. I am aware that this is an Appellant who has the benefit of  Article  8
    leave.  I am also aware that Mr Walker has indicated that the Appellant
    having been in the UK since 2013 it is unlikely that the  Secretary  of
    State would require her to leave on the expiry of that leave.  With the
    greatest of respect, to the Secretary of  State  and  the  Home  Office
    position, that is a theoretical guess.   Mr  Walker  submits  that  the
    claim before me is a hypothetical one.  He makes that submission on the
    basis that it is not open at the present  time  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to apply to remove the Appellant.  I acknowledge that that is the
    case however I do not accept that  that  is  a  hypothetical  argument.
    Such a finding cannot in any way impinge upon  the  Appellant's  rights
    under Article 3.  The Appellant has the right to have her case heard on
    the basis upon which it is put.

42. I have related the facts of this case in considerable  detail  and  set
    out again in detail the criteria as a matter of law that is required to
    satisfy an Article 3 claim.  Despite it  being  old  law  there  is  no
    dispute between Mr Hodgetts and Mr Walker that the  test  is  basically
    that set out in Horvath.  The question is in this instant case  has  it
    been reached?

43. It is I consider extremely important for the Upper Tribunal to identify
    two specific questions that have been posed to me here.   Firstly,  the
    generic question as to whether a single white woman without family  and
    financial support in South Arica is at risk per se on return.  I do not
    find that generically that threshold is reached.  In order  to  make  a
    finding it is necessary to carry out an examination of the following:

      a) The factual circumstances of the case in question.

      b) To consider exactly what the family circumstances of the  applicant
         are i.e. are there any family members?  If so, what is the level of
         consanguinity?  Would the applicant  be  living  with  that  family
         member?  Would that family member be providing any support?

      c) What is the level of support that can be provided and what are  the
         requirements for that support both financially and in security?

44. All such questions are fact specific.  I agree so far as it  goes  with
    Mr Walker that it cannot be shown that generically a single white woman
    alone in South Africa can meet the requirements of the Article 3  test.



45. However, in this instant case I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  does
    and that she succeeds.  It is important to give  reasons.   Firstly,  I
    emphasise that each case must be fact specific.  I further  acknowledge
    that the objective evidence makes is abundantly clear  that  there  are
    substantial problems of security for single white women in South Africa
    - indeed for all women - that the crime statistics are  horrendous  and
    that there are substantial failings amongst the police and the security
    services to provide an adequate level of protection.  However,  despite
    those failings there is a police force, there is a system  of  law  and
    order and there are security forces.  Generically I  am  not  persuaded
    that the Article 3 threshold is reached.

46. Further, I take on board the expert's reports that I have  seen.   Miss
    [J] has no family in South Africa.  Her family have  dispersed  to  New
    Zealand and to the UK.  As the  experts  indicate  that  in  itself  is
    firstly indicative of the problems  that  the  family  experienced  and
    secondly would not endear Miss [J] to other white remainers if she were
    returned.  She would be returning with absolutely no family  member  in
    South Africa to offer any support.

47. It has to next be appreciated that she has  had  a  history  of  mental
    problem arising,  as  Dr  Ragpal  put  it,  substantially  out  of  her
    circumstances.  She lives with her mother in the UK and has done so for
    five years.  Albeit educated to degree standard she is supported by her
    mother, although I anticipate that  they  provide  a  level  of  mutual
    support to each other.  It was very much assumed on that basis that the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim succeeded and has not been appealed by  the
    Secretary of State.

48. Family members have made extensive witness statements  and  her  mother
    gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  I glean  the  impression
    that whilst the family are not by any means destitute  they  cannot  be
    considered rich or at least not of sufficient  financial  potential  to
    enable the Appellant to return to  South  Africa,  buy  or  rent  in  a
    property and hire sufficient security to provide her with the requisite
    degree of safety that she would need.  In addition, it  is  clear  that
    whilst the Appellant has a  degree  she  does  not  have  a  sufficient
    professional qualification to ensure that she would receive  an  income
    that would enable her to support herself.  The combined effect of  this
    is that this is an Appellant who would not, I  am  satisfied  be  able,
    even with the benefit of any limited financial support her family could
    provide, to maintain herself in a secure environment.

49. The practical effect of returning this Appellant to South Africa  would
    be to return a person with a proven history of depression, to a country
    the other side of the world where no family members live  and  with  no
    visible means of financial support, friends or the ability  to  protect
    herself from the  risks  to  which  she  would  be  exposed.   In  such
    circumstances as a single  white  woman  without  family  or  financial
    support from the risks (and they are very real) of crime  and  violence
    the appellant's claim succeeds.

50. Consequently, for all the above reasons on the facts of this individual
    case, I am satisfied that this Appellant meets the threshold set out in
    Horvath and the test pursuant to Article 3 of the  European  Convention
    of Human Rights and the Appellant's appeal is allowed under Article 3.

Notice of Decision

The  Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  under  Article  3  of  the   European
Convention on Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
