
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12933/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd March 2020                             |On 23rd March 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                             shah muhammed safi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Thathall, Immigration Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Butler)  promulgated  on  17th  October   2019,
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
    refusing to grant him leave to remain in the UK on family/private  life
    grounds.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born 1st January  1992.   He
    states he left Afghanistan in around 2011 and travelled to Italy  where
    he applied for, and was granted, subsidiary  protection  status.   This
    status was valid, following an extension being granted, until  December
    2019.  The Appellant did not remain in Italy; he travelled  to  the  UK
    entering illegally, he claims  in  April  2015.   He  did  not  declare
    himself to the  authorities  on  entry,  but  lived  initially  in  the
    Manchester area with friends.

 3. In June 2016 he met his partner Miss [Q] via  an  online  dating  site.
    Miss [Q] is a Pakistani national who was granted refugee  status  as  a
    dependant of her mother.  Her mother was granted asylum on 20th October
    2017 on account of her Christian faith.  Miss [Q],  together  with  her
    mother and siblings, moved to the London area.  The  Appellant  visited
    her regularly  there,  but  according  to  their  accounts  kept  their
    relationship secret as it was not approved  of  by  Miss  [Q]'s  mother
    because the Appellant is a Muslim.

 4. Miss [Q] moved to Derby in September 2018 to continue her education and
    the Appellant moved in with her in October 2018.  They  married  in  an
    Islamic ceremony on 6th  November  2018.   On  1st  February  2019  the
    Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  family  and  private  life
    grounds.

The Secretary of State's Decision to Refuse

 5. The Respondent refused the application because the Appellant could  not
    meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  the  following
    reasons:

      a)  On  the  eligibility  requirements  an  Islamic  marriage  is  not
         recognised under English law

      b) The requirement that he and his partner live together for a  period
         of two years prior to the application for  leave  to  remain  being
         made was not met

      c) He entered and is residing in the UK unlawfully

      d) He had not shown that  there  were  significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration into Afghanistan or Italy, if required to leave the UK.

 6. The Respondent also found after further consideration, that there  were
    no exceptional circumstances justifying a consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules.  The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision to
    the FtT.

FtT Hearing

 7. The appeal came before Judge Butler.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from
    both the Appellant and Miss [Q].  He noted that the Grounds  of  Appeal
    claimed that to refuse the Appellant's application violated Articles  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.  It was also claimed that the  Respondent's  failure
    to recognise that returning the Appellant to Afghanistan or Italy would
    be in breach of the Refugee Convention and was  disproportionate.   The
    grounds also claimed  that  "Dublin  Regulation  III"  applied  to  the
    Appellant's circumstances.  So far as the appeal before me is concerned
    the Article 3 claim does not feature because permission was granted  on
    one ground only.

 8. In a full and reasoned decision, the judge found that the Appellant did
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to  remain
    in relation to either private or family life.  After directing  himself
    on the Razgar principles he found that  the  claim  outside  the  Rules
    pursuant to Article 8 ECHR also failed.   The  appeal  was  accordingly
    dismissed.

Onward Appeal

 9. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There were  originally  three  grounds  in  the  handwritten
    application, but permission was granted on one ground only  (Ground  3)
    which says as follows:

         "That the IJ erred under the Article 8 considerations in failing to
         consider the specific circumstances of the appellant and sponsor as
         raised in a skeleton argument and especially the young age  of  the
         sponsor, their inability to return to their own countries  as  they
         are both with Refugee status and the respective difficulties  faced
         by the sponsor in resuming (?) her  education  and  career  as  too
         great a price, hence the cumulative effect disproportionate to both
         parties."

10. Permission was granted in the following terms,  the  relevant  part  of
    which is reproduced here:

         "1. The application is in time. I turn first  to  the  ground  that
         asserts the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  specific
         circumstances of the appellant and his partner, and  in  particular
         their inability to live elsewhere.

         2. While the Judge was plainly correct to find that the appellant's
         partner did not meet  the  definition  at  GEN.1.2,  and  EX.1  was
         therefore not engaged,  it  is  arguable  that  the  assessment  of
         proportionality   nonetheless   required   engagement   with    the
         appellant's submission (recorded at [29])  that  the  couple  faced
         literally insurmountable obstacles.  The appellant had been granted
         subsidiary protection in Italy, so could not  return  to  Pakistan.
         His partner had leave to remain in the UK as a refugee, which  gave
         her no right to be admitted to Italy.  The  Judge  nonetheless,  at
         [32], approached proportionality on the basis that it was "a matter
         for them whether they choose to continue their relationship outside
         the UK."

         3. While engagement with, and indeed acceptance of, that submission
         might still have led to  the  Judge  concluding  that  removal  was
         proportionate, it cannot be said  that  this  was  inevitable.  The
         legal  error  argued  is  therefore,  if  established,  potentially
         material."

11. Thus, the matter comes before me to determine whether the  decision  of
    the FtTJ contains such error that it must be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

12. Before me Mr Thathall appeared on behalf of the Appellant and Mrs Aboni
    on behalf of the Respondent.  Mr Thathall's submissions relied upon the
    written ground upon which permission  was  granted.   He  handed  up  a
    skeleton argument together with an excerpt from the guidance  published
    by the Respondent relating to EX.1 of the Rules and dated 10th December
    2019 (post dating the date of decision) and a copy of the  judgment  in
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

13.  In addition, he said that he wished to emphasise that the Appellant is
    the dependant of Miss [Q] who is a refugee.  In his decision  the  FtTJ
    did not properly factor this into  the  balancing  exercise.  Miss  [Q]
    cannot freely travel to Italy to continue the  relationship  there.  As
    these matters were not dealt with properly by the  judge  the  decision
    should be set aside for a re-hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    added that the Appellant's partner, Miss [Q] has now gained a place  to
    read medicine at Nottingham University.

14. Mrs Aboni on behalf of the Respondent  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    directed himself properly.  The Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the  Rules.
    This was a relationship which had been started  and  continued  in  the
    full knowledge of the Appellant's precarious immigration status. By the
    time the Appellant moved in with Miss [Q] he had already lived  in  the
    UK unlawfully for 3 years without declaring himself to the authorities.
    There  was  no  evidence  produced  to  show  that   there   would   be
    insurmountable obstacles to the relationship between the Appellant  and
    Miss [Q] continuing in Italy, a country where the Appellant had status.

15. Developing that point, Mrs Aboni continued that there was  no  evidence
    to show that Miss [Q] would be unable to join the  Appellant  in  Italy
    and continue the relationship there. The submission made to the FtT  on
    behalf of the Appellant asserted that Miss [Q] could  not  enter  Italy
    without valid leave [29].  However there was  nothing  put  before  the
    judge to show why there would be difficulty in obtaining a  visa.   The
    fact was she did not wish to go to Italy because she wanted  to  remain
    in the UK so that she could continue her  studies.   The  evidence  put
    forward did not amount to an insurmountable obstacle.   The  judge  had
    looked at all the material evidence which had been placed  before  him.
    The findings made by the judge were ones open to him on that  evidence.
    The decision was sustainable and the appeal should be dismissed.

Consideration

16. At the end of submissions, I reserved my decision which I now give with
    reasons.  I find, after considering and taking into account the written
    and oral submissions, that there is no material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is clear in what  is  a  well-
    constructed decision,  the  judge  has  carefully  considered  all  the
    evidence and taken into account all relevant factors.

17. Firstly, I am satisfied that the FtTJ's assessment at [19  -  20]  that
    the Appellant could not rely on family reunion provisions was  entirely
    correct.  On the Appellant's own account, he left Italy  where  he  had
    subsidiary protection and entered the UK unlawfully in or around  April
    2015.  He made no effort and took no steps to declare  himself  to  the
    authorities in the UK nor did he take steps to regularise his  position
    here.  He claimed at some point that  he  could  not  remain  in  Italy
    because he was badly treated there.  However there was no evidence  put
    before the FtTJ to support that claim, such as having sought to  report
    any ill-treatment to the authorities in Italy.

18. The Appellant did not meet his partner until June 2016.   It  is  self-
    evident therefore that he could not be said to have entered the  UK  on
    the basis of a family reunion with someone he had yet to meet.

19. The FtTJ then considered the relationship of the  Appellant  with  Miss
    [Q] and made a finding at [22] that the Appellant could  not  meet  the
    partner requirements under Appendix FM of the Rules.  That  finding  is
    correct in that the evidence before him showed  that  at  the  date  of
    application, the Appellant had not lived with Miss [Q] for  two  years.
    The Islamic marriage to Miss [Q] is not one which is  recognised  under
    UK law.  Accordingly, the FtTJ was correct to find that  EX.1  did  not
    apply since the definition of partner within the  Rules  could  not  be
    satisfied.

20. The judge then turned his attention to the Article 8 claim outside  the
    Rules [23].  He kept in mind the five-stage test in Razgar.  The  judge
    looked as he  was  obliged  to  do  at  Section  117B  public  interest
    considerations in Article 8 cases [24]. He noted that the Appellant had
    entered the UK illegally, could not show financial independence and nor
    could he speak English.  He and Miss [Q] communicate in Urdu. The judge
    reminded himself that leave can be granted outside the Rules only where
    exceptional circumstances apply.  This, as  he  correctly  said,  means
    "circumstances in which refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  refusal  would  not  be
    proportionate" [27].  The FtTJ was fully aware of the position  of  the
    Appellant and of Miss [Q].  He looked at the evidence  before  him  and
    noted that the objection which Miss [Q] put forward to  furthering  her
    relationship with the Appellant outside the UK was on the basis that it
    would disrupt her education and she did not speak  Italian.   He  found
    that those considerations did not amount to exceptional circumstances.

21. The judge noted Mr Thathall's submission at [29]  asserting  that  Miss
    [Q] would be unable to enter Italy without  valid  leave.  Mr  Thathall
    criticised the judge for not  properly  factoring  into  the  balancing
    exercise, the fact that Miss [Q] has refugee  status  and  thus  cannot
    travel to Italy.  That criticism is, I find, unfounded.   There  was  a
    lack  of  evidence  detailing  what  difficulties  there  would  be  in
    accessing a visa to travel to Italy.  In these circumstances it is hard
    to see what error the judge has fallen into.

22. I find that on reading the decision as a whole, it is  clear  that  the
    judge has had regard to all the material information  that  was  before
    him and has not omitted any material information from his assessment of
    the proportionality of the Appellant's claim. Properly balancing  those
    relevant considerations against  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control, I find that the judge was entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion  he  did  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK   was   a
    proportionate one. It follows therefore that I find no error of law  in
    the FtT's decision and this appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This  appeal  is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier   tribunal
promulgated on 17th October 2019 does  not  contain  an  error  of  law  and
stands.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     18 March 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     18 March 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts



