
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12135/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2018                           |On 10th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     D E
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis for
                    the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND


 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan.   He  is  now  aged  twenty
    years.  He arrived in the UK in January 2012 when he was aged fourteen.
     He claimed asylum on 14 February 2012 which was  refused  on  16  July
    2012,  but  he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  as   an
    unaccompanied minor.  He was  given  a  right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his asylum claim which he did not exercise.  He then applied
    on 3 July 2015 for further leave to remain.   He  appeals  against  the
    decision of the Respondent dated 12 November 2015 refusing him leave to
    remain.


 2. The Appellant's appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Isaacs
    in a decision promulgated on 16 February 2017.  The Judge accepted that
    the Appellant's father had  been  killed  by  the  Taliban.   She  also
    accepted that the Appellant would be at risk of persecution in his home
    area of Logar.  Those findings were not challenged by  the  Respondent.
    However, the Judge went on to find that the Appellant could  return  to
    Kabul and that this would  not  breach  his  rights  under  either  the
    Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Act 1998.


 3. The Appellant  appealed  that  decision  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
    permission to appeal granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert.   By
    a decision promulgated on 19 December 2017, a panel  of  this  Tribunal
    consisting of The Honourable Lady Rae (sitting  as  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge) and Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley found there to be an error  of
    law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  so  far  as  concerned  the
    findings in relation to return  to  Kabul.   At  [21]  of  the  panel's
    decision, the errors of law are stated to be as follows:


         "[21]    We find therefore that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
         law in failing to set out and apply the correct test  for  internal
         relocation and apply it to the substantial amount  of  evidence  on
         this point.  We also find that the same error occurred with respect
         to the failure to apply the full  evidence  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to  the  decision  on  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi)  of  the
         Immigration Rules with respect to whether the Appellant would  have
         very significant obstacles to integration in Afghanistan, and  thus
         the appeal Article 8 ECHR.
         [22]  We  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  We preserve however all of the  findings  up  until  and
         including paragraph 85 of the decision which are not infected  with
         any errors.
         [23] We now need to remake these aspects of the  appeal  identified
         at paragraph 21 above.  However, it is now appropriate  to  adjourn
         the remaking hearing until after the  country  guidance  in  AS  on
         relocation to Kabul is promulgated.  It is understood that this  is
         likely to be available in January  2018,  so  the  matter  will  be
         listed for a case management review hearing on the first  available
         date before Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley after 1st February 2018"


 4. A copy of the panel's decision regarding the error of law  is  attached
    to this decision for ease of reference.


 5. The appeal next came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Dawson  on  10  April
    2018 for case management review.  The Appellant sought  a  remittal  of
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal which application  was  rejected.
    Directions were given for the filing of evidence.


 6. We had before us a  consolidated  bundle  of  documents  filed  by  the
    Appellant to which were added late in the day a  number  of  additional
    documents, including the Appellant's most recent statement signed on  2
    August 2018 which for some reason did not find its way into the  bundle
    until the morning of the hearing.  We also had to permit the  Appellant
    a short adjournment on the morning of the hearing in order for Ms Capel
    to take instructions in relation to a medical report from Dr  Bagga,  a
    document not produced by the Appellant until that  day.    We  admitted
    that document in evidence with no objection from the Respondent.


 7. The late filing of evidence suggests a lack of  preparedness  by  those
    acting for the Appellant which was also reflected in their  failure  to
    request an interpreter for the  Appellant's  oral  evidence,  a  matter
    which is made expressly clear in the standard directions on  the  grant
    of permission.  An adjournment in order to obtain  an  interpreter  was
    avoided by the Appellant's agreement to give his evidence  in  English.
    We indicated that we would consent to that course but  would  stop  the
    evidence if it appeared to us  at  any  time  that  he  was  unable  to
    understand and answer questions.  It was not necessary  to  adjourn  as
    the Appellant gave his evidence in English without any difficulty.   He
    was  able  to  understand  and  answer  the   questions   articulately.
    Fortunately, therefore the lack of proper preparation on  the  part  of
    the Appellant's solicitors did not prejudice the Tribunal's conduct  of
    the hearing.


 8. We refer to the evidence contained in the consolidated bundle hereafter
    as [AB/xx].


 9. We record our equal dissatisfaction with the  Respondent's  failure  to
    file his statement of case on time or indeed at  all.   We  nonetheless
    permitted Mr Tufan to make oral submissions.  He also produced  on  the
    day of the hearing the latest "Country Policy and Information Note"  in
    relation to Afghanistan dated April 2018.  Our attention was not  drawn
    to any particular part of that Note and, having  read  it,  we  do  not
    consider it necessary to refer to it.   It refers to  evidence  already
    considered in the country guidance in AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan
    CG [2018] UKUT 00118  (IAC)  ("AS  (Afghanistan")  to  which  we  refer
    further below.

THE APPELLANT'S CASE


10. We begin by re-stating the limited scope of the issues which we have to
    determine.  We are not concerned with the  Appellant's  return  to  his
    home area in Logar province where he would be at risk  of  persecution.
    Although Ms Capel referred in her Amended  Statement  of  Case  to  the
    possibility of return to Khost (where the Appellant formerly  had  some
    family  members),  she  did  so  because  the  Respondent  raised  this
    possibility in his decision letter  in  November  2015.   However,  the
    Respondent  has  not  submitted  before  us  that  this  would  be   an
    alternative place of relocation.  We do not therefore need to  consider
    whether this would be a reasonable alternative.


11. We note by reference to the errors of law set out in the passage  cited
    at [3] above, that the only issues for us to determine are whether  the
    Appellant can be expected to internally relocate within Afghanistan  to
    Kabul and/or whether there are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his
    integration there under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules ("the
    Rules").  Although Ms Capel did refer in her Amended Statement of  Case
    to an issue whether Article 8 ECHR is breached more  generally  by  the
    decision to remove, we observed in the course of submissions that, when
    the interference with the Appellant's private life is balanced  against
    the public interest, it would  be  unlikely  to  outweigh  that  public
    interest unless the Appellant can show that his integration in Kabul is
    prevented by "very significant obstacles".


12. In brief summary, the Appellant's case is as follows.


13. The Appellant says that he does not any longer have contact with family
    members in Afghanistan and does not know where his mother and uncle are
    now living.  As such, he says that he would be relocating to a part  of
    Afghanistan where  he  has  never  lived  without  any  family  support
    network. He would also be returning to a country which he left when  he
    was a young teenager and would have little familiarity with the culture
    there.


14. It is part of the Appellant's case, that,  in  finding  employment  and
    accommodation in the UK, he has been reliant on others for support  and
    assistance and that, without such support in Afghanistan, he would  not
    be able to find employment and accommodation in order to  survive.   We
    have evidence before us from a Ms  A  Tyrrell,  an  independent  social
    worker as well as from a social worker from Suffolk County Council  who
    had responsibility for the Appellant as a minor and from Mr Farid Mall,
    the director of the Afghan Paiwand Association ("Paiwand") and Ms  Kate
    Duffy, a key worker for Paiwand, in relation to that support network.


15. The Appellant  says  that  his  problems  in  securing  employment  and
    accommodation would be exacerbated by his low level  of  education  and
    illiteracy in the Pashtu languages and physical problems arising from a
    road traffic accident suffered in the UK in February 2018.  In relation
    to the latter, we have a report from a Dr  Bagga  dated  13  June  2018
    which was written for the  purposes  of  litigation  by  the  Appellant
    against the other driver involved in the accident.


16. The Appellant also says that he is not otherwise in  good  health.   He
    points to mental health conditions which are dealt with in most  detail
    by a psychiatric report of Dr Obuaya dated 27 June 2018 and GP records.


17. Finally, the Appellant also says that the security situation  in  Kabul
    has deteriorated and, as a civilian, he would not be  safe  there.   He
    does not ask the Tribunal to depart from the country guidance given  in
    AS (Afghanistan).  It is not suggested that the level of  risk  is  now
    such as  to  breach  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.
    Nonetheless, the  Appellant  relies  on  the  latest  report  from  the
    European Asylum Support Office ("EASO") dated 2018 as showing that  the
    level of risk to civilians has increased and that this is a  factor  to
    which we must also have regard.


18. It is convenient at this juncture to mention that, at the start of  the
    hearing, Judge Dawson read out a statement setting out his  involvement
    with EASO in terms of providing training for courts and tribunals (as a
    trainer approved by EASO) and assisting with the  creation  of  written
    guidance for the judiciary directly with EASO and indirectly  for  EASO
    through the auspices of the International Association  of  Refugee  Law
    Judges (IARLJ) who have prepared additional judicial guidance.   He  is
    also on the Joint Monitoring Group of  the  IARLJ  which  oversees  the
    creation of its training material.  Judge Dawson confirmed however that
    he had not been involved in any of the work for EASO's  information  on
    countries of origin and is independent of EASO.  As such,  he  did  not
    perceive any conflict arising from his role.  Neither party objected to
    his  continuing  involvement  with  this  appeal  in  light   of   that
    declaration.


 LEGAL FRAMEWORK


19. The country guidance in AS (Afghanistan) was concerned with whether and
    to what extent, internal relocation to Kabul would be  "unduly  harsh".
    There is therefore a significant overlap with the issue  in  that  case
    and this appeal.  The Tribunal in that case also  received  submissions
    in relation to the legal test concerning internal relocation which were
    more extensive than  those  before  us.   Rather  than  rehearse  those
    arguments again by reference to  earlier  case-law,  it  is  convenient
    simply to set out the Tribunal's reasoning and  conclusions  about  the
    test as follows:


         "[14]    By Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a
             person who is out of the country of his or her nationality and
             who, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution  for  reasons
             of race, religion, nationality or membership of  a  particular
             social group or political opinion, is unable or  unwilling  to
             avail him or herself of  the  protection  of  the  country  of
             origin.
         [15] Article 8 of the Qualification Directive provides as follows:
               1.    As part of  the  assessment  of  the  application  for
               international protection, Member States may determine that an
               applicant is not in need of international protection if in  a
               part of the country of origin there is no  well-founded  fear
               of being persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm
               and the applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in  that
               part of the country.
               2.    In examining whether a part of the country of origin is
               in accordance with paragraph 1, Member States  shall  at  the
               time of taking the decision on the application have regard to
               the general circumstances prevailing  in  that  part  of  the
               country and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.
               3.    Paragraph  1  may  apply  notwithstanding   technical
               obstacles to return to the country of origin.
         [16] The Immigration Rules provide in Rule 339O(i):
             (i)  The Secretary of State will not make:
                  (a)        a grant of refugee status if in  part  of  the
                  country of origin a person would not have a  well  founded
                  fear of being persecuted, and the person can reasonably be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country; or
                  (b)        a grant of humanitarian protection if in  part
                  of the country of return a person would not  face  a  real
                  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm,  and  the  person  can
                  reasonably be  expected  to  stay  in  that  part  of  the
                  country.
             (ii)   In examining whether a part of the country of origin or
             country of return meets the requirements in (i) the  Secretary
             of State, when making a decision on whether to grant asylum or
             humanitarian protection,  will  have  regard  to  the  general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to
             the personal circumstances of the person.
             (iii)  (i)  applies  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin or country of return.
         [17] From the above,  a  person  is  not  a  refugee  if  they  can
             reasonably be expected to live in another part of  their  home
             country where they would  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution.  In such circumstances, a person has  the  option
             of internal relocation,  also  known  as  an  internal  flight
             alternative.  Once the issue of internal relocation  has  been
             raised there are two discrete questions to  determine  whether
             there is an option of internal relocation.   First,  does  the
             person have a well-founded fear of persecution in the proposed
             place of relocation?   If  yes,  then  there  is  no  internal
             relocation option and the person is a refugee.  There is  also
             no internal relocation option if the person would  be  subject
             to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  within  the  meaning  of
             Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the
             "ECHR") in the proposed place of relocation or if it would  be
             in breach of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  If
             not, then secondly there must be an assessment of  whether  in
             all the circumstances, it would be reasonable  or  not  unduly
             harsh to expect the person to relocate to that place.
             .....
         [18]  Lord  Bingham  summarised  the  approach  to   reasonableness
             in Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]
             2 AC 426, at [21]:
             "The  decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all   relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so... There  is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
             observed  in Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of  cases.
             The decision-maker  must  do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
             material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular
             case falls... All must depend on  a  fair  assessment  of  the
             relevant facts."
         [19] Further, at [47], Lord Hope stated the position as follows:
             "The question where the issue of internal relocation is raised
             can, then, be defined quite simply ... it is whether it  would
             be unduly harsh to expect a claimant who is  being  persecuted
             for a Convention reason in one part of his country to move  to
             a less hostile part before seeking refugee status abroad.  The
             words "unduly harsh" set the standard that  must  be  met  for
             this to be regarded as unreasonable.  If the claimant can live
             a relatively normal life there by the standards  that  prevail
             in his country of nationality generally, and if he  can  reach
             the  less  hostile  part  without  undue  hardship  or   undue
             difficulty, it will not be unreasonable to expect him to  move
             there."
         [20] The test was considered further by the House of  Lords  in AH
             (Sudan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] 1
             AC 678, upon  which  we  had  detailed  submissions  from  the
             parties as to the scope  of  the  test  of  reasonableness  of
             internal relocation......
         [21] First, Lord Bingham, having referred to his own  judgement  at
             [21] of Januzi, (set out above), went on to say at [5]:
             "Although specifically directed to a secondary  issue  in  the
             case, these observations are plainly of  general  application.
             It is not easy to see how the rule could  be  more  simply  or
             clearly expressed.  It is, or  should  be,  evident  that  the
             enquiry must be directed to the situation  of  the  particular
             applicant, whose age, gender, experience, health,  skills  and
             family ties may all be very relevant.  There is no warrant for
             excluding,  giving   priority   to,   consideration   of   the
             applicant's way of life in the place of persecution.  There is
             no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to, consideration
             of conditions generally prevailing in the home country.  I  do
             not estimate  the  difficulty  of  making  decisions  in  some
             cases.  But the difficulty lies in applying the test,  not  in
             expressing  it.   The  humanitarian  object  of  the   Refugee
             Convention is to secure a reasonable measure of protection for
             those with a well-founded fear of persecution  in  their  home
             country or some part of it;  it  is  not  to  procure  general
             levelling-up of living standards around the  world,  desirable
             though of course that is."
         [22] Baroness Hale confirmed at [20] that the House was all  agreed
             that the correct approach was that set  out  by  Lord  Bingham
             in Januzi and further endorsed the following submission from
             the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR)  of
             the correct approach:
             "The correct approach when considering the  reasonableness  of
             IRA [internal relocation alternative] is  to  assess  all  the
             circumstances of the individual's case holistically  and  with
             specific reference to the individual's personal  circumstances
             (including past persecution or fear thereof, psychological and
             health condition, family and social  situation,  and  survival
             capacities).  This assessment is to be made in the context  of
             the conditions in the place  of  relocation  (including  basic
             human rights, security conditions, socio-economic  conditions,
             accommodation, access to health care facilities), in order  to
             determine the impact on that individual  of  settling  in  the
             proposed place of relocation and whether the individual  could
             live a relatively normal life without undue hardship."
         [23]  The  assessment  must  therefore  consider   the   particular
             circumstances of the individual applicant in  the  context  of
             conditions  in  the  place  of  relocation.    The   test   of
             reasonableness is one of great generality,  excluding  only  a
             comparison with  conditions  in  the  host  country  in  which
             protection has been sought,  per  Lord  Bingham  at  [13]  and
             Baroness Hale at [27].
         [24] Secondly, the test of reasonableness is not analogous  to,  or
             to be equated with, the test under Article 3 of the ECHR,  per
             Lord Bingham at [9] and Baroness Hale at [21-22 and 26].   If,
             however, conditions in the proposed  place  of  relocation  do
             breach Article  3  of  the  ECHR,  internal  relocation  would
             automatically be unreasonable without more.
         [25]  Thirdly,  the  correct   comparator   by   which   to   judge
             reasonableness is not against the conditions for the worst  of
             the worst in that country.  Put  another  way,  it  is  not  a
             consideration of whether  a  person's  circumstances  will  be
             worse than the circumstances of anyone else in that country,
             per Baroness Hale at [27-28].
             ....
         [37] When assessing the reasonableness of internal relocation,  the
             language used in Januzi and AH (Sudan) is of standards  or
             conditions generally prevailing in the  home  country  and  of
             whether a person can live a relatively normal life.  There  is
             of course no single standard or set of conditions which  apply
             throughout a country, but a range of examples of  'normal'  or
             conditions which are experienced either in particular parts of
             the country, or throughout it by groups of  people.   One  can
             envisage for example, that there will almost inevitably in any
             country  in  the  world  be  differences   between   standards
             generally prevailing in urban as opposed to rural  areas,  and
             between the capital or large cities and other areas.  That  is
             not to say that because the majority of  the  population  live
             in, for example a rural area, the conditions  in  urban  areas
             could not said to be normal or  include  conditions  generally
             prevailing in the home country.  We consider that Lord Brown's
             reference to a  significant  minority  of  the  population  is
             expanding on what is contained in the speeches of Lord Bingham
             and Baroness Hale, and is simply a way of expressing what  is,
             in practice, required  to  identify  standards  or  conditions
             generally prevailing in  the  home  country,  reflecting  that
             there is not a single standard  or  set  of  conditions  which
             apply  to  a  simple  numerical  majority  of  the  population
             throughout the entire geographical territory of a country.
              ....
         [40] The final principle that therefore flows from AH  (Sudan) is
             that when considering the standards or  conditions  prevailing
             generally in the country of nationality, it is  not  necessary
             to establish that a majority of the population live  in  those
             particular conditions, but only that  a  significant  minority
             suffer equivalent hardship to that likely to  be  suffered  by
             the  applicant  on  relocation.   What  follows  is   then   a
             personalised assessment of whether the applicant would  be  as
             well able to bear it as most or whether those  conditions  are
             in any event unreasonable, for example  because  they  involve
             crime, destitution, prostitution and the like.   There  is  no
             requirement for a specific numerical,  geographical  or  other
             qualification  on  what  is  a  significant  minority  of  the
             population...."


20. The Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan) went on to point out at  [44]  of  the
    decision that there is no burden of proof on either party  in  relation
    to the overall issue of whether  it  is  reasonable  for  a  person  to
    internally relocate.


21. The Tribunal in  AS  (Afghanistan)  was  not  tasked  with  considering
    whether there would be "very significant obstacles" to the  appellant's
    relocation to Kabul ([251]).  We therefore asked  the  parties  whether
    and to what extent there is an overlap or difference between  the  test
    in relation to internal relocation and that of whether there are  "very
    significant obstacles" to integration.


22. As Ms Capel pointed out, it  was  not  clear  from  the  error  of  law
    decision that this was an issue which was expected  to  arise  in  this
    case.  Further, whilst  she  submitted  that  the  two  tests  are  not
    coterminous, she nonetheless said that the factors which  are  relevant
    to this appeal are the same whichever test is applied.


23. That submission  however  does  not  necessarily  answer  the  question
    whether our determination of the internal relocation issue  would  also
    be  determinative  of  the  "very  significant  obstacles"  issue.   We
    therefore turn to consider the test in relation  to  the  latter.   The
    main judgment relating to this issue is that of the Court of Appeal  in


    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813
    where Sales LJ (as he then was) explained the  test  in  the  following
    way:
           "[14]   In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a  foreign   criminal's
           "integration" into the country to which it is proposed  that  he
           be deported, as set out  in  section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
           399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to
           find a job or to sustain life while living in the other country.
           It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject
           to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a  court  or
           tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that  Parliament
           has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for  a  broad
           evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will
           be enough of an insider in terms of understanding  how  life  in
           the society in that other country is carried on and  a  capacity
           to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity  to
           be accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis
           in that society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
           variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
           individual's private or family life."
24. We accept, as Ms Capel pointed out, that Kamara  is  a  case  concerned
    with criminal deportation and the question of whether "very significant
    obstacles" to integration exist in an appellant's home  country  is  in
    that context part of a wider evaluation.  However, we do  not  consider
    that the principles relating to integration in a person's home  country
    are by reason of that  distinction  any  different.   The  question  is
    whether a person is able to carry on daily life in that country without
    any significant impediment.  That involves consideration  of  both  the
    situation in that home country and the personal characteristics of  the
    individual appellant in the same way as does an evaluation of whether a
    person can be expected to internally relocate to avoid  persecution  in
    the context of the Refugee Convention.


25. That still does not though answer the  question  whether  the  test  in
    relation to "very significant obstacles" is one which is higher,  lower
    or the same as the question whether a person can internally relocate.


26. As is evident from the citations taken from Januzi and  AH  (Sudan)  in
    the extract from AS (Afghanistan) at [19] above, the concept of  "undue
    harshness" or "undue difficulty" are equated with whether it  would  be
    "unreasonable to  expect  [an  appellant]  to  move  [to  the  area  of
    relocation]".


27. We have regard to the Supreme Court's judgment in Agyarko and  Ikuga  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC  11.   We
    recognise that the  judgment  in  that  case  relates  to  a  different
    provision of the Rules and is concerned with "insurmountable obstacles"
    and not "very significant obstacles".   There  is  however  an  overlap
    between the two evident from what is there said.  As is pointed out  at
    [43] of the judgment, it is clear from  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  that
    the  test  is  intended  to  be  a  "stringent  one"  involving  "major
    impediments".


28. We also take into account that the issue of  whether  there  are  "very
    significant  obstacles"  is  part  of  the  analysis  whether   it   is
    proportionate to remove a person based on interference with  the  right
    to respect for his private life under Article 8 ECHR.  Article 8  is  a
    qualified right and the interference with the right to  respect  for  a
    person's private life is to be balanced against  the  public  interest.
    That contrasts with the  principle  of  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention which is absolute and from which no derogation is  permitted
    (save in relation to exclusion clauses which do not apply  here).   The
    balance inherent in Article 8 suggests  to  us  that  the  interference
    required to outweigh the public interest is higher than the test  which
    the Appellant has to satisfy to show that it would be unduly  harsh  to
    remove him for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.


29. As such, if there is a difference between the two tests,  in  our  view
    that is reflected in a higher threshold applying to whether  there  are
    "very significant obstacles" under  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules by reference to the threshold for a breach of Article 8 ECHR than
    that which applies to whether a person can be  expected  to  internally
    relocate for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.  For that  reason,
    when we come to discuss our conclusions in relation to  this  case,  we
    begin with the internal relocation test as, if the Appellant is  unable
    to meet that test, we consider it  unlikely  that  he  could  meet  the
    higher threshold which we consider applies under  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules.


30. Finally, in this section,  we  set  out  for  convenience  the  country
    guidance taken from AS (Afghanistan) which applies to our consideration
    of internal relocation to Kabul:
         "Internal relocation to Kabul
         (ii)              Having regard to the  security  and  humanitarian
         situation in Kabul  as  well  as  the  difficulties  faced  by  the
         population living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and
         other returnees, which are not dissimilar to the  conditions  faced
         throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it will not, in general
         be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single  adult  male  in  good
         health to relocate to Kabul even if he does not have  any  specific
         connections or support network in Kabul.
         (iii)             However,  the  particular  circumstances  of   an
         individual applicant must be taken into account in the  context  of
         conditions in the place of relocation, including  a  person's  age,
         nature   and   quality   of   support   network/connections    with
         Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical  and  mental  health,  and  their
         language, education and vocational skills when determining  whether
         a person falls within the general position set out above.
         (iv)             A  person  with  a  support  network  or  specific
         connections in Kabul  is  likely  to  be  in  a  more  advantageous
         position on return, which may counter a particular vulnerability of
         an individual on return.
         (v)               Although Kabul suffered  the  highest  number  of
         civilian casualties (in the latest UNAMA figures from 2017) and the
         number of security incidents is increasing, the proportion  of  the
         population directly affected by the  security  situation  is  tiny.
         The current security situation in Kabul is not at such a  level  as
         to render internal relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh."


31. We also take into account what is said in AK (Article 15(c) Afghanistan
    CG [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  (which  country  guidance  is  expressly
    maintained in AS (Afghanistan)):
         (iv) Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article  15(c)
         in which the respondent asserts that Kabul city would be  a  viable
         internal relocation alternative,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into
         account (both in assessing "safety" and reasonableness")  not  only
         the level of violence  in  that  city  but  also  the  difficulties
         experienced by that  city's  poor  and  also  the  many  Internally
         Displaced Persons (IDPs) living there,  these  considerations  will
         not in general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.


EVIDENCE

Contact with family members in Afghanistan


32. We begin by recording Mr Tufan's submission that we  should  view  with
    some scepticism, the Appellant's evidence that he has no  contact  with
    family in Afghanistan.  Mr Tufan reminded us of the country guidance in
    HK and others (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment by
    Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010]  UKUT  378
    (IAC) as follows:
         "...[3]  Where a child has close relatives in Afghanistan who  have
         assisted him in leaving the country, any assertion that such family
         members are uncontactable or are unable to meet the child in  Kabul
         and care for  him  on  return,  should  be  supported  by  credible
         evidence of efforts to  contact  those  family  members  and  their
         inability to meet and care for the child in the event of return."


33. The Appellant says that  he  has  no  contact  with  his  relatives  in
    Afghanistan (assuming they are in Afghanistan).  Those are  his  mother
    and his paternal uncle.  His father is dead.  He  also  has  two  older
    sisters who he presumes are still in Afghanistan.  He has  two  younger
    brothers, [N] and [M].  [N] is said to be in the UK and [M] in France.


34. The Appellant gave evidence that he made contact with [N] by chance  in
    Harrow about one year ago.  He told Ms Tyrell (the  independent  social
    worker) that [N] has been granted asylum in the UK.  We do  not  accept
    that assertion.  Mr Tufan confirmed that the Home Office has no  record
    of a [NE] having claimed or been granted asylum.   When  the  Appellant
    changed his position in oral evidence to suggest that this  is  because
    [N] has been using a different identity  and  calls  himself  [SE],  Mr
    Tufan also confirmed that there is no individual of  that  name  having
    claimed asylum.  It is of course possible that [N] is  not  even  using
    his own surname which might explain the lack of any record. However, we
    do not have evidence from [N] and for present purposes,  therefore,  we
    do not accept that [N] has been recognised as a refugee.  He is younger
    than the Appellant though and may have  been  granted  leave  for  that
    reason.


35. Whilst the coincidence of the  Appellant  having  met  his  brother  by
    chance at a meeting in Harrow might,  as  Mr  Tufan  submitted,  appear
    somewhat far-fetched, we have no real reason to doubt  the  Appellant's
    evidence in  this  regard.    The  Appellant  has  no  good  reason  to
    fabricate this part of his evidence.


36. We do not know why [N] has refused his cooperation with the Appellant's
    claim.  The Appellant was not able to tell us.   It  appears  from  the
    Appellant's evidence that [N] may have been less than truthful with the
    authorities, certainly in relation to  his  identity.   However,  [N]'s
    reasons for not providing evidence are not relevant to  the  issues  we
    have to determine.  As a matter of fact, we have no evidence  from  him
    which we can consider.  We accept the Appellant's evidence that [N]  is
    unwilling  to  provide  him  with  information  including   about   the
    whereabouts of the Appellant's family.


37. We do not though accept in the same way, the Appellant's evidence about
    what he knows from his conversations with [M].   Although  the  way  in
    which the Appellant has managed to contact and converse with [M] was  a
    little difficult  to  follow,  we  are  prepared  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant is in contact with [M] and has spoken to him.  Again, he  has
    no real reason to fabricate this evidence.  It is also consistent  with
    what the Appellant said about trying to bring [M]  to  the  UK  as  his
    brother (although so far he has failed due to his own status).


38. The Appellant said that he has been unable to obtain  information  from
    [M] about his family in Afghanistan because [M] is young and gets  very
    upset when  the  Appellant  tries  to  raise  this  and  therefore  the
    Appellant says that he has stopped asking.  We consider it more  likely
    that a young person would welcome the opportunity to talk  to  a  close
    family member about his family, having undergone what  was  probably  a
    traumatic journey to Europe.


39. We note however that the Appellant says that  [M]  was  in  a  madrassa
    before he came to Europe and it is therefore quite  possible  that  [M]
    does not know either where the rest of the family are  in  Afghanistan,
    if indeed that is where they are.


40. We do not accept the Appellant's explanation for not seeking to contact
    his family via the Red Cross.  He  says  that  he  is  fearful  of  the
    Taliban or others finding out if enquiries are made.  The Red Cross  is
    a reputable international organisation with a great deal of  experience
    in tracing people abroad in conflict situations and would be  aware  of
    the need for caution when making enquiries.


41. However, whilst not accepting that explanation, we accept that there is
    no evidence to suggest that the Appellant has in fact contacted the Red
    Cross in order to trace his family members.  As such,  we  accept  that
    the Appellant has not in fact made contact in that way.


42. We turn to consider what the Appellant says about  when  he  last  made
    contact with his family.  In his first statement, he says this:
         "[3] I have one older sister who is married [BJ] and  older  sister
         still living at home [KA], I have two younger brothers aged about 8-
         9 yrs and 5-6 yrs.
         [4]  I haven't seen my father for a long time.   He  is  dead.   My
         other family consists of a paternal uncle who lives in  my  village
         and 4 maternal uncles who live in Khost province.
         ....
         [7]  Before I started my journey I travelled to  Pakistan  with  my
         paternal uncle and my mother to arrange my travel  with  an  agent.
         When I left for my journey my  mother  and  my  uncle  returned  to
         Afghanistan.
         [8]  During the third month of my journey I became  aware  that  my
         family travelled to Pakistan to spend the winter there  as  it  was
         very cold in Afghanistan.  I called home during my journey  and  my
         mother told me that they were going.   I  believe  they  are  still
         there."


43. Mr Tufan made much of what  is  said  in  particular  at  [8]  of  that
    statement as suggesting that the Appellant  was  in  contact  with  his
    mother and uncle whilst they were still in  Afghanistan  and  that  the
    "still there" related therefore to Afghanistan and  not  Pakistan.   He
    submitted that the Appellant therefore knows how to make  contact  with
    his family who are still in Afghanistan and his evidence that the phone
    is now not contactable or that the Appellant has not tried to call  the
    home phone should be treated as not credible.


44. We accept that what is said at [8] might be  read  as  suggesting  that
    when the Appellant made contact during  his  journey,  his  mother  and
    uncle were still in Afghanistan, in particular the  use  of  the  words
    "that they were going" which suggests a  future  move,  we  nonetheless
    accept the Appellant's evidence that this contact  was  made  when  the
    Appellant's mother and uncle had already moved to  Pakistan  and  that,
    therefore, he believed at that time that they were still  in  Pakistan.
    The use of the word "travelled" (past tense) suggests as much. The  use
    of the word "home" might perhaps suggest Afghanistan and  not  Pakistan
    but the Appellant's  evidence  is  that  he  departed  to  Europe  from
    Pakistan.  Equally, he may simply have been referring to "home" in  the
    context of the family with who  he  was  making  contact.   We  do  not
    therefore read this as any confirmation that the Appellant spoke to his
    mother and uncle when they were still in Afghanistan or that  he  knows
    how to contact them there.


45. In any event, we accept the Appellant's evidence that when he  referred
    to calling, he was not speaking about a landline but  rather  a  mobile
    phone.  We  are  prepared  to  accept  that  a  war-torn  country  like
    Afghanistan is highly unlikely to  have  working  land-based  telephone
    networks, at least not in rural areas. As such, it is credible that the
    phone might later have stopped working whether the  Appellant's  family
    were in Afghanistan or Pakistan.


46. That the Appellant's  mother  and  uncle  were  in  Pakistan  when  the
    Appellant made contact is also consistent with the Appellant's evidence
    about his last contact with his mother, he says in  January  2013.   He
    says that, at this time, his mother had been told  to  leave  Pakistan.
    That too is consistent with what he says about media reports at  around
    that time indicating that  the  Pakistani  authorities  were  returning
    refugees to Afghanistan (see [20] of his second statement).   The  fact
    that the Appellant was in contact with his mother in January 2013  does
    not though mean that he remains in contact and even if he assumes  that
    his mother and uncle have returned to Afghanistan, that does  not  mean
    that he knows where they are in Afghanistan nor that he has  the  means
    of contacting them, particularly since it is accepted  that  he  cannot
    physically relocate to his home area of Logar province.


47. We do not give weight to any suggestion that the Appellant's  knowledge
    about his sisters' circumstances suggests that he has been  in  contact
    at a later date.  As he said when asked, he has merely assumed that his
    older sister who was unmarried when he left would have married since as
    that would be the cultural expectation.


48. Based on the above and for the reasons we  have  given,  therefore,  we
    accept that the Appellant is not currently in contact with  his  mother
    and uncle.  His case is that he does not have the information in  order
    to make contact.  We  accept  that  he  may  be  able  to  obtain  such
    information using the services of the Red Cross, but we accept that  he
    has not asked that organisation to trace his family and he  is  not  in
    fact in contact at the present time.


Independence Skills/Support Network in the UK

49. The Appellant was age assessed at the time of his arrival in the UK  in
    January 2012.  It was concluded that he was aged  fourteen  years.   He
    was placed with a foster family for about twelve months in Ipswich  and
    then with a different family in  Wembley  until  he  was  aged  sixteen
    years.  Although it is said that the Appellant  has  continued  contact
    with his foster carers, we were not referred to any evidence from those
    foster families nor does the Appellant refer to continuing support from
    that source.


50. In 2014, the Appellant was moved by the local authority into  supported
    accommodation with six young men.  He had access to a  Key  Worker  for
    support.


51. When the Appellant became eighteen, the local  authority  informed  the
    Appellant that they intended to  cease  to  provide  accommodation  and
    financial support.   In March 2017,  the  Appellant  sought  assistance
    from Suffolk County Council.  They  supported  his  return  to  Ipswich
    where he was accommodated at the YMCA.   However,  the  Appellant  felt
    isolated and returned to Harrow where he was street  homeless  for  two
    weeks.  Thereafter, he privately rented accommodation, sharing his room
    with a friend in order to afford the rent.


52. In December 2017, the Appellant had to leave that accommodation because
    his landlord increased the rent and he could no longer afford  it.   He
    was provided with temporary accommodation by Ipswich Leaving Care  Team
    but again returned to London.  He was again homeless for  a  period  of
    about one month, although it appears, accommodated by friends until  he
    was  helped  by  Paiwand  who  provided   him   with   semi-independent
    accommodation.  The Appellant's rent is paid  for  by  way  of  housing
    benefit.


53. The accommodation provided by Paiwand is  due  to  cease  in  September
    2018.  We were told by Mr Mall of Paiwand, who gave  oral  evidence  at
    the hearing, that, if needs be, Paiwand will put the Appellant in touch
    with a local housing organisation to find him somewhere to  live.   The
    Appellant said in his oral evidence that he intends to use this support
    to find alternative accommodation.  We take  note  of  the  fact  that,
    although the termination of his accommodation was  fairly  imminent  at
    the date of the hearing, the Appellant had not taken any action to find
    alternative accommodation and expected  to  be  able  to  rely  on  his
    support network to find him somewhere else to live.


54. As Ms Capel confirmed when we asked her, the only evidence we have from
    the local authority is a letter said to be dated 4 June 2018 from Ms  K
    Anderson who is the Appellant's "Leaving Care Personal Adviser".   That
    speaks of providing the  Appellant  with  some  assistance  by  way  of
    emergency housing and helping him to obtain housing benefit  and  other
    benefits.  The letter goes on to say  that  Ms  Anderson  provides  the
    Appellant with emotional support due to mental health concerns and with
    assistance with legal visits but confirms that the local  authority  no
    longer provides  financial  assistance.   The  letter  provides  little
    detail about the level of support provided and, since the Appellant has
    lived in the London area more recently than  in  the  area  of  Suffolk
    County Council, we give that evidence little weight.


55. We have regard to the letter dated 13 December 2016  written  by  Ms  K
    Duffy, a Mentoring Coordinator and then Wellbeing and  Support  Manager
    working for Paiwand.  She had at the time  known  the  Appellant  since
    September 2014 and acted as his Key Worker.


56. Ms Duffy points to the Appellant's skills learnt during his time in the
    UK which have "aided him to  live  semi-independently".   However,  she
    says in the letter that  the  Appellant  "regularly  seeks  advice  and
    guidance from Key Workers when he  needs  help  with  decision  making,
    personal organisation and paperwork".  For that reason, Ms Duffy  says,
    the Appellant continued  to  live  in  "Supported  Accommodation"  even
    though he was by then aged over eighteen years.


57. Ms Duffy concludes that "[a]lready at risk of financial  difficulty,  I
    am concerned that [DE] would not be able to manage employment, rent and
    sustenance without regular support  and  guidance.   I  would  also  be
    concerned about his mental health and  wellbeing.  [DE]  has  regularly
    expressed feeling lonely and low, which is why he  is  well  suited  to
    Supported Accommodation".


58. We received oral evidence from Mr Farid Mall of Paiwand.  He  has  also
    provided a written  statement  dated  17  August  2018.  Paiwand  is  a
    registered charity and relies on  funding  through  various  charitable
    donations.  It has been  in  existence  for  sixteen  years.   Mr  Mall
    confirmed that, as the Director, he was not necessarily the person with
    the closest relationship with the Appellant and did not have day-to-day
    contact with the Appellant.  He has two other  staff  members  who  are
    support workers.  One has just left and is being replaced.  Those staff
    have to deal with the cases of about four hundred people per annum.


59. As Ms Capel pointed out in her submissions, one of the Paiwand  workers
    is named Rafi.  He is said by the Appellant  to  be  one  of  the  most
    important people in his circle ([AB/97]).


60. Mr Mall's evidence is that he knows all the young people  whom  Paiwand
    supports very well because he visits the houses and encourages them  to
    take part in activities.  It was therefore perhaps surprising  that  Mr
    Mall did not know whether the Appellant was working.  He could say only
    that he "must be" because he was not receiving financial  support  from
    others (except by way of housing benefit).


61. Paiwand has also helped the Appellant in  relation  to  his  education.
    The Appellant says that he did not attend school in Afghanistan and, as
    a result, cannot read or write in Pashtu or Dari.  We have no reason to
    question that evidence.  However, he originally wanted to give evidence
    in Pashtu at the hearing before us, and it is therefore evident that he
    feels more comfortable speaking that language.


62. The Appellant also says that he cannot read or write  in  English.   We
    find that more difficult to accept.  Certainly, the Appellant's  spoken
    English was  proficient.   When  we  asked  him  how  he  was  able  to
    understand certain documents, such as the medical report of Dr Bagga to
    which we refer below, which was sent to  him  by  his  personal  injury
    solicitors for consideration and signature, he said that he  took  such
    documents to Paiwand.  However, we observed that he  appeared  able  to
    refer to part of  that  document  when  it  was  shown  to  him  during
    questioning.  We do not accept that he cannot read any English.


63. Mr Mall said that the Appellant was helped to enrol in college.  He had
    also embarked on an apprenticeship programme in  catering  designed  to
    help young people into work.  However, the programme was not successful
    and the Appellant was not therefore able to complete it.  Mr  Mall  was
    unable to confirm that the Appellant would be "fully employable".


64. Paiwand  also  helps  the  Appellant  by  way  of  advocacy  and  youth
    activities and workshops.  Mr Mall says therefore  that  the  Appellant
    has been helped with life skills support such as "learning how to cook,
    how to eat healthy, how to manage his finances,  banking"  and  someone
    from Paiwand has attended medical and legal appointments with him.


65. Mr Mall explained that Paiwand offers two types of support.  From  2014
    to 2017, the Appellant should have received six hours support per  week
    but, due to his needs, in fact received more  than  fifteen  hours  per
    week.  Thereafter, because of his age, Paiwand was only able  to  offer
    minimum support of six hours per week.  Mr Mall confirmed that this was
    the minimum  and  the  lowest  level  which  the  organisation  offers.
    However, as Ms Capel pointed out, six hours per week is still  quite  a
    high level of support.  Mr Mall said that  the  Appellant  still  needs
    Paiwand's advocacy service and still needs to be accompanied  to  legal
    appointments.


66. Mr Mall himself has links with Afghanistan and has given evidence  that
    the Appellant would "find it very  difficult  to  survive  in  such  an
    environment in Afghanistan".   We  give  that  evidence  little  weight
    however since Mr Mall has not been in Afghanistan since  2007  and  his
    only knowledge of the current situation is what he is told by  teachers
    and staff  with  whom  he  associates  who  visit  relatives  still  in
    Afghanistan.  He therefore has no personal experience of the process of
    reintegration in the current situation and he readily accepted that  he
    did not know what support might be available to the Appellant.


67. By far the most detailed evidence on this part of the Appellant's  case
    comes in the form of two reports of Ms A Tyrell who is  an  independent
    social worker.  Ms Capel confirmed that  Ms  Tyrell  is  not  a  social
    worker who has had responsibility for the Appellant at any  time.   The
    reports are written for the purposes of this appeal and  are  based  on
    two meetings with the Appellant and  review  of  other  documents.  The
    meetings were of two hours each.


68. The reports are dated 18 November 2017 and  23  June  2018.   Since  Ms
    Tyrell accepts that little has changed  between  the  two  reports,  we
    focus our attention on the second report.


69. We give only limited weight to Ms Tyrell's opinion that  the  state  of
    the Appellant's accommodation is indicative of  a  "lack  of  self-care
    abilities".  The Appellant is aged  twenty  and  sharing  accommodation
    with four other men of the same age.  It  would  not  in  our  view  be
    unusual for a household of males of that age not to pay much  attention
    to domestic chores.


70. We also note what Ms Tyrell  reports  at  [8.7]  and  [8.8]  about  the
    Appellant's income and outgoings.   That  the  Appellant  was  able  to
    provide Ms Tyrell with  that  information  shows  an  understanding  of
    financial planning.  We do not accept  Ms  Tyrell's  opinion  that  the
    Appellant working for "cash in hand" shows that the  Appellant  is  "at
    risk of exploitation" particularly since the Appellant's  own  evidence
    is that the business concerned is that of a friend who offered him this
    work.


71. We do however take into account what Ms Tyrell says about the Appellant
    having run up debts,  borrowing  large  sums  of  money  from  friends.
    Again, though, that may simply be a fact of life  for  a  young  person
    living in the London area with limited income.  It does not in our view
    indicate any particular lack of independence skills.


72. We accept Ms Tyrell's evidence that the fact of  the  Appellant  having
    moved from Ipswich back to London because he  felt  isolated  indicates
    some dependency on his network of friends for support. We  note  though
    that the Appellant's friends are mainly in the  Afghan  community.   As
    the Appellant himself says in his latest statement, there  is  a  large
    Afghan community in Harrow and it is within that community that he  has
    forged close friendships.  He has  been  able  to  make  use  of  those
    friendships in  order  to  help  himself,  for  example,  by  obtaining
    employment in a business owned by a friend.


73. Ms Tyrell also says that the Appellant has maintained contact with  his
    former foster carers although we have no evidence to that  effect  from
    either them or the Appellant himself.


74. We also accept Ms Tyrell's evidence that the Appellant is dependent  to
    some extent on local authority support and support  from  Paiwand.   Ms
    Tyrell describes this in the following way:
         "In my view, the support provided by these two organisations is not
         dissimilar to the support that a parent might provide  to  a  young
         adult moving to independence or developing their independent living
         skills.  In the absence of available parental support in this area,
         I have concluded that [the Appellant] is reliant  on  this  support
         for his material welfare".
    We note however that, when asked about the importance which Ms Anderson
    has in the Appellant's  life,  Ms  Tyrell  points  only  to  the  local
    authority's duty and that it  is  Ms  Anderson's  job  to  provide  and
    deliver this support.  That  indicates  in  our  view  that  the  local
    authority is providing only a basic level of support.  In any event, Ms
    Anderson is in the Suffolk County Council area and  the  Appellant  now
    lives in Harrow.


75. We do not need to deal with Ms Tyrell's  views  about  the  Appellant's
    vulnerability arising from his mental health condition because we  have
    a fuller medical report written by an expert who is qualified  to  deal
    with this issue.  We deal with that under a separate heading below.


76. In response to the question whether  the  Appellant  is  able  to  live
    independently without his current support network, Ms Tyrell  concludes
    as follows:


         "14.6.1  My opinion on this issue is unchanged from  that  detailed
         in my report of 18/11/2017:
         'From the information provided by DE, he has been  unsuccessful  in
         securing and maintaining suitable accommodation and is now at  risk
         of homelessness.  He has sought the assistance  of  Suffolk  County
         Councils Care Leavers services to help resolve this issue.
         DE's current employment appears precarious, he reports  he  has  no
         contract, no agreed hours and is paid 'cash in hand'.
         In relation to budgeting DE reported he has borrowed large sums  of
         money from friends and is indebted to his friends.  Additionally DE
         was given budgeting advice in relation to his current accommodation
         by Krista Anderson, Personal Advisor but did not take this on board
         and now finds himself  in  financial  difficulties  and  unable  to
         afford the rental on his  current  accommodation.   This  has  been
         compounded by the landlord increasing the rent  which  demonstrates
         DE's vulnerability to  exploitation  and  places  him  at  risk  of
         financial hardship and destitution.  Fortunately he has  access  to
         support from the Local Authority due to The Children (Leaving Care)
         Act  2000  which  recognises  the  vulnerability  of  Looked  After
         Children  and  aims  to  address  the  inequalities   and   reduced
         opportunities  that  Looked  After  Children  are  at  risk  of  in
         adulthood.'
         14.6.2        Since my initial meeting with DE he has  demonstrated
         an inability to secure suitable accommodation without  the  support
         of Suffolk County Council or the Paiwand Association and has relied
         on these organisations in order to meet his material needs.
         14.6.3        In terms of his emotional needs, he has  the  support
         of his network of friends in the Harrow area of  London  though  at
         present he has been referred for professional support in this  area
         and is awaiting professional intervention  to  further  assess  and
         promote his mental health and emotional wellbeing."


77. The Appellant's own evidence in relation to his "life skills" is  that,
    although he has learnt from workshops  in  the  UK,  those  skills  are
    relevant to life in the UK and would not translate to  the  culture  of
    Afghanistan.  He says that if he tried to tell people how he  lived  in
    the UK, they would believe him to  be  westernised  and  to  be  acting
    contrary to Sharia law.  The Appellant also says that  unemployment  is
    high in Afghanistan and he would not therefore be able to get a job.


78. We will come on to deal with the medical  report  of  Dr  Bagga  below.
    However, the Appellant confirmed that, when he was involved in the road
    traffic accident which underlies  that  report,  he  was  driving.   He
    confirmed that he has a full driving licence.  That too gives us  cause
    to doubt that the Appellant is  as  illiterate  as  he  claims  to  be,
    certainly in the English language.  In order to pass a driving test  in
    the UK, he would have had to undertake a  written  test.   It  is  also
    indicative of the Appellant's ability to obtain skills for himself.


Medical Evidence


79. The Appellant relies on the psychiatric report of Dr Chiedo Obuaya MBBS
    BSc MRCPsych MBA dated 27 June 2018.   Dr Obuaya met with the Appellant
    once on 4 May 2018.


80. Dr Obuaya diagnoses the Appellant as suffering from a "Mixed Anxiety  &
    Depressive Disorder".  The Appellant's symptoms  in  Dr  Obuaya's  view
    fall  below  the  threshold  for  either  a  "Depressive  Episode"   or
    "Generalised Anxiety Disorder". In the alternative, Dr Obuaya says that
    the Appellant may be suffering from "a primary mood disorder such as  a
    Depressive Episode or Recurrent Depressive Disorder".


81. Dr Obuaya notes that the Appellant suffered a head injury during a fall
    from a roof when  he  was  a  child  to  which  is  attributed  regular
    headaches and vomiting which have continued throughout  his  life.   He
    also notes that the Appellant  suffered  a  road  traffic  accident  in
    February 2018 to which the  medical  notes  attribute  the  Appellant's
    asthma and chronic back and lower limb pain.   However, in Dr  Obuaya's
    view, the Appellant's depression and anxiety  is  attributable  to  his
    current uncertain immigration status.  He does not appear  to  consider
    the possibility that this too was caused by the road traffic accident.


82. Dr Obuaya discounts a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.


83. In terms of medical treatment, Dr Obuaya  advocates  psychotherapy,  in
    particular cognitive behavioural therapy  ("CBT").   He  suggests  that
    medication is unlikely to be appropriate treatment,  although  that  is
    the treatment which the Appellant has and continues to receive.


84. In response to a question about the impact on  the  Appellant's  mental
    health of return to Afghanistan, Dr Obuaya says this:
         "[61]    From a purely psychiatric viewpoint, given  the  diagnosis
         of a Mixed Anxiety & Depressive Disorder, a return  to  Afghanistan
         need not necessarily impact adversely to a significant degree on Mr
         DE's mental health or his capacity to remain safe.  He  would  not,
         in my clinical opinion, require any different medication  or  other
         treatment from psychiatric services there if returned there.
         [62] Mr DE's prognosis should  there  not  differ  if  returned  to
         Afghanistan, assuming he receives treatment of the nature  outlined
         above (ie psychotherapy) and he should be able  to  find  work  and
         conduct all his activities of daily living as  a  Mixed  Anxiety  &
         Depressive Disorder is not deemed to be severe of  enduring  mental
         illness.
         [63]  I  note  that  Mr  DE  has  struggled  to   support   himself
         financially, though this is not in my opinion as a direct result of
         any mental disorder and  is  more  likely  linked  to  his  limited
         education.  Nevertheless, without the professional support  of  the
         nature available to him, which itself has not  been  sufficient  to
         stop him being vulnerable to possible financial exploitation,  this
         is likely to be even more challenging in Afghanistan.
         [64] Mr DE may struggle to establish a  new  life  for  himself  in
         Afghanistan if he continues to live in fear for his safety.  He has
         expressed a fear  of  the  Taleban  and  Da'esh  there;  this  fear
         appeared to be genuine (though there  is  no  'test'  to  determine
         this).  Therefore, any threat of forced return there may worsen his
         current psychological symptoms.
         [65] Whilst it is beyond my expertise to comment on what conditions
         Mr DE is likely to face in Afghanistan, were he to face significant
         adversity  there,  this  could  threaten  his  mental   well-being.
         However, it is not possible to conclusively say if it would lead to
         a specific condition, such as depression, or what the likelihood of
         him developing more profound mental health problems would be.  Were
         he to experience a depressive episode, for example, he  may  become
         very low in mood and socially withdrawn.
         [66] Furthermore, given the length of time he has  been  away  from
         Afghanistan, Mr DE is likely to experience  a  return  there  as  a
         stressful event.  This in turn could act as a  significant  barrier
         to him accessing the mental health services  there,  assuming  they
         are available to him and he requires access to them, in  the  event
         of suffering from a more severe depressive episode.   However,  the
         likelihood of this occurring cannot be estimated."


85. We consider Dr Obuaya's report to be a very fair and balanced one.   He
    does not  exaggerate  his  diagnosis  and  fairly  concludes  that  the
    Appellant may be able to  return  to  Afghanistan  notwithstanding  the
    mental health issues which he identifies.  We give this  report  weight
    and in particular his conclusions about what might  be  the  impact  of
    return of the Appellant to Afghanistan.  We note however  that,  as  Dr
    Obuaya himself recognises at [65] of  his  report,  he  has  no  expert
    knowledge of  conditions  in  Afghanistan.   Dr  Obuaya  has  also  not
    considered the consequences for the Appellant's mental  health  if  the
    difficulties and risks which the Appellant perceives may  face  him  on
    return do not in fact materialise.


86. There is reference in the GP notes to the Appellant having  self-harmed
    on 18 June 2018 when the Appellant presented with a  cut  to  his  left
    forearm due to cutting himself with a knife.  The Appellant  said  that
    he did not recall having cut himself.  There is no mention of  this  in
    Dr Obuaya's report.  Although that report post-dates the  incident,  Dr
    Obuaya met with the Appellant in May 2018 and it is possible  therefore
    that he was not made aware of it.  Dr  Obuaya's  opinion  is  that  the
    Appellant did not exhibit any specific suicidal thoughts or intent.


87. As we indicated at [15] above, the Appellant has also produced a report
    from Dr A Bagga who is said to be a "GP Specialist".  The Appellant and
    Ms Capel confirmed that this report was produced on the instruction  of
    a firm of personal injury lawyers in order to obtain  compensation  for
    the Appellant's injuries following the road traffic accident.  Ms Capel
    indicated on instructions that it is not clear whether the other driver
    has admitted liability for the accident but, in any event,  the  figure
    which the Appellant's lawyers have advised might be appropriate for his
    injuries is not high.  This is not therefore relevant to the issues for
    us in the same way as it might have been  if  the  Appellant  had  been
    about to receive substantial compensation which  might  assist  him  on
    return to Afghanistan.


88. Dr Bagga concludes that the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  "Pain  and
    Stiffness in the Thoraco-Lumbar Spine" which he assesses might  resolve
    itself within twelve months from the accident (ie by February 2019).


89. The Appellant's back pain is said to be  moderate  but  exacerbated  by
    bending or lifting.   The  Appellant  is  also  said  to  have  ongoing
    moderate left leg pain and paraesthesia.  He is said to have moderately
    reduced range of movement in the lower back. It is  not  expected  that
    the injury will cause or accelerate any longer-term degeneration of the
    spine.


90. Dr Bagga also attributes certain psychological  symptoms  such  as  the
    Appellant's fear of travel to the accident but says that  those  should
    resolve themselves within ten months from the  date  of  accident.   It
    appears from the report that Dr  Bagga  was  not  made  aware  of  past
    psychological illness.  The examination was carried out after the  date
    when the Appellant was examined by Dr Obuaya.  Neither  doctor  appears
    to have been aware of the report of the other.


91. In terms of the impact of the accident on the Appellant's  day  to  day
    activities, Dr Bagga concludes that the Appellant finds  self-care  and
    shopping more strenuous but should recover within five months from  the
    injury.  He also notes that the Appellant is still not able  to  go  to
    the gym and his leisure activities are affected.  Any sleep disturbance
    is similarly expected to resolve itself within  five  months  from  the
    date of the accident.


92. In terms of employment, Dr Bagga appears to have  been  told  that  the
    Appellant was not able to work at the date of examination and yet  told
    Ms Tyrell at around the same time that he was working.  It is said that
    the Appellant cannot drive on long journeys or lift heavy items.


93. The Appellant confirmed to us that he has not taken up  the  suggestion
    of either physiotherapy for his physical injuries or  CBT  therapy  for
    his mental health issues.  We accept that this may involve referrals by
    the Appellant's GP if the treatment is  to  be  accessed  via  the  NHS
    rather than being privately paid for.


94. We consider to be overstated Ms  Capel's  submission  that  Dr  Bagga's
    prognosis is conditional  on  the  Appellant  receiving  physiotherapy.
    Although Dr Bagga recommends physiotherapy and says that eight sessions
    would be "appropriate", he does not go so far as to  say  that  without
    that physiotherapy, the Appellant's  physical  symptoms  would  not  be
    resolved.


95. We find that the effect of the road traffic accident is not such as  to
    prevent the Appellant resuming normal activities including a  range  of
    employment after the periods  stated  in  Dr  Bagga's  report  for  the
    Appellant's recovery from his injuries.


Security Situation in Kabul


96. As we have noted, the Appellant does not suggest that the Article 15(c)
    threshold is reached in  this  regard  nor  that  there  is  sufficient
    evidence to cause us to depart  from  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  AS
    (Afghanistan).


97. The Appellant's Amended Statement of Case refers to the  report  of  Dr
    Antonio Giustozzi prepared for this appeal in  relation  to  the  risks
    which the Appellant might face on return ([26] of the Amended Statement
    of Case).  That report is dated 28 December 2016.


98. We do not find it necessary or appropriate to refer to that report, not
    due to any concern about Dr Giustozzi's expertise, but  rather  because
    the report is mainly concerned with return to the Appellant's home area
    with which we are not concerned and because the views expressed  by  Dr
    Giustozzi in relation to the relevant issues pre-date the consideration
    of his evidence alongside  that  of  the  other  experts  who  provided
    reports to the Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan).  As such, we are guided by
    what the Tribunal said in that case.  We have referred to that guidance
    below.


99. We do though deal with one point made at [26] of the Amended  Statement
    of Case namely the suggestion that there is a risk to the Appellant due
    to "westernisation".  We do not consider  that  Dr  Giustozzi's  report
    supports that view.  At [25] of his report,  Dr  Giustozzi  points  out
    that there are "tens of thousands of people who spent time in the  west
    in Kabul".  As such, the Appellant would not "stand out there" in order
    to attract the attention of the Taliban.  He says that  "[t]he  Islamic
    State (daesh) does not have capacity for now to pursue  individuals  in
    Kabul".   That  is  consistent  with  his  conclusion  at   [39]   that
    "[w]esternised attitudes are  quite  common  in  Kabul"  and  that  the
    Appellant's "westernised attitude would only be a problem if he settled
    in rural areas or in the most conservative areas of the  country,  such
    as southern Afghan cities and some suburbs of Kabul  itself,  including
    however those populated by eastern Pashtuns like [DE] himself".  Whilst
    we recognise that the last part of that  sentence  might  suggest  some
    risk, the Appellant is not obliged to relocate to the  parts  of  Kabul
    where such a risk might arise and would not be at risk  in  Kabul  more
    generally.


100. Further and in any event, the Tribunal in AS  (Afghanistan)  considered
    the risk on  account of Westernisation but concluded at  [187]  of  the
    decision, that "[t]here is simply a lack of any  cogent  or  consistent
    evidence of incidents of such harm on which it could be concluded  that
    there was a real risk to a person who has spent time in the west  being
    targeted for that reason, either because of  appearance,  perceived  or
    actual attitudes of such a  person".   The  Tribunal  was  prepared  to
    accept only "at most" evidence of "a possible adverse social impact  or
    suspicion affecting social and family interactions and evidence from  a
    small number of fear based on 'Westernisation'"


101. Nor do we consider it  necessary  to  refer  to  the  other  background
    material to which our  attention  is  drawn  at  [26]  of  the  Amended
    Statement of Case.  The material in [AB/D41-369] pre-dates the guidance
    in AS (Afghanistan) and  for  the  most  part  is  material  which  was
    considered by the Tribunal in that appeal.


102. We have regard  to  the  "New  Country  Background  Material"  included
    within the consolidated bundle.  We have  read  that  material  and  in
    particular the 2018 EASO reports  to  which  Ms  Capel  makes  specific
    reference.  However, although she says that the  reports  refer  to  "a
    series of brutal attacks" in Kabul in early 2018,  we  do  not  discern
    that EASO suggests that there has been any significant  change  in  the
    security situation.  EASO refers at [2.1.1] of its May 2018  update  on
    the security situation in Kabul to a "peak of attacks in January 2018".
     As the Tribunal pointed out in AS (Afghanistan), however, the evidence
    then showed that "Kabul province continued to record the highest number
    of civilian casualties, mainly in Kabul city..." ([105]).  The Tribunal
    accepted  that  "the  numbers  of  civilian  casualties  in  Kabul  are
    increasing year on year and from the information available to date from
    2017 are  at  record  levels"  ([192]).   Furthermore,  in  Afghanistan
    overall, the General Assembly Security Council report dated 6 June 2018
    records that the total number of security  incidents  between  February
    and May 2018 had decreased by 7% in comparison with the same period  in
    2017.


103. The Appellant says that he will be at risk on return from  the  Taliban
    or "Da'esh".  We  accept  that  his  concerns  are  subjectively  held.
    However, based on the Tribunal's conclusions at [173] to  [201]  of  AS
    (Afghanistan), we do not accept that the  Appellant  is  at  risk  from
    those quarters.  There is no evidence that the  Appellant  is  a  high-
    profile target for the Taliban or  any  other  group.   His  fears  are
    related to the general security situation with which  we  have  already
    dealt and as addressed in AS (Afghanistan).  We  do  though  take  this
    subjective  fear  into   account   when   reaching   our   conclusions,
    particularly given what is said by Dr Obuaya about the consequences for
    the Appellant's mental health of being put under stressful  conditions.
    That evidence, though, has to be considered  also  in  the  context  of
    whether the risks and difficulties which the Appellant fears  are  ones
    which are likely to materialise.


Appellant's Ability to Reintegrate in Kabul/ Support in Afghanistan


104. We have accepted at [48] above, that the Appellant would be  relocating
    to Kabul with no current contact with family.  Even if his family  have
    returned to Afghanistan, there is  no  evidence  to  suggest  where  in
    Afghanistan they may have gone. We heard evidence  from  the  Appellant
    that, even if he were able to make contact, his mother is not  able  to
    support him as she worked in the past only as  a  "tailor"  doing  work
    from home.  He said that his paternal uncle would not be able  to  help
    him as he has his own family.  We give  that  evidence  little  weight.
    The Appellant said that his travel to the UK was funded by his  family.
    He said that he had to remain in Turkey for a number of  months  whilst
    his family raised further money to send  him  further  on  his  journey
    ([19] of his witness statement dated 7 March 2012).  It appears  to  us
    likely that the Appellant's travel to the UK would have been funded  by
    his uncle; there is no other suggested source of funds.  Similarly,  we
    find it likely that his brothers [N] and [M] have also been  helped  to
    leave by a relative and that this  is  likely  to  be  the  Appellant's
    uncle.


105. However, that makes little difference to our findings since  we  accept
    that the Appellant is not in contact with that uncle and does not  know
    how to contact him.


106. We take account  however,  of  the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) as to the importance and formation of  support  networks.
    At [212] of the decision, the Tribunal pointed out that just because  a
    person does not have a support network to  which  to  return  does  not
    necessarily mean that one could not be formed  after  return.   As  the
    Tribunal observed "[n]etworks  can  be  reactivated  and  established".
    That was based on evidence (for the appellant) that single men may form
    their own support network or join a network via another member  of  it,
    for example, via an employment relationship.  We have  already  pointed
    to evidence that the Appellant has made connections with other  Afghans
    in the Harrow area and has used such friendships to find at  least  one
    of his jobs.  As is recorded at [212] of AS (Afghanistan), the view  of
    the appellant's expert was that it was  "inevitable"  that  a  returnee
    would make contact with someone from  a  person's  wider  community  or
    tribe.


107. In any event, the Tribunal concluded at [213] of the decision  that  "a
    support network is not  essential,  and  that  internal  relocation  is
    generally reasonable without one for a single male in good health".


108. As was pointed out to us, the Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan) observed  at
    [227] of the decision that "there was  little  firm  evidence  of  what
    support was in  reality  being  provided  to  returnees..and  that  the
    position as at  August  2017  was  specifically  unclear  as  to  IOM's
    continuing involvement or not in the provision of the main packages  of
    support."   The  Tribunal  went  on  however  to  find  that  there  is
    "sufficient evidence before us to establish that there is a basic level
    of support, referred to by some as a 'parachute package' which includes
    the offer of temporary accommodation, travel expenses and ether cash on
    return or support in-kind for those with a plan to establish themselves
    in Kabul".  That though was said to be sufficient only for four to  six
    weeks.


109. In terms of the availability of employment, the evidence  available  to
    the Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan) was that  there  is  "availability  of
    lower skilled jobs which did not require specific skills, experience or
    connections, including  day  labouring  or  portering  work  and  other
    occupations such as being a taxi  driver."   The  documentary  evidence
    also showed that there were "other low or unskilled labour such as jobs
    in the bazaars, in the construction industry and agricultural workers."
    ([223]).


110. Accommodation in Kabul is said  in  AS  (Afghanistan)  to  be  of  poor
    standard with little access to  basic  amenities  and  with  insanitary
    conditions ([220]).  The Tribunal also records that a single  male  may
    have more limited access to accommodation because of the suspicion of a
    single man living near family groups ([217]).  It is  however  recorded
    that there is evidence of single rooms being available  and  of  single
    men sharing accommodation (as the Appellant has done in the UK).


111. Although  there  was  some  disagreement  between  the  experts  in  AS
    (Afghanistan), the Tribunal there concluded that  it  was  possible  to
    obtain employment and accommodation without the need for references and
    therefore a support network is not necessary for that reason ([207]).


112. We do not give weight to the suggestion in  the  Amended  Statement  of
    Case that the Appellant is at risk of  discrimination  in  relation  to
    access to housing, employment and services because  he  is  a  "Kuchi".
    The UNHCR view on which this is premised dates back to 2016.  There  is
    no reference to this group as suffering any  particular  discrimination
    in, for example, the EASO report.  In any event, we can find no factual
    support for the assertion that the Appellant's family  are  "Kuchi"  in
    the Appellant's witness evidence nor in  other  evidence  such  as  the
    report of Dr Giustozzi.  The Amended Statement of Case does not  cross-
    refer to any such evidence.


113. We have recorded the evidence of Dr Obuaya in terms of the  Appellant's
    prognosis if returned to Kabul  without  appropriate  medical  support.
    The Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan) recorded that the evidence shows  that
    there "is a basic  package  of  healthcare  in  Afghanistan"  but  that
    "around a third of the total population have inadequate  access  to  it
    with significant barriers and inequality of access" ([221]).   However,
    healthcare is said to be better in Kabul and other urban areas and  for
    men.  We have already noted that the evidence before us suggests  that,
    other than the prescribing of medication, the  Appellant  has  not  had
    treatment for either his mental or physical health concerns.   We  have
    not been provided with any  evidence  that  the  medication  which  the
    Appellant is taking for depression is not available in Afghanistan  (or
    that a similar medication could not be obtained).


114. We do though have regard to the evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) at [141] to [143] of the decision to which Ms Capel  drew
    our attention  and  which  records  the  poor  state  of  provision  of
    healthcare in Afghanistan and  the  high  incidence  of  mental  health
    problems in that country.


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


115. This appeal presents particular challenges because  the  factors  which
    are relevant to our consideration whether it would be unduly harsh  for
    this Appellant to relocate to Kabul  do  not  all  point  in  the  same
    direction.   A  careful  evaluation  of  those  factors  is   therefore
    required.


116. The Tribunal in  AS  (Afghanistan)  concluded  that  a  person  with  a
    support network is in a "more advantageous position on return" ([233]).
     We have accepted that the Appellant does not have a support network to
    Kabul to which he could return.


117. However, we also take into account the conclusions of the  Tribunal  in
    AS (Afghanistan) that such a support network is, first, not  essential,
    particularly if the returnee is a single,  healthy  male  and,  second,
    will inevitably be re-established via wider connections, including  via
    employment and from tribal or ethnic connections.


118. We have not accepted  as  made  out  Ms  Capel's  submission  that  the
    Appellant  suffers  from  physical  incapacity  which  will  render  it
    difficult for him to obtain particular types of  employment.   Although
    we accept that the Appellant did suffer some injuries in a road traffic
    accident the prognosis of Dr Bagga is that he will recover  from  those
    within at most twelve months (by February 2019).  We  did  not  receive
    any updated evidence that the Appellant continues  to  suffer  symptoms
    from this accident.  The GP notes we have seen do not suggest  this  to
    be the case.


119. It has been suggested that the Appellant is uneducated which will  also
    limit his ability to find work on return to Kabul.  We  do  not  accept
    this to be the case.  The Appellant presented as an articulate  witness
    which was the more impressive when one considers that he gave  evidence
    in a language which is not his first language.  Although we accept that
    the Appellant was not educated previously in Afghanistan ([61]) and may
    well be unable to read and write in Pashtu or Dari, the  Appellant  has
    had some limited education in the UK and has learnt  to  speak  English
    even if his ability to read and write it may be more limited ([62]).  A
    command  of  English  would  in  our  view  increase  the   Appellant's
    employment prospects if returned to Afghanistan.   In  any  event,  the
    evidence received in AS (Afghanistan) is that there is an  availability
    of lower skilled jobs.  We have already noted that  the  Appellant  has
    learned to drive in the  UK  which  may  also  assist  him  in  finding
    employment.


120. We accept that, because the Appellant has no family  or  other  support
    network to turn to immediately on return to Kabul,  he  would  have  to
    find his own job and accommodation.


121. The Appellant has shown himself able to  find  employment  through  his
    own efforts and support network of friends he has made in the  UK.   We
    have explained at [70] why we do not accept Ms Tyrell's  evidence  that
    the sort of employment which the Appellant has found for himself  shows
    him to be vulnerable to exploitation.   There  is  no  reason  why  the
    Appellant could not associate with other Afghans on return to Kabul and
    find employment in that way.  We refer in particular  to  what  we  say
    about the findings made by the Tribunal in AS  (Afghanistan)  at  [106]
    above.  Single men may form their own support network or  join  another
    already established network.


122. Looking at the position immediately on return, the Appellant  would  be
    able to access temporary accommodation and some financial support which
    might be expected to last him four to six weeks ([108] above).


123. We have to consider, however, whether that level of  support  would  be
    sufficient given the Appellant's reliance on support in the UK.  As  we
    have observed, the Appellant is  able  to  understand  such  things  as
    financial  organisation.   However,  as  the  evidence  shows,  he  has
    difficulty managing his finances and has been dependent on friends from
    whom he has borrowed large sums.


124. We have evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  been  largely  reliant  on
    support, particularly from Paiwand.  Whilst the Appellant was a  minor,
    he was supported by the local authority.  The need  for  that  sort  of
    support for a child is to be expected.  However, when that support  was
    taken away from him, the  evidence  shows  that  he  has  struggled  to
    obtain, in particular, accommodation.  He was apparently able to obtain
    rented accommodation which he shared with another male when he returned
    to Harrow but, having been unable to afford the rent  and  having  been
    evicted, he was then homeless for about one month until he  was  helped
    by Paiwand.  Mr Mall's evidence is that the Appellant has continued  to
    receive  weekly  support  from  that  organisation  with   many   daily
    activities.  The Appellant has described one of  the  Paiwand  workers,
    Ravi, as one of the most important persons in his circle.


125. We also take into account the Appellant's background before he came  to
    the UK.  The Appellant has never lived in Kabul previously.   He  comes
    from a rural area.  He left Afghanistan when he  was,  at  the  oldest,
    thirteen years.  In fact, he started his journey in Pakistan.  Thus, he
    has never had the experience of finding a job or a home for himself  in
    Afghanistan more widely let alone in Kabul. As such, he  is  likely  to
    find the environment in Kabul even more alien than might be the case if
    he had come from that or another urban area in  Afghanistan  previously
    or had left after he had some experience of living on his own  in  that
    country.


126. The Appellant's reliance on the support  of  others  and  his  lack  of
    experience of coping on his own in Afghanistan (because  of  the  young
    age at which he left that country) is relevant to  what  might  be  the
    impact on his mental health condition  if  he  is  returned  to  Kabul.
    Ultimately, it is the combination of these factors in this  case  which
    has persuaded us in the Appellant's favour.


127. We have given  weight  to  Dr  Obuaya's  report.   We  have  noted  his
    balanced and fair  diagnosis  and  that  he  has  not  exaggerated  the
    prognosis in terms of the effect on the Appellant's  mental  health  of
    return to Kabul.


128. We note what Dr Obuaya says about the need  for  continuing  treatment.
    We accept that the evidence in AS (Afghanistan) shows that while  there
    is some healthcare provision, particularly in Kabul,  that  is  limited
    and there is a high incidence  of  mental  health  problems  which  are
    likely to lead to  a  greater  pressure  on  the  resources  available.
    Equally,  though,  the  Appellant  is   only   receiving   prescription
    medication for his condition in the UK.  We have no  evidence  that  he
    would be unable to obtain that in Kabul even if he had to pay for it.


129. We have not  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  fear  that  he  will  be
    targeted by the Taliban or Da'esh is objectively well-founded  ([103]).
    However, we have accepted that the Appellant is  genuinely  afraid  for
    his safety in Kabul and Dr Obuaya's report supports that finding  ([64]
    of the report).  We are not here concerned with the  issue  of  whether
    the Appellant is at real risk from the Taliban and Da'esh.   We  accept
    that the Appellant is not. However, that is a different  question  from
    the impact which the Appellant's own genuine fear  has  on  his  mental
    health if returned. Dr Obuaya says that, if the Appellant  is  forcibly
    returned with that genuine fear, then  that  "may  worsen  his  current
    psychological symptoms".


130. Dr Obuaya also concludes that if the Appellant faces  conditions  which
    amount  to  "significant  adversity",  then  this  could  threaten  the
    Appellant's mental well-being.  We have  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    will face return to Kabul with no contact with his family nor  recourse
    to any established social network there.  The evidence considered in AS
    (Afghanistan)  suggests  that  there   are   employment   opportunities
    available which the Appellant may be able to access and that, if he  is
    able to find work, he may be able to use the network of contacts  which
    he would make from such employment to obtain  support  in  other  areas
    such as accommodation.  We have though accepted that the Appellant  has
    needed support in the UK to  cope  with  everyday  life  in  much  less
    challenging circumstances. Withdrawal of  such  support  on  return  is
    likely to mean that the Appellant would find it even more difficult  to
    cope with the conditions in Kabul.


131. In addition, Dr Obuaya points to the likely effect on  the  Appellant's
    mental health if he does suffer from a depressive  episode  on  return.
    He concludes that if that were to occur, the Appellant "may become very
    low in mood and socially withdrawn".  In our view that would be  likely
    to  exacerbate  the  Appellant's  difficulties  in  dealing  with   the
    conditions he would face on return.


132. The conditions in Kabul, based on the evidence in AS (Afghanistan)  can
    best be described as challenging.  For  a  person  in  the  Appellant's
    position, having regard to his mental state by virtue of his  fear  for
    his safety on return and his lack of ability to  cope  without  support
    (even  in  the  UK),  we  consider  that  he  will  face   "significant
    adversity".  The conditions  will  be  of  the  kind  which  Dr  Obuaya
    concludes  as  likely  to  exacerbate  the  Appellant's  mental  health
    difficulties  and  therefore   the   Appellant's   ability   to   cope.
    Ultimately,  this  will,  as  Dr  Obuaya  concludes,   "threaten   [the
    Appellant's] mental well-being".


133. In all the circumstances, and in light of the above  factors,  although
    the Appellant does not face a risk of persecution in Kabul (and  it  is
    not his case that  he  would),  internal  relocation  would,  for  this
    appellant, be unduly harsh.  Accordingly, his appeal succeeds.

Decision

We allow the Appellant's appeal.

Signed [pic]
                           Dated: 5 October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: /12135/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th December 2017                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                             HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between
                                     DE
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STAET FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in January  1998,  he
       is therefore 19 years old. He arrived in the UK in January 2012 when
       he was 14 years old, and claimed asylum  the  following  month.  His
       claim was refused in July 2012  but  he  was  granted  discretionary
       leave to remain as an unaccompanied minor. He  did  not  appeal  the
       refusal of asylum. He made an in-time application for further  leave
       to remain on asylum grounds on 3rd July 2015 which  was  refused  on
       11th November 2015. His appeal against the decision was dismissed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs in a determination  promulgated  on
       the 16th February 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Lambert on 6th September 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law firstly in arguably failing to
       set out the legal test of reasonableness when  making  the  decision
       that the  appellant  could  internally  relocate;  and  secondly  in
       arguably having failed  to  consider  the  personal  background  and
       expert evidence regarding the  deterioration  in  the  situation  in
       Kabul since the deciding of the  country  guidance  decision  in  AK
       (Article 15(c) Afghanistan [2012] UKUT 163.

    3. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of  appeal  and  oral  submissions  it  is  contended
       firstly that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law as  it  failed  to
       direct itself to consider whether it would be unreasonable or unduly
       harsh with reference to the  appellant's  age,  gender,  experience,
       health, skills and  family  ties  for  him  to  have  to  internally
       relocate and live in Kabul having found that the  appellant  was  at
       risk in his home area of Logar from the Taliban at paragraph  81  of
       the decision. It is accepted by the respondent that the correct test
       is not set out anywhere in the decision.  There  are  findings  that
       there would be no risk of persecution or of destitution in Kabul but
       whilst relevant these are not determinative of whether it  would  be
       reasonable for the appellant to relocate there.

    5. Secondly it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  take
       into  account  material  relevant  to   the   appellant's   personal
       circumstances and the deterioration in the  situation  in  Kabul  in
       addressing this question. This material was set out in detail in the
       skeleton argument provided to the  First-tier  Tribunal  identifying
       the key evidence, see  particularly  paragraphs  80  -  83  of  that
       document, and it is clear from the decision itself at  paragraph  68
       that oral submissions were made on the issue too.

    6. The  key  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  inability  to  live
       independently in Afghanistan or elsewhere is the letter from Ms Kate
       Duffy (key worker at the  Afghan  Association  Paiwand)  dated  13th
       December 2016. There is no reference to this letter and it does  not
       support the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraphs  93
       and 88 of the decision that the appellant had  "in  practical  terms
       been living independently of daily help from adults" or that  he  is
       "living  independently  without  any  day-to-day  involvement   from
       adults". This letter  does  not  stand  alone  as  evidence  of  the
       appellant having particular personal challenges to relocating, there
       are also letters from Mr Fazil and Ms  Beaton  in  the  respondent's
       bundle which provide evidence to support this too. So,  contrary  to
       what is said at paragraph 88 of the decision, evidence was presented
       to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  had  particular
       personal  challenges  in  dealing  with  issues  such  as  arranging
       accommodation.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal found that it was: "open" to  the  appellant
       to "resume contact with his mother at paragraph 93 of the  decision,
       but this conclusion fails to take into account the  evidence,  which
       is not disputed in the decision,  that  the  appellant  had  had  no
       contact with his mother since her expulsion from  Pakistan  back  to
       Afghanistan in 2013; does not know where she is; and  is  afraid  to
       use the Red Cross to trace her as this may put her at risk. There is
       no reasoning as to how  in  these  circumstances  contact  with  his
       mother would be made  or  how  she  would  be  able  to  assist  the
       appellant in Kabul, or indeed  how  long  it  might  be  before  the
       appellant was able to obtain any possible support from his mother.

    8. Other personal factors which were relevant to whether the  appellant
       could reasonably be expected to  relocate  are  the  fact  that  his
       family are from the marginalised Kuchi group (and are  nomads);  the
       fact that the appellant cannot read and write in an Afghan language;
       and  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  westernisation,  lack   of
       knowledge of Kabul and long absence from Afghanistan. These  factors
       are also not engaged with by the First-tier Tribunal.  With  respect
       to westernisation the evidence of Dr Guistozzi at  paragraph  40  of
       his report was that this  was  problematic  in  certain  suburbs  of
       Kabul, even though this factor did not result  in  a  real  risk  of
       serious harm, and this was therefore relevant to internal relocation
       as those suburbs were ones where this appellant might reasonably  be
       expected to relocate to as they were ones where his  fellow  eastern
       Pashtuns live.

    9. Documents which were not considered but went to the deterioration in
       circumstances in Kabul included the report of Dr Giustozzi;  Refugee
       Support Network report of 6th April 2016, the RSN  report,  and  the
       UNCHR eligibility guidelines, and the pertinent  material  in  these
       documents is identified in detail at paragraph 40  of  the  skeleton
       argument provided for the hearing before us. In summary it is argued
       that the appellant would be returning to a city where  the  economic
       and  security  situation  was  significantly  worse  than  when  the
       guidance in AK was decided, and with significantly less humanitarian
       support than at the time this case was decided.

   10. The guidance in AK is such that it was beholden  on  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to have conducted an individual assessment  as  to  whether
       relocation was reasonable, and also to have had reviewed the country
       situation. It is  argued  therefore  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       failed to follow AK in deciding the appeal by failing to have regard
       to the material set out above, and that  in  addition  the  material
       came, in very large part, into being after AK was decided  so  could
       have led to different conclusions than were reached in AK.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal  had  therefore  firstly  failed  to  direct
       itself properly to the test for internal  relocation;  and  secondly
       failed to refer to and engage with relevant  evidence  and  thus  to
       provide adequate reasoning for the conclusion that the appellant was
       not entitled to succeed in his asylum appeal. The decision  was  not
       in accordance with Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 as there was a need to  look
       at the personal circumstances of the appellant and this had not been
       done. The appellant was not arguing that the decision  was  unlawful
       as the appellant would not obtain the same support  he  receives  in
       the UK.   The  errors  with  respect  to  internal  relocation  were
       repeated with respect to consideration of the appeal under paragraph
       276ADE (1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

   12. In the Rule 24 notice and in oral  submissions  from  Mr  Kotas  the
       respondent argues that specific factors relating  to  the  appellant
       were considered at paragraphs 87 to 89 and 93 of the  decision,  and
       it is clear that the reasonableness test was  in  the  mind  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge. In relation to the  evidence  submissions
       were recorded relating to the evidence, and it is  not  demonstrated
       how this should have led the First-tier Tribunal to deviate from AK.

   13.  In relation to the issue of westernisation  Dr  Guistozzi  was  not
       supportive of this being a relevant as a source of  serious  trouble
       unless the appelant were living in  certain  suburbs  where  eastern
       Pashtuns live. The idea that that  the  appellant  was  living  semi
       independently was supported by the letter of 16th December 2016 from
       Ms Kate Duffy who used this phrase. It was clear therefore that this
       information  had  been  considered  when  the  First-tier   Tribunal
       concluded that he could live "independently without  any  day-to-day
       involvement from adults"  at  paragraph  88  of  the  decision,  and
       similarly at paragraph 93 of the decision. It was contended that  it
       was accurate to say that there was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant
       facing particular personal challenges, at paragraph 88.

   14. Mr Kotas contended that the decision was in line with  the  decision
       of the House of Lords in Januzi at paragraph 47 whereby the standard
       of  reasonableness  must  be  measured  by  normal  Afghan  societal
       standards. When all  factors  were  considered  the  conclusions  at
       paragraphs 88 and 93 were rational and internal relocation to  Kabul
       was not unreasonable.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   15. The First-tier Tribunal conclude that the appellant would be at real
       risk of persecution if he were to be returned to his  home  area  of
       Logar in Afghanistan, see paragraph 79 of the decision.

   16. The question of whether the appellant can reasonably be expected  to
       relocate or whether this would be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  is
       therefore determinative of his asylum appeal.

   17. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal, made at paragraph 75 of  the
       decision, that the appellant is 19 years old is not contested by any
       party. It is also not contested that the finding that the  appellant
       is not at real risk of serious harm or persecution in Kabul  is  not
       properly made at paragraph 82 of the decision, or that there is  not
       a Article 15(c ) risk of generalised violence in Kabul, as found  at
       paragraph 83- 85 of the decision.

   18. We find that the First-tier Tribunal has failed however to apply the
       unreasonableness/ unduly harsh test for internal  relocation  having
       established that the appellant was at risk in his home  area.  There
       is no evidence that the First-tier Tribunal considered this test  at
       all having discounted a risk of persecution or Article 15(c) risk in
       Kabul, this was therefore an error of law.

   19. The First-tier Tribunal considers only that  there  is  no  evidence
       that the appellant could not find and pay for his own  accommodation
       or that he would be destitute  in  Kabul  at  paragraph  88  of  the
       decision, and at paragraph 93 when looking at issues of integration,
       that he is young, fit, has received some education in the UK,  would
       get a re-integration package and that he would be able to  find  his
       mother as she was not  at  risk  from  the  Taliban.  This  was  not
       sufficient to look at whether return to Kabul would be  unreasonable
       or unduly harsh in the context of the personal and country of origin
       evidence before the  judge  set  out  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
       argument before the First-tier Tribunal, particularly at  paragraphs
       80 to 83 of that document.

   20. In so far as the decision states that there was no evidence that the
       appellant faces any particular personal challenges or  that  he  was
       living a life independent of day to day help from adults this is not
       an accurate reflection of the evidence which  is  in  fact  that  he
       needs regular help from adults with respect to  decision-making  and
       with important issues such as employment, rent  and  sustenance  and
       lives, and despite being over the age of 18 years,  is provided with
       supported accommodation. The finding that he  could  resume  contact
       with his mother is also insufficiently  reasoned,  and  there  is  a
       failing to explain how this contact would  make  his  relocation  to
       Kabul less harsh.

   21. We find therefore that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
       failing  to  set  out  and  apply  the  correct  test  for  internal
       relocation and apply it to the substantial  amount  of  evidence  on
       this point. We also find that the same error occurred  with  respect
       to the failure to apply the  full  evidence  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  to  the  decision  on  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi)  of  the
       Immigration Rules with respect to whether the appellant  would  have
       very significant obstacles to integration in Afghanistan,  and  thus
       the appeal Article 8 ECHR.

   22. We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  We
       preserve  however  all  of  the  findings  up  until  and  including
       paragraph 85 of the decision which are not infected with any errors.



   23. We now need to remake these aspects  of  the  appeal  identified  at
       paragraph 21 above.  However,  it  is  appropriate  to  adjourn  the
       remaking hearing until after the country guidance decision in AS  on
       relocation to Kabul is promulgated. It is understood  that  this  is
       likely to be available in January 2018, so the matter will be listed
       for a case management review hearing on  the  first  available  date
       before Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley after 1st February 2018.

Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. We set aside the decision and the findings from paragraphs 86 to 93 of
      the decision.

   3. We adjourn the remaking hearing.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim.




Signed:  Fiona Lindsley                      Date:  12th December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
