
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/12910/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                       |Decision Promulgated           |
|On: 11 October 2017                        |On: 12 October 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     EA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Bashow, Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant's three  children.   The  appellant  has
    four dependents: her husband, KA and their three children, V,  born  in
    2004 (13), E, born in 2005 (12) and J, born in 2009 (8).



Background

 2. The appellant and her dependents are citizens of Nigeria.   KA  entered
    the UK in March 2005  as  a  visitor  and  overstayed  his  visa.   The
    appellant entered the UK in May 2008 with her  two  elder  children  as
    visitors and also overstayed.  The youngest child was born in the UK.


 3. In a decision dated 10 January 2017, the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds and  concluded  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the  children  to  return  together  with
    their parents to Nigeria.  In a decision dated 25 July 2017  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted  permission  to   appeal,   having
    identified  arguable  legal  errors  in   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    assessment of the issue of reasonableness.

Hearing

 4. At the beginning of the hearing Mr McVeety conceded that the First-tier
    Tribunal committed a  material  error  of  law  in  failing  to  attach
    significant weight to the length of residence of the  children  in  the
    UK, and in the premises erred in law in its approach to section 117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002  Act').
    For the reasons I outline below, the respondent was clearly correct  to
    make this concession.


 5. Both representatives agreed that I could and should remake the  Article
    8 decision.


 6. After hearing brief oral evidence from the  appellant  and  submissions
    from both representatives I reserved my decision, which I  now  provide
    with reasons.

Error of law discussion

 7. The correct approach to the reasonableness test in 276ADE  and  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act has been considered in  MA  (Pakistan)  V  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (7 July 2016).  The Court of Appeal found that  the
    significance of section 117B(6) is that where the child has been in the
    UK for seven years, this is a factor of weight  leaning  in  favour  of
    leave to remain being granted [45].  Elias LJ said this:


           "46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
           that a child has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
           significant  weight  when  carrying  out   the   proportionality
           exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published  guidance  in
           August 2015 in the form of Immigration Directorate  Instructions
           entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life:
           10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that  once  the
           seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there  need  to
           be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave  (para.  11.2.4).  These
           instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
           appeal were determined, but in my view they merely confirm  what
           is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After  such  a
           period of time the child will have put down roots and  developed
           social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is
           likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required to leave
           the UK. That may be less so when the  children  are  very  young
           because the focus of their lives will be on their families,  but
           the disruption becomes more serious as they get older. Moreover,
           in these cases there must be a very strong expectation that  the
           child's best interests will be to remain  in  the  UK  with  his
           parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
           primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.
           ...
           49...However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for
           seven years would need to be given  significant  weight  in  the
           proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because
           of its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of  the
           child's best interests; and second, because it establishes as  a
           starting point that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are
           powerful reasons to the contrary."


 8. When the First-tier Tribunal decision is read as a whole, there  is  no
    clear indication that it attached significant weight to the  children's
    length  of  residence  when  considering  the  reasonableness  test  or
    carrying out the proportionality exercise.  The First-tier Tribunal was
    clearly mindful of the length of residence and that  lengthy  residence
    is a relevant factor, but that is different  to  attaching  significant
    weight to it.


 9. Although the First-tier Tribunal referred to the respondent's policy at
    [24], it failed to take into account  its  full  ambit  and  failed  to
    acknowledge that this provides that once  the  seven  years'  residence
    requirement is  satisfied,  there  need  to  be  "strong  reasons"  for
    refusing leave.  In  adopting  the  approach  it  did,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law and the decision needs to be remade.


10. There is an additional material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision.  I address this in summary form only given the agreement that
    the decision needs to be remade in any event.


11. The approach to the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal in
    a decision dated 17 October 2014 is flawed.  The legal framework to  be
    applied had substantially altered by the time the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered the evidence at the hearing on 30 November  2016.   In  2014
    the children had all resided in the UK for a period under seven  years.
    By 2016 they all had over  seven  years  residence  in  the  UK.   This
    significantly altered the entire approach to be taken to  the  children
    pursuant to both policy and law.  In these  circumstances,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's search for "a material change in circumstances" at [21-
    23] was unnecessary and unhelpful.  As acknowledged by Mr McVeety,  the
    correct approach was to consider whether or not it would be  reasonable
    to expect the children  to  reside  in  Nigeria  by  reference  to  the
    evidence available as at the date of hearing, and the  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal findings of fact were merely a starting point in that process.






Re-making the decision under Article 8

Approach to the evidence

12. I heard from the appellant very briefly.  She explained that E is  very
    settled at the specialist school and would find it  very  difficult  to
    change schools given his  need  for  stability  and  familiarity.   She
    explained that he kept asking to  return  to  school  over  the  summer
    holidays, and the school had to prepare a special  visual  calendar  to
    explain why he was not at school and when he would return.


13. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the underpinning  factual  matrix  is  not
    disputed.  He accepted that E's autism together with the length of  the
    children's residence render this a finely balanced  case.   Mr  McVeety
    quite properly  acknowledged  that  the  legal  landscape  had  changed
    substantially since the 2014  decision  and  the  correct  approach  to
    section 117B(6) is to consider whether the accepted  facts  as  at  the
    date of hearing are such that it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    children to live in Nigeria with the parents,  when  all  the  relevant
    countervailing circumstances are considered.

14. Ms Bashow invited me to find that  the  children's  return  to  Nigeria
    would be unreasonable, even when the parents'  immigration  history  is
    factored in.


15. After hearing submissions from both parties  I  reserved  my  decision,
    which I now provide with reasons.

Best interests

16.  I  begin  the  Article  8  assessment  by   evaluating   the   primary
    consideration of the interests of the appellant's  three  children.   I
    accept that their length of residence in the UK is a weighty factor, to
    which significant weight should be attached.


17. I also accept that V and E have resided in the  UK  at  a  particularly
    significant and formative time in  their  lives:  ages  4-13  and  3-12
    respectively.  All three are settled in school.  E is autistic  and  is
    happier and more  settled  since  commencing  a  specialist  school  to
    address his needs, in September 2015. Whilst it is regrettable that the
    specialist school was not asked to provide updated evidence  on  how  E
    would cope with a change of school and return to Nigeria, when all  the
    evidence is considered in the round I accept his mother's evidence that
    he would find this very difficult  indeed.   The  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal consistently supports the proposition that E  finds
    change very difficult indeed and the whole family suffer when  this  is
    imposed upon him.


18. I acknowledge that the two elder children were born in Nigeria  and  it
    is likely that they have been brought up with an awareness  of  aspects
    of Nigerian culture, through their parents.   In  addition,  EA  has  a
    family network in Nigeria and it is likely that  they  will  assist  in
    supporting  the  children  there.   Even  with  the  support  of  their
    committed parents and the extended family in Nigeria, the children  are
    likely to find a move to Nigeria difficult.  It  will  be  particularly
    difficult for the elder two given their ages and  the  undisputed  fact
    that as far as they can recall their lives have been in the UK, and  as
    such UK values, culture,  friendships  and  education  have  played  an
    important role in shaping them.


19. I note  that  the  children  and  the  family  unit  as  a  whole  have
    demonstrated a degree of resilience in adjusting to a move from  London
    to Manchester in 2012.  The children were  significantly  younger  then
    and likely to be much more dependent upon their parents.  Moving  to  a
    different country and educational system at the ages of 12 and 13 is an
    entirely different proposition.


20. I accept that prior to settling into his current specialist  school,  E
    found school difficult and this made him unhappy.  Although the country
    background evidence suggests that there are facilities and  schools  to
    address E's autism in Nigeria, any change  in  education  and  domestic
    circumstances is  likely  to  have  a  serious  adverse  impact  on  E,
    particularly when accompanied by all the other changes  inherent  in  a
    move from the UK to Nigeria.  The evidence  available  makes  it  clear
    that E's autism is such that he relies upon a  predictive  routine  and
    familiar adults and settings that take careful account of  his  sensory
    challenges.  In addition, the particularly adverse impact of  any  move
    to Nigeria on E will inevitably also affect the two other children  and
    the family as a whole negatively.


21. On balance, I conclude that the best interests of the children would be
    best served by remaining in the UK.  Whilst they will have the  support
    of their parents and family in Nigeria and may adjust with  time,  they
    are likely to find the short to medium term very difficult indeed.   In
    my judgment, it is in the best interests of E to remain at his  special
    school in the UK, and not  to  return  to  Nigeria,  by  a  significant
    margin.


Section 117B(6)


22. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act states as follows:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -


                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child; and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

23. It is undisputed that (a) is met - the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with three qualifying children.  It  is  agreed
    that the real question for me is the reasonableness  of  expecting  the
    children to leave the UK in accordance with (b).  I must take  all  the
    relevant factors into account when  assessing  reasonableness  and  not
    just the impact upon the children - see MA Pakistan (supra).   Relevant
    countervailing factors include the parents' immigration history.


24. When considering reasonableness, it  is  also  relevant  to  take  into
    account the SSHD's policy.  This has been addressed in  SF  and  others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT  120  (IAC)  at  [10]  in
    which it was held that the Tribunal  ought  to  take  the  respondent's
    policy into account if it pointed clearly to a particular outcome.


25. Mr McVeety acknowledged there was no question of  any  criminality  but
    invited me to find that  the  parents  have  a  very  poor  immigration
    history. The Appellant and her husband entered the UK as  visitors  and
    brazenly overstayed for an extended period, and wasted little  time  in
    enrolling their children into schools.  On the other  hand,  they  have
    sought to regularise their leave on  the  basis  of  their  family  and
    private life in the UK on two occasions.   The  first  application  was
    made in 2012 and they did not  become  appeal  rights  exhausted  until
    April 2015.  The second application to remain was made in August  2015,
    and these proceedings remain ongoing.  When the second application  was
    made it was correctly pointed out that V  and  E  accrued  seven  years
    residence in the UK on 4 August 2015.   This  is  relevant  because  it
    points to a serious application with prospects of success,  as  opposed
    to a hopeless and frivolous attempt to repeat reliance upon  Article  8
    that had already been rejected.

26. I also bear in mind that E's education will be at significant  cost  to
    the taxpayer.  However, I am satisfied that a return to Nigeria  for  E
    would be very difficult indeed.  He has not coped  with  moves  in  the
    past.  Even if he is able to access specialist education in Nigeria  he
    is likely to suffer greatly from  the  obvious  differences  in  almost
    every aspect of his private life.  His autism is at  the  more  serious
    end of the spectrum and this is a factor of considerable weight.


27. In all the circumstances, even when the  parents'  immigration  history
    and the additional public expense is factored in, it would  be  not  be
    reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the  UK  and  section
    117B(6)(b) is met.

Balancing exercise

28. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) thereof  I  am  obliged  to
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B.   I  consider
    that section 117B applies to this appeal in the following way:


          (a)  The  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
          immigration controls is clearly engaged.  The  appellant  and  her
          husband have deliberately and over  an  extended  period  of  time
          flouted immigration rules and control.


          (b) I am satisfied that the appellant  and  her  dependents  speak
          English and as such I do not find an infringement of the  "English
          speaking" public interest.


          (c) The economic interest  is  engaged.   The  appellant  and  her
          husband are not  employed  and  their  children  rely  upon  state
          education.  This includes specialist education for E.


          (d) The private life established by the appellant and her  husband
          during the entirety of their time in  the  UK  qualifies  for  the
          attribution of little weight only.


29. In my judgment, when all of the above matters are  considered  together
    with the best interests of the children, the appellant's removal  would
    constitute a disproportionate  breach  of  Article  8.     In  all  the
    circumstances, it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
    live in Nigeria.


30. Having applied the facts to section 117B of the 2002 Act and considered
    the general principles applicable in a case raising family and  private
    life under Article 8 of the ECHR, I find that the  appellant's  removal
    from the UK would constitute a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


32. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.






Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 11 October
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


