
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/12836/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 October 2017                        |  On 24 October 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                Suman Chalise
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Diem, Counsel, instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Respondent against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlin (the  judge),  promulgated  on  12  June
    2017, in which she allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds.   That
    appeal arose from the Respondent's decision of 13  May  2016,  refusing
    the Appellant's human rights claim.  The claim had been based  squarely
    on the Appellant's assertion that he had acquired ten years' lawful and
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom by virtue of various periods
    of leave as a student in this country.   In  refusing  the  Appellant's
    application the Respondent had stated  that  there  was  a  significant
    break in the Appellant's leave between the end between October 2010 and
    February 2011, when a further period of leave was granted.




The judge's decision

 2. Somewhat unfortunately, the Respondent was not represented  before  the
    judge.  Partly on the basis of this, the judge found the  Appellant  to
    be a credible witness (paragraph 12).  She deals  with  the  series  of
    events relating to the Appellant's application  for  further  leave  to
    remain in 2010.  She finds  that  a  first  attempted  application  for
    further leave was rejected by the Respondent  due  to  the  Appellant's
    failure to provide mandatory information within the  application  form.
    She notes  the  Appellant's  expeditious  attempts  at  rectifying  his
    initial error. She  finds  that  the  Appellant  did  in  fact  provide
    relevant bank statements with the valid application  made  in  November
    2010.  She finds that the Appellant had not remained without leave  for
    a period of over three months, as alleged by the  Respondent.   In  the
    judge's view, the Respondent should have exercised what is described as
    "evidential flexibility" in respect of the  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  In light of this the judge goes  on  to  state  that  she  was
    placing "considerable weight" on her finding that the Appellant in fact
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the consequent finding that the Respondent  should  have  exercised
    discretion in his favour back in 2010/2011 (paragraph  28).   She  also
    states that considerable weight had been placed upon her findings as to
    the reasons why the Appellant had  been  without  lawful  leave  for  a
    period in excess of twenty eight days (paragraph 28).  In light of this
    the appeal was duly allowed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. There are four grounds of appeal.  In essence, they make the  following
    arguments.  First, the judge erred in effectively purporting to reach a
    judicial decision against the decision of the Respondent made  back  in
    2010, a decision that had not been challenged at the time.  Second, the
    judge was not entitled to purportedly exercise discretion or  to  state
    that the Respondent should have  done  this.   Third,  that  the  judge
    should have adjourned the appeal of her own volition given the  absence
    of a representative for the Respondent and  the  material  conflict  of
    fact relating to which bank statements had in fact  been  submitted  by
    the Appellant.  Fourth, the judge was wrong to have relied on any delay
    by  the  Respondent  in  deciding  the  Appellant's   applications   in
    2010/2011.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes on 13 July 2017.

The hearing before us

 5. Mr Clarke submitted that although the issue of the bank statements  had
    been stated in the Appellant's witness  statement,  this  evidence  had
    only been provided some five days before the hearing and the Respondent
    had not had a chance to respond to it.  The  judge  acted  unfairly  in
    failing to adjourn the appeal.  In respect of the discretion issue,  Mr
    Clarke submitted that the judge had failed to  make  any  reference  to
    what, if any, policy on evidential flexibility she  was  purporting  to
    apply.  In addition, she had made no reference to any duty arising  out
    of common law fairness.  The judge had also erred in relying  on  delay
    on the Respondent's part.

 6. Mr Diem submitted that the judge had  been  entitled  to  take  various
    factors into account.  She had not been bound  to  adjourn  the  appeal
    given that the issue of the bank statements  had  been  raised  in  the
    witness statement and this evidence had been provided to the Respondent
    in advance of the hearing.




Decision on error of law

 7. We conclude that the judge has materially erred in  law.   Our  reasons
    for this conclusion are as follows.

 8. We see nothing  material  in  the  adjournment  issue.   Administrative
    matters relating to the provision  of  Presenting  Officers  at  appeal
    hearings do not generally provide a sound  basis  for  suggesting  that
    judges  should,  of  their  volition,  adjourn  hearings  simply  where
    additional evidence has been provided by  the  Appellant,  particularly
    when this has been done in advance of the hearing.  In this  case  that
    was done only a fairly short time beforehand, but of course it  may  be
    that additional evidence is provided  many  months  before  a  hearing.
    There has been no suggestion that appeal hearings should  be  routinely
    adjourned in  such  circumstances.   Furthermore,  Mr  Clarke  has  not
    provided us with any evidence (by way  of  an  application  under  Rule
    15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules) to  indicate  that  there
    was evidence from the Respondent which made any material difference  to
    the judge's consideration of the case.

 9. The errors of  law  lie  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the  issue  of
    discretion and conclusion that the requirements of  paragraph  276B  of
    the Rules had in fact been  met.   The  decisions  of  the  Respondent,
    particularly that dated 4 January 2011, had not been challenged by  the
    Appellant.  Therefore the judge could not and should not have  provided
    what was in effect a judicial decision on the correctness or  otherwise
    of the Respondent's decision at that point in time. Further, we  cannot
    see the basis for the purported  exercise  of  discretion  relating  to
    evidential flexibility.  There is no reference to a  particular  policy
    in existence at the time, nor does the judge purport  to  rely  on  any
    common law duty of fairness.

10. Turning to the purported satisfaction of the requirements of  paragraph
    276B, we cannot see that  is  a  sustainable  conclusion.  This  is  so
    because the judge was not in a position to exercise her own  discretion
    in respect of evidential flexibility, and of course the Respondent  had
    not exercised any residual discretion in the  Appellant's  favour.   In
    turn, there had in fact been a break in the  Appellant's  leave  for  a
    period  in  excess  of  twenty   eight   days,   something   apparently
    acknowledged by the judge in the same paragraph in which she  has  also
    stated that the requirements of paragraph 276B were  met.   It  follows
    that  the  judge  had  placed  "considerable  weight"   on   a   factor
    (satisfaction of the Rules) to which  no  weight  was,  in  the  event,
    attributable.

11. The judge's approach to the issues arising out of events  in  2010/2011
    is materially erroneous.

12. We therefore set her decision aside.




Re-making the decision

13. Both representatives were agreed that we could remake the  decision  on
    the basis of the evidence before us.  We invited submissions as to  the
    merits of the Appellant's case.

14. It is fair to say that there was a degree of discussion in  respect  of
    how  the  chronology  of  events  in  2010/2011  was  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's status during this period.  Mr Diem submitted that in light
    of the Respondent's policy on applications  from  overstayers  (version
    6.0, dated 20 October 2014), the "grace" period of twenty eight days to
    be disregarded only started to run from the  Respondent's  notification
    to the  Appellant  of  4  November  2010  that  his  initial  purported
    application made on 30 September 2010 was invalid.  He  submitted  that
    the valid application made on 10 November 2010 was within  this  twenty
    eight day grace period, although he accepted that it  was  made  beyond
    the expiration of the  Appellant's  previous  leave  to  remain  on  11
    October 2010.  Mr Diem accepted that the  valid  application  had  been
    made 29 days after that previous leave had  run  out  (calculating  the
    period between 12 October 2010 and 10  November  2010).   He  suggested
    that that single  day  should  not  have  a  material  bearing  on  our
    consideration.

15. Mr Clarke submitted that in essence it was the  Appellant's  fault  for
    failing to include mandatory information in  the  original  application
    form, this had led to subsequent difficulties. Ultimately, submitted Mr
    Clarke, the Appellant's lawful leave  had  been  broken.   This  lawful
    residence had been at the core of his initial human rights claim.  Once
    this  fell  away  there  was  nothing  in  the  case  to  indicate  any
    exceptional or compelling circumstances.  The Appellant had always been
    in this country on a precarious basis as a Tier 4 Student.   There  had
    never been any expectation that he would  be  able  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom permanently.  We were asked to consider all the relevant
    mandatory factors under section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

16. Mr Diem had nothing further to add by way of reply.




Findings and conclusions on the re-making of the decision

17. We find that this Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 January
    2006 with leave as a student.  He obtained various extensions, the last
    of which ran to 11 October 2010.   Having  considered  the  application
    form submitted on 30 September 2010, we agree with the Respondent  that
    mandatory information was not provided (specifically two boxes had  not
    been ticked by the Appellant).  We find that the Respondent was correct
    to have rejected that attempted application as being invalid.  We  find
    that the Appellant did not challenge the decision of 4 November 2010 by
    way of judicial review.

18. We find that the Appellant then  put  in  a  valid  application  on  10
    November 2010.  We are prepared to accept that  the  Appellant  did  in
    fact provide bank statements issued on 15 September 2010 and 15 October
    2010, as he has claimed in his witness statement.   We  note  that  the
    judge had found the Appellant to be a generally credible person and  we
    have no additional evidence before  us  to  suggest  to  the  contrary,
    although Mr Clarke submitted that the judge had been unfair not to have
    adjourned the case in order for the Respondent to be  able  to  provide
    additional evidence, no such evidence has been forthcoming.  There  was
    nothing before us to suggest that these two bank statements had not  in
    fact been provided by the Appellant.

19. We find that the Appellant's application was refused by the  Respondent
    on 4 January 2011.  This decision did not carry  with  it  a  right  of
    appeal because of course at that time the Appellant did not have  leave
    to remain.  Although there was a period  of  just  under  three  months
    between the application being made and the Respondent's decision, we do
    not find this to have involved an inordinate delay.  We have  not  been
    referred to any cases or materials by  the  Appellant  to  suggest  the
    contrary.

20. We find that the Appellant made his  second  valid  application  on  14
    January 2011.  This application was granted  by  the  Respondent  on  7
    February 2011.

21. We find there are no issues of misconduct on the  Appellant's  part  in
    this case.  We find that  he  has  maintained  himself  throughout  his
    residence in this country,  speaks  perfectly  good  English,  and  has
    sought to maintain a lawful presence here as best he could.

22. We now apply our findings of fact  to  the  relevant  legal  framework.
    Turning first to paragraph 276B of the Rules,  we  conclude  that  even
    taking the Appellant's case at its highest, there is still  a  material
    gap in lawful residence, a gap which precludes him from being  able  to
    satisfy the requirements of ten years' continuous lawful  residence  in
    the United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 276B(i)).   In  light  of  the
    Respondent's 2014 guidance, even if the twenty eight day  grace  period
    only started to run from the date of the  Respondent's  decision  of  4
    November 2010, further leave to remain was not granted until 7 February
    2011, a timescale which is  clearly  well  over  that  period.   It  is
    important to note in this regard that the twenty eight day period  does
    not statutorily  extend  leave  to  remain  under  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, but is simply a period of unlawful presence which
    falls to be disregarded.

23. Although we have accepted that  he  submitted  the  two  relevant  bank
    statements with the first valid application, the fact remains that  the
    refusal of this application on 4 January 2011 was never  challenged  by
    the Appellant by way of judicial review (we accept that  there  was  no
    right of appeal).  By the time he put his second valid  application  in
    on 14 January 2011, he had  been  without  leave  to  remain  since  11
    October 2010 and had remained in this country well  beyond  the  twenty
    eight day grace period which (for the sake  of  argument)  ran  from  4
    November 2010.  In light of the above,  the  Appellant  could  not  and
    cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B of the  Rules.   That
    is significant for reasons which we shall expand on below.

24. There has been no suggestion  by  Mr  Diem  that  the  Appellant  could
    otherwise satisfy the provisions of either  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules.  We find that he cannot.

25. We turn then to an assessment of Article 8 outside the context  of  the
    Rules.  We find the Appellant does enjoy a private life in  the  United
    Kingdom, built up over the course of fairly lengthy residence here.  We
    find that his removal from the United Kingdom  in  consequence  of  the
    Respondent's  decision  would  constitute  an  interference  with  that
    private life.  The Respondent's decision is clearly in accordance  with
    the law and it pursues the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  effective
    immigration control and thereby the economic wellbeing  of  the  United
    Kingdom.

26. We come to the issue of proportionality.   The  significant  difficulty
    faced by the Appellant is that his human rights claim was always  based
    firmly upon the continuous lawful residence and what  he  believed  was
    his ability to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Rules.
     In light of our findings and conclusions above, this  has  not  turned
    out to be the case. Thus, the essential plank of his claim falls  away.



27. In addition, the following factors weight against the  Appellant.   The
    public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control   is
    powerful (section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act).   Here,  the  Appellant  is
    unable to meet the provisions of any Article 8-related Rules.  We  have
    accepted that the Appellant did take steps to regularise his  situation
    back in 2010/2011.  Whilst we have some sympathy for  his  predicament,
    it remains the fact that he failed to complete that  initial  attempted
    application made whilst he still  had  leave  to  remain.   Whilst  the
    failure to tick a couple of boxes in the application form  may  on  one
    view appear trivial,  they  concerned  mandatory  information  and  the
    Respondent was perfectly justified in setting  those  requirements  and
    rejecting applications which omit such information as being invalid.

28. The Appellant has always been in this country on  a  precarious  basis:
    his leave has been that of a student  and  there  has  never  been  any
    expectation that he would inevitably be  permitted  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.

29. The requirement to attribute a little weight to the Appellant's private
    life is not in our view mitigated by any other compelling circumstances
    (Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803).

30. We have  found  that  the  Appellant  is,  and  has  been,  financially
    independent, and that he  speaks  good  English.  These  are  therefore
    neutral factors.

31. What else is there which can be said in the  Appellant's  favour  which
    might go to outweigh the  factors  in  the  Respondent's  side  of  the
    scales?  In our view there are no circumstances in this case which  can
    properly be described as compelling, exceptional, very significant,  or
    particularly strong.  No such circumstances have ever been put  forward
    on the Appellant's behalf as far as we can see, and certainly there  is
    no evidence of any before us.  We fully appreciate that  the  essential
    test in Article 8 cases is whether a "fair  balance"  has  been  struck
    between the public interest on the one hand,  and  the  rights  of  the
    individual on the other.  However, if an Appellant cannot  satisfy  any
    of the requirements of relevant Rules, they need to be able to point to
    additional circumstances which disclose some other important or  strong
    reasons on which to found success.  In  this  case,  there  simply  are
    none.  In light of the above the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
we set it aside.

We re-make the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal  on  Article  8
grounds.



We do not make an anonymity direction

Signed   [pic]         Date: 21 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD



We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 21 October 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


