
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12221/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2019                      |On 28 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Esther [o]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Bantleman, Counsel instructed by S Hirsch & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones promulgated  on  22  March  2019.   The
    Secretary of State issued a notice of refusal to revoke  a  deportation
    order made against the now respondent appellant on 20 July  2006.   The
    decision is dated 15 September 2017.  The deportation  order  proceeded
    on a conviction Isleworth Crown Court on 3 January 2006 for using false
    instruments and attempting to obtain services by  deception  for  which
    the appellant received a sentence of imprisonment of nine  months.   In
    making the application for revocation the appellant relied on a  number
    of factors including the fact that ten  years  had  elapsed  since  the
    making of the deportation order.  In the  interim  she  had  married  a
    British citizen in 2006, although the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found
    that the relationship was entered into in the United Kingdom  prior  to
    that.  There were now also two children of the marriage aged 9  and  7.
    They reside with the appellant in Nigeria.

2.   The  grounds  of  appeal  can  be  succinctly  characterised  as  being
    misdirection in law by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the application
    of  the  rules;  the  correct  threshold   was   one   of   exceptional
    circumstances in accordance with paragraph 390A.  Before us  Mr  Clarke
    drew our attention to the  fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    proceeded on the basis  of  Section  117C(5)  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was a foreign criminal. This was an error of law; she is  not
    a foreign criminal.  It is not surprising that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge proceeded on that basis since  that  was  the  way  that  it  was
    presented by  the  appellant's  representative  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and apparently acquiesced in by the Presenting  Officer.
    That being the case Rule 391A applies and  that  is  in  the  following
    terms:-

         "In other cases, revocation of  the  order  will  not  normally  be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by  fresh
         information coming to light which  was  not  before  the  appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State.  The passage of  time  since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a  change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order".

3.   In Smith (paragraph 391(a) - revocation of  deportation  order)  [2017]
    UKUT 00166(IAC)) the Upper Tribunal held that the fact that a period of
    ten years  has  elapsed  since  the  making  of  the  order  creates  a
    presumption that the order will be discharged unless having  considered
    the individual facts of the case the Secretary of State considers  that
    it continues to be  in  the  public  interest  to  maintain  the  order
    (paragraph 23).

4.   Essentially what is required in the consideration of an application  to
    revoke a deportation order where Section  117C  does  not  apply  is  a
    proportionality  exercise  taking  into  account  all  of  the  factors
    including the public interest.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge conducted
    that exercise and that is set out in the conclusions in  paragraphs  26
    onwards.  In particular  she  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant regretted her offending, that she has  not  reoffended,  that
    her offending although serious concerning immigration controls  it  was
    not one of violence, that she does not present a risk  of  reoffending,
    that the appellant had entered into a relationship in the UK  and  that
    there were children of the  relationship.   Her  husband  suffers  from
    sickle cell disease and if  he  was  to  return  to  Nigeria  his  life
    expectancy would be thereby reduced. These were all factors  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to take into account.

5.   As Ms Bantleman pointed out the First-tier Tribunal Judge  specifically
    addressed the public interest in paragraph 31 as follows:

         "31. In terms of the public interest I trust  the  respondent  does
             not consider I treat this lightly.  I do not.  However,  there
             are provisions here that express the public interest  which  I
             find are addressed to the requisite standard by the  appellant
             and given  the  passage  of  time  relevant  to  the  sentence
             imposed".

6.   Accordingly while it is clear that the reference to Section 117C(5)  is
    misconceived, we do not consider that the error is a material one given
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has fully considered all the factors
    on both sides.  Accordingly, the appeal is refused.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.


                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                          Date: 26 June 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:
