
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12646/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               mr mark Ntanda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - pretoria

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jane Rutaza-Babu, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant,  a  national  of  Uganda,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision by the Entry Clearance Officer to  refuse
    entry clearance dated 15th  August  2017.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Moore dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  10th  August
    2018.  The Appellant now appeals  with  permission  granted  by  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Davey on 11th January  2019  following  a  renewed
    application for permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal, it is contended in  the  first  ground
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to adequately  deal
    with the evidence in relation to the Appellant's father's death and his
    relationship to the Sponsor.  It is contended in the second ground that
    the judge failed to properly apply the standard or  proof  setting  the
    standard too high in considering the evidence  as  to  the  Appellant's
    father's death and the DNA evidence.  It is  further  contended  within
    that ground that the judge erred  in  his  approach  to  the  issue  of
    responsibility under the Immigration Rules in that at paragraphs 21 and
    22 he acknowledged that after the death of the Appellant's  father  the
    Sponsor sent money to maintain the Appellant and employed maids to  act
    as caretakers but  sought  further  corroboration  from  the  Appellant
    himself in relation to the issue of sole responsibility issues.  It  is
    contended that the documents produced show that the Appellant's  father
    was deceased, that the Appellant was the biological son of the  Sponsor
    and that the Sponsor supported the Appellant.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer raised a number of issues  in  relation  to
    the evidence. The Entry Clearance Officer considered that, because  the
    Appellant's birth certificate was dated 16th  May  2017,  approximately
    eighteen years after the child was born, he was not satisfied that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were related as  claimed.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer did not consider that the evidence provided was  sufficient  to
    establish that the Appellant's father had died as claimed.   The  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  also  considered  that  the   Appellant   had   not
    established compelling family or other considerations  which  made  his
    exclusion undesirable.   In  the  circumstances,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  that
    paragraph 297(i)(e) or (f) were satisfied.

 4. There were therefore two main issues in dispute in the  appeal  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In approaching the Appellant's  appeal  the  judge
    had therefore to decide whether the Appellant and Sponsor were  related
    as claimed and whether the Appellant's father had died as claimed.   If
    it were established that the father was dead and  the  Sponsor  is  the
    Appellant's  mother  then  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(d) which sets out the requirements  to  be  met  by  a
    person seeking indefinite leave to remain as  the  child  of  a  parent
    present and settled in the UK where the  other  parent  is  dead.   The
    issue of sole responsibility in paragraph  297(i)(e)  only  comes  into
    play where one parent is present and settled in the  UK  and  "has  had
    sole responsibility for  the  child's  upbringing".   In  circumstances
    where it is accepted that the Appellant's father has died then there is
    no need to look at sole responsibility.

 5. In this case the judge noted that the Appellant had left Uganda in 2002
    leaving her two children with their biological father since he  refused
    to consent to the children's permanent relocation to the UK  [9].   The
    judge noted the Sponsor's claim that she had always played a close role
    in relation to the upbringing of the children sending remittances until
    he died on 30th March 2017 [10].  The judge noted  that  the  Sponsor's
    daughter is now married and lives an independent life [12].  The  judge
    noted the Sponsor's evidence that she contributed to the maintenance of
    the family in Uganda from about 2011 but that things changed  when  the
    Appellant's father died and from that time she employed a maid to  look
    after the Appellant and sent money to the maid to pay for  school  fees
    and for the maintenance and welfare of the Appellant.  The  first  maid
    left after two or three months and a  second  maid  was  employed  from
    April 2017 [13].  The judge considered the evidence in relation to  the
    Appellant's father's death at paragraphs 17 to 20 and the  relationship
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor.  The judge  considered  that  it
    was "odd" that the Appellant's birth certificate was issued on 16th May
    2017 and the father's death certificate was issued on  17th  May  2017.
    The judge did not accept the Sponsor's explanation  that  she  did  not
    know the dates when  her  son's  birth  and  his  father's  death  were
    registered. She said that as far as she was aware,  the  dates  on  the
    certificates were the dates when those certificates were  processed  by
    the registrar.

 6. The judge went on to take into account  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    evidence of the Appellant's father's funeral and that the  letter  from
    the school in relation to the Appellant made no mention of the death of
    the Appellant's father [17].  The judge also  took  into  account  that
    there was no  letter  or  witness  statement  from  the  housemaid  and
    concluded that there was no credible evidence showing that  the  father
    of the Appellant is deceased [19].

 7. In my view the judge's consideration of the issue of the father's death
    demonstrates that he applied a standard  higher  than  the  balance  of
    probabilities in considering this issue.  The judge had  before  him  a
    death certificate issued on 17th May 2017 in relation to the  death  on
    30th March 2017.  The judge has given inadequate reasons for  rejecting
    this death certificate basing that decision on a  suspicion  about  the
    date on which it was issued.  The judge has given insufficient  reasons
    for rejecting the Sponsor's evidence as to the death of the Appellant's
    father.  In my view the judge erred in requiring evidence about to  the
    funeral and evidence from the person looking after the Appellant as  to
    the death of the Appellant's father.

 8. The judge has also failed to give sufficient reasons  at  paragraph  20
    for rejecting the DNA evidence submitted  confirming  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and the  Sponsor.   The  DNA  report  dated  11th
    October 2017 was  obtained  after  the  date  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    decision. The judge found that there was "an absence as to the chain of
    custody records being provided which would demonstrate the  reliability
    of the DNA test results and the absence  of  any  likelihood  of  those
    results being unreliable".  However, the Appellant's assertion that the
    DNA tests were undertaken by a company recommended by the  Home  Office
    for immigration purposes was not dealt with.  There is no record in the
    decision of any specific challenge on the part of the Respondent to the
    DNA evidence obtained.  Mr Walker  made  no  submission  that  the  DNA
    evidence was open to criticism. In these circumstances I consider  that
    the judge has applied too high a standard and  has  given  insufficient
    reasons for rejecting the DNA evidence.

 9. The judge went on  to  consider  sole  responsibility  under  paragraph
    297(i)(e) of the Rules.   The  judge  accepted  that  the  Sponsor  had
    regularly sent money to Uganda for the maintenance of  welfare  of  the
    Appellant and his sister.  However, the judge found that:

         "Up until the appellant's father's death it would  appear  that  it
         was the father who made all the important decisions and would  have
         ensured that his son went to school and that he was fed  and  cared
         for and looked after.  Upon the death of the father I  accept  that
         the sponsor has employed maids to act as caretakers in  the  family
         home where the appellant now lives and appears to  have  lived  all
         his life".

10. The judge did not accept that the evidence from  the  school  confirmed
    that the Sponsor had  been  in  touch  with  the  school  to  ascertain
    progress or obtain reports in relation to the Appellant  [21].  However
    he did find at paragraph 22 that the Sponsor has for a number of  years
    provided financial assistance and more recently had probably instructed
    a maid on two occasions to act as a caretaker and live  at  the  family
    home with the Appellant.

11. At the hearing before me Mr Walker accepted that it  appears  that  the
    judge erred at paragraph 22.   The  provision  of  paragraph  297(i)(e)
    requires only that the Sponsor "has had" sole  responsibility  for  the
    child's upbringing.  In my view, the judge's finding  at  paragraph  22
    accepts that the Sponsor has had sole responsibility  for  the  child's
    upbringing since the death of his father.  297(i)(e) does not place any
    time restriction on sole responsibility.  It may be  that  the  Sponsor
    could  not  demonstrate  that  she  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant prior to the death of his father but it is  clear  from  what
    the judge accepted at paragraph 22 that she did  demonstrate  that  she
    had sole responsibility after the death of the father.  I further  note
    that the judge's findings in relation to this matter are  contradictory
    in that it appears that it was accepted for the purposes  of  the  sole
    responsibility assessment that the child's father had died but  it  was
    not accepted in considering the death certificate  and  other  evidence
    that it had been established that he was deceased.

12. For all of the reasons set out  above  I  consider  that  it  has  been
    established that the judge erred in his approach  to  the  evidence  in
    relation to the death of the Appellant's father  and  the  relationship
    with the Sponsor and to the  assessment  of  sole  responsibility.   In
    these circumstances I set aside the decision in its entirety.

Remaking the Decision

13. In remaking the decision I considered the evidence before me as it  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the additional oral  evidence  given
    by the Sponsor at the hearing.  At the hearing the  Sponsor  said  that
    prior to the death of his father and the application to  enter  the  UK
    the Appellant had not needed a birth certificate and only  applied  for
    it when it became a requirement in  connection  with  his  application.
    She said that the birth certificate was not needed for  his  day-to-day
    living but was only required for the application.  She also  said  that
    as she is not in Uganda she had had to make the  arrangements  for  the
    issue of the certificates by phone.  She said that at the time  of  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and since  then  the  Appellant  has
    been residing with a maid.  She also pointed out that the DNA  evidence
    was obtained through NorthGene,  a  company  recommended  by  the  Home
    Office.

14. I have considered the application in the context of  paragraph  297  of
    the Immigration Rules.  In my view the death  certificate,  along  with
    the Sponsor's oral evidence in  relation  to  the  provenance  of  that
    certificate, is sufficient to establish  that  the  Appellant's  father
    died on  30th  March  2017.   I  accept  on  the  basis  of  his  birth
    certificate and the DNA evidence that the Appellant and the Sponsor are
    related as claimed.  In these circumstances, as the Sponsor is  present
    and settled in the UK and the Appellant's father is dead, the Appellant
    meets the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(d).

15. In the alternative, accepting  that  the  Sponsor  is  the  Appellant's
    mother, on the basis of the unchallenged findings at paragraph 22  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge I accept that, since the death of  his
    father, the  Sponsor  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  child's
    upbringing.  In reaching  this  conclusion  I  take  into  account  the
    evidence of remittances contained in the Respondent's bundle.   I  also
    take into account the letter from the Appellant's school dated 17th May
    2017 giving the name of the Sponsor as the first emergency contact.   I
    also take into account the evidence  from  the  Sponsor  that  she  has
    employed a maid to look after the Appellant.

16. In my view, as at the date of the  application  and  the  date  of  the
    decision, the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This paragraph is compatible with Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights and a weighty factor  in  assessing
    the proportionality of the refusal decision.  In these circumstances  I
    find that the appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.  I remake the decision by allowing the appeal  on  human
rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the DNA evidence was not before the decision-maker.

Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

