
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12139/2017
                                                               HU/12141/2017
                                                               HU/12143/2017
                                                               HU/12148/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2019                           |On 30 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                 H B T (Mrs)
                                                       First Named Appellant
                                     and

                                  H T (Mr)
                                                      Second Named Appellant
                                     and

                                 M T (miss)
                                                       Third Named Appellant
                                     and

                                 L T (miss)
                                                      Fourth Named Appellant
                         (anonymity direction Made)

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Afghanistan. The first Appellant is  the
    wife of Mr A S T and the other three Appellants are their children. All
    four Appellants entered the  United  Kingdom  on  18  August  2014  as,
    respectively, the spouse and children of Mr A S T with leave to  remain
    which was valid until 1 May 2017. On 13 March 2017 all four  Appellants
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of their
    family  life  together  and  upon  on  private  life   grounds.   Those
    applications were refused and  the  Appellants  appealed.  Following  a
    hearing at North Shields, and in a decision  promulgated  on  13  April
    2018, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Duff dismissed their appeals.

 2. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was initially refused.
    However, a renewed application was subsequently granted by Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chapman. Her reasons for so granting were: -

         "1. The Appellants seek permission to appeal, in  time,  against  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff who, in a  decision  and
         reasons promulgated on 13 April  2018,  dismissed  the  Appellants'
         appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  3  October  2017
         refusing their human rights claim

         2. The grounds of appeal assert that the Judge  erred  at  [12]  in
         stating that there would be treatment  for  the  first  Appellant's
         back pain and depression in Afghanistan, contrary to the  evidence;
         in finding at [14] that the second Appellant could return alone and
         be able to integrate; at [19] in failing to take proper account  of
         the youngest Appellants' best interests in finding that they should
         remain with their family as a unit and in failing to find that  the
         Appellants would face insurmountable obstacles and very significant
         difficulties reintegrating the family in Afghanistan.

         3. It is arguable that in  light  of  the  UNHCR  guidelines  dated
         30.8.18 and the background evidence which raises concerns as to the
         safety of Kabul, to which this family would return, that the  Judge
         erred at [12] in failing to provide adequate  reasons  for  finding
         that the hardship and difficulty that  the  first  Appellant  would
         experience would not  amount  to  "very  significant  difficulties"
         within the meaning of EX2 of Appendix FM;

         4. It is arguable the Judge erred at [14] in finding it  "virtually
         unarguable" that there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
         second Appellant's integration in Afghanistan for  the  reasons  he
         provided.

         5. It is further arguable that the Judge erred at [19]  in  failing
         to provide adequate reasons for finding that the best interests  of
         the  younger  two  Appellants  would  be  met   by   returning   to
         Afghanistan, bearing in mind the matters raised at [18] in  respect
         of difficulties for girls in respect of  education  and  employment
         and generally.

         6. In light of the fact that the Respondent previously saw  fit  to
         grant the Appellants entry clearance to join  the  Sponsor  in  the
         United Kingdom and the only reason for refusal of the  applications
         for further leave to remain was that the Sponsor's income as a taxi
         driver fell below the minimum financial requirement, it is arguable
         that the Judge's  findings  on  proportionality  at  [20]-[21]  are
         inadequately reasoned and fail  to  take  account  of  the  country
         situation in Afghanistan.

         7. Permission to appeal is granted."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Ms Cleghorn highlighted the issues raised in the Upper Tribunal's grant
    of permission to appeal. In short that the Judge  had  failed  to  find
    that the Appellants would face insurmountable obstacles and significant
    difficulties reintegrating the family into Afghanistan, that the  Judge
    erred in failing to find adequate reasons for finding that the hardship
    and difficulties that the first Appellant would  experience  would  not
    amount to "very significant difficulties" within the meaning of EX2  of
    Appendix FM, erred in finding  it  "virtually  unarguable"  that  there
    would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the   second   Appellant's
    integration into Afghanistan, failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the best interests of the younger two Appellants would  be
    met  by  returning  to  Afghanistan  and,  given  that  the  Respondent
    previously granted the Appellants Entry Clearance to join  the  Sponsor
    in the United Kingdom and that the  only  reason  for  refusal  of  the
    applications for further leave was that the Sponsor's income as a  taxi
    driver fell below the minimum financial requirement, the Judge arguably
    erred in considering proportionality.

 5. Mr Diwnycz accepted that prior to hearing the issues raised within  the
    grant had evaded him. Having considered the submissions of Ms  Cleghorn
    he conceded that within the decision there are material errors  of  law
    as highlighted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman in her  grant  of
    permission to appeal as recorded above.

 6. I share the analysis of both representatives. They  each  asked  me  to
    remit this matter for a de novo hearing  as  further  evidence  is  now
    required. That is a course I intend in adopting.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh
pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
Act 2007 and Practice Direction 7(b)  before  any  Judge  aside  from  Judge
Duff.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard                     15 January 2019







