
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12226/2015
                                                               HU/12227/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 11th of January 2018                |On 26th of January 2018       |
|Prepared on 23rd of January 2018             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                     MR MANI PRAKASH RAI - 1st Appellant
                   MR DEO KRISHNA RAI RAI - 2nd Appellant
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms E. Lagunju of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of Nepal and  are  brothers.  The  1st
    Appellant was born on 1st of of February 1974 and the 2nd Appellant  on
    28th of March 1980. They appealed against decisions of  the  Respondent
    dated 4th of November 2015 to refuse them entry clearance to settle  in
    the United Kingdom as adult dependent  relatives  of  their  father  Mr
    Agamlai Rai ("the Sponsor"). He is a former Gurkha who served the Crown
    with exemplary service with the Gurkha rifles for 11 years from 19th of
    December 1960 until 10th of May 1971. Their  appeals  were  allowed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robinson sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on
    7th of April 2017.


 2. The Respondent appealed with leave against that decision and the matter
    therefore came before me in  the  first  place  as  an  appeal  by  the
    Respondent. For the reasons which I set out in some detail below I have
    found a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  and
    have set it aside. I shall therefore continue to refer to  the  parties
    as they were known at first instance.

The Appellants' Case

 3. The Sponsor was born on 1st of January 1943. He was granted  indefinite
    leave to enter the United Kingdom on 27th of July 2009 as he had served
    in the British Army for over 11 years. He and  his  first  wife  had  6
    children. He married his 2nd wife following  the  death  of  his  first
    wife. His 2nd wife was granted indefinite leave to remain  on  22nd  of
    February 2011. His two elder sons and two  daughters  are  married  and
    lead independent lives. The two Appellants in this case  are  unmarried
    and live with their married brothers. The Appellants stated  that  they
    were still emotionally and financially dependent on  their  father.  He
    had made visits to see them in 2014 and 2017. The three communicate  by
    mobile phone. The Sponsor suffers  from  heart  disease  and  has  poor
    hearing.  His  heart  condition  requires   regular   monitoring.   The
    Appellants lived in the  same  house  sometimes  working  as  labourers
    either on farms or in wood workshops for which they were paid  a  small
    amount of money. The  Sponsor's  daughter-in-law  sometimes  cooks  for
    them. Both Appellants are in good health.


 4. The Sponsor owns the property where all four of his  sons  are  living.
    The Sponsor was denied any opportunity to settle in the United  Kingdom
    after his discharge from the British  Army.  That  injustice  was  only
    corrected in 2009 by which time the two Appellants were over the age of
    18. Had the injustice not happened the  Appellants  would  either  have
    been born British or have accompanied the Sponsor as minors  to  settle
    in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Appellants  claim  they  had  no   fair
    opportunity to apply until 2009 and then only under a policy  requiring
    exceptional circumstances. Once a new policy  was  introduced  in  2015
    they applied to join the Sponsor. The Appellants argued that there  was
    family life between them and their father.  They  were  unemployed  and
    dependent on the Sponsor for their living expenses  and  for  the  roof
    over their heads. There were  no  countervailing  considerations  which
    could  assist  the  Respondent  and  depriving  the  Sponsor   of   the
    Appellant's company would be unduly harsh.



The Decision at First Instance

 5. It  was  not  argued  that  the  Appellants  could  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The Judge assessed the  appeals  outside  the  Rules
    under the jurisprudence relating to Article 8  (right  to  respect  for
    private and family life) of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    The Judge found a causal nexus between the historic injustice  and  the
    actions of the Sponsor. But for the Gurkhas' inability to settle in the
    United Kingdom at the date of discharge when their children were  young
    they would have come to the United Kingdom a long time ago.  The  Judge
    found that family life  existed  in  this  case  based  on  the  strong
    evidence that the Appellants were financially dependent on their father
    and there was clear evidence showing  emotional  ties  which  had  been
    maintained through occasional visits and daily telephone contact.


 6. The issue was what weight should be given to the fact of  the  historic
    injustice when assessing the proportionality of the  interference  with
    the Appellant's right to family life.  The  Judge  found  the  historic
    wrong argument a strong one weighing in the Appellant's  favour.  There
    were additional factors, the poor health of the Sponsor which  made  it
    more difficult for him to travel to see the Appellants in Nepal and the
    circumstances of the Appellants themselves.


 7. Section 117B (2) of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides that it is in the public interest that  persons  who  seek  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to  speak  English.  But
    for the injustice, the Judge found, the Appellants would have been born
    in the United Kingdom and would have been fluent in English.  This  was
    not a factor to weigh  in  the  balance  against  the  Appellants.  The
    applicable  policy  relevant  to   Gurkha   dependents   contained   no
    accommodation and maintenance requirements and therefore subsection (3)
    (that it was in the public interest that persons seeking to  enter  the
    United Kingdom should be financially independent) did not apply.  There
    were no negative issues such as a poor immigration history or  criminal
    convictions and the Respondent's policy allowed for special factors  to
    be taken in to account in cases of this type. The  Appellants  had  not
    misled the Respondent. The Judge allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

 8.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  this  decision  arguing  that  the
    Appellant's family ties did not demonstrate emotional dependency to the
    Kugathas  standard,  that  is  to  say  they  did  not  demonstrate   a
    relationship over and above normal emotional ties. The evidence had not
    substantiated  that  finding.  The  Appellants  could  not   meet   the
    Immigration Rules or the Respondent's own policy. The Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant had not lived  together  continuously  since  2010  when  the
    Sponsor and his wife migrated to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  voluntary
    separation of the family demonstrated that the Appellants  were  deemed
    to be adults able to take care of themselves in Nepal. There  had  been
    no severance of normal family ties because there had  been  visits  and
    telephone contact. There was another married  sibling  in  Nepal  whose
    wife cooked for  the  Appellant's  suggesting  there  were  strong  and
    adequate family ties already in  Nepal.  The  Sponsor  was  content  to
    migrate voluntarily to the  United  Kingdom  leaving  his  children  in
    Nepal.


 9. There was no reason why the current parental support arrangements could
    not continue nor why the Appellant could not remain in Nepal  as  adult
    siblings being able to support each other  and  find  work  to  support
    themselves. Even if family  life  was  shown  to  exist  there  was  no
    evidence  to  show  emotional  dependency  beyond  the  norm  and   the
    disproportionality argument was not made out. The Judge had  found  the
    Appellants  to  be  financially  dependent  on   their   Sponsor.   The
    determination provided limited reasoning as to why this was  considered
    to be beyond the norm particularly given that the Appellants were adult
    men who had found some, albeit low paid, work. The financial dependency
    seemed to have been a matter of choice. They had not  demonstrated  why
    they could not work or why they had shown no intention of finding work.
    There was no evidence of poor health precluding them from working.


10. Even if there was financial dependency, pursuant to the case of  AAO  v
    entry clearance officer [2011]  EWCA  Civ  840  reliance  on  financial
    dependency did not mean there was  a  breach  of  Article  8  if  entry
    clearance was refused. The Judge also failed  to  consider  the  public
    interest in the proportionality tests under the 2002 Act as to  whether
    the Appellants would be a financial burden or able  to  integrate.  The
    Sponsor was not well and was in receipt of an attendance allowance.  He
    was receiving pension credits, carers allowance  and  housing  benefit.
    The onus was on the Appellants to  prove  that  Sponsor  could  provide
    adequate support.  The  Judge's  statement  that  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements did not  apply  was  unreasoned.  Given  the
    Sponsor's poor health maintaining two adult men would be a  significant
    challenge for him in terms of  the  increased  living  and  maintenance
    costs which would be greater than the current arrangements  to  support
    the Appellants. There was no guarantee that the  Appellants  would  not
    become a burden on the state in the future. Nor was  any  reason  given
    why the Sponsor could not continue to provide financial support  whilst
    the Appellants remained in Nepal.


11. Finally, the Respondent argued, there was no historic injustice in this
    case. The Appellants did not meet the  conditions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, Appendices AF and FM or the Respondent's own policy  (issued  in
    2015). The Judge had afforded significant weight  to  the  argument  of
    historic injustice. This was just one  aspect  of  the  proportionality
    assessment but was insufficient to swing the balance in the Appellant's
    favour.


12. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page on  13th  of  November  2017.  In
    granting permission to appeal he wrote that the Respondent's grounds of
    appeal were clearly arguable. The overarching complaint  was  that  the
    Judge had erred in law by finding that the two Appellants who were aged
    41 and 35 at the  time  of  their  applications  were  emotionally  and
    financially dependent upon their father  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    central argument of the Respondent was that the voluntary separation of
    the family by the Sponsor when he came to reside in the United  Kingdom
    demonstrated that the Appellants were deemed to be adults able to  take
    care of themselves in Nepal. Permission was granted on all grounds.

The Hearing Before Me

13. At the hearing before me to determine  whether  there  was  a  material
    error of law, the Respondent relied on the detailed grounds  of  onward
    appeal. There were three main grounds: (i) the Judge's treatment of the
    issue of emotional dependency; (ii)  his  treatment  of  the  financial
    aspects of the case and (iii) the issue of historic injustice.


14. The Appellants were able to take care of themselves and there had  been
    no severance of normal family ties. There was no obvious reason why the
    Appellants could not find work. They had  been  employed  in  low  paid
    work. The Sponsor was in poor health receiving attendance allowance and
    could not continue to provide financial  support  for  the  Appellants.
    They could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  evidence
    provided meant they could not meet the conditions imposed in case  law.
    The Judge was seeking to change the wording of the 2002 Act. The  Judge
    was wrong in law  at  [35]  of  the  determination  (dealing  with  the
    relevance of proficiency in English and accommodation  and  maintenance
    requirements).


15. In reply counsel argued that the determination was sound. The Judge had
    considered all the relevant  case  law.  There  was  a  two-part  test:
    whether Article 8 was engaged and if  so  the  proportionality  of  the
    interference. The Judge had concluded  there  was  strong  evidence  to
    support dependency. The Respondent's grounds of appeal were  merely  an
    attempt to reargue the case.  There  had  to  be  further  elements  of
    dependency which the Judge found. There  was  evidence  such  as  money
    transfers. There were regular visits and regular telephone  calls.  The
    Judge had applied the Kugathas test correctly. It was conceded  by  the
    Respondent that family life had not been severed. The Appellants relied
    on the recent Court of Appeal decision of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320. Just
    because the Sponsor had left his children in Nepal that should  not  be
    held against them. The Sponsor had left  them  with  the  understanding
    that he would continue to support the Appellants. The  Appellants  were
    entitled to choose to be dependent upon  the  Sponsor.  The  Judge  had
    regard to the provisions of section 117B.


16. I raised the point with counsel as to what weight in the balancing  act
    the provisions of the 2002 Act had against  the  argument  of  historic
    injustice referred to by the Upper Tribunal in Ghising [2013] UKUT 567,
    a case decided before section 117B came into force.  That  section  was
    inserted into the 2002 Act by the provisions  of  the  Immigration  Act
    2014. Counsel conceded that it was not open to the Judge to find in the
    Appellant's favour on the historic injustice argument  alone  (see  the
    Court of Appeal decision in Gurung) but there  were  no  other  factors
    which tipped the balance in the  Respondent's  favour.  The  Judge  was
    correct to find that the Respondent's decision was  a  disproportionate
    interference.

The Decision in Rai

17. Shortly after the Judge heard this case in the First-tier, the Court of
    Appeal handed down their Judgement in the case of  Rai.  The  facts  of
    that case (which were not in dispute) were very similar to the facts of
    the instant case before me. Mr Rai was born in Nepal on 1st of  January
    1986. He was the youngest of his parents'  six  children.  His  father,
    Birkha Bahadur Rai, was born in  Nepal  on  1st  of  of  January  1941,
    enlisted in 7 Gurkha Rifles as a boy in 1956, fought in  the  conflicts
    in Borneo and Malaya, and was honourably discharged in August 1971. The
    Appellant could not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  case  was
    considered by the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge outside the  rules  under
    Article 8.


18. The Appellant's argument, relying on the Upper  Tribunal  authority  of
    Ghising, was that where family life was engaged, the historic injustice
    argument would tip the balance in  favour  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    appeal should be allowed. The Upper Tribunal set aside the decision  at
    first instance and proceeded to re-determine the matter. The  Court  of
    Appeal did not criticise that aspect because the facts in the case were
    not in dispute, it was a question of the  assessment  of  those  facts.
    What the Court of Appeal did criticise  was  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge had not expressed a  distinct  and  definite  conclusion  on  the
    question of whether or not the Appellant  in  Rai  did  in  fact  enjoy
    family life with his parents, within the meaning of Article 8(1).


19.  Further as was submitted to me, the Court of Appeal  had  stated  that
    even though the Appellant's parents in that case had  chosen  to  leave
    Nepal to settle in the United Kingdom when they  did,  the  Appellant's
    family life with his parents subsisted then, and was  still  subsisting
    at the time of the Upper  Tribunal's  decision.  In  other  words,  the
    Tribunal could not find that Article 8 was not engaged by virtue of the
    separation. The appeal was allowed  and  remitted  back  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the issue of whether Article  8  was  engaged  to  be  re-
    determined. Since there had been no  proper  consideration  of  whether
    Article 8 was engaged, there could have been no proper  proportionality
    exercise carried out.


20. Counsel had raised in the Court of Appeal the argument that in view  of
    the historic injustice underlying the Appellant's case, the  provisions
    contained in section 117B would have made no difference to the outcome,
    and certainly no  difference  adverse  to  him.  As  I  understand  the
    decision in Rai, the Court of Appeal did not  make  a  ruling  on  that
    point because the decision of the Upper Tribunal under appeal  did  not
    reach that far as the Judge had not considered  the  2002  Act  in  any
    detail.

Findings

21. It is accepted in this appeal that the Appellants cannot succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules and that their claim  is  therefore  outside  the
    rules under Article 8. The Judge at first instance found Article 8  was
    engaged because of their financial  and  emotional  dependence  on  the
    Sponsor. Having found that Article 8 was engaged, he decided  that  the
    decision under appeal was  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    rights protected by Article 8. The Respondent disputes both aspects  of
    the case, whether Article 8 is engaged at all but if it  is  he  argues
    that the decision is a proportionate one.


22. The grounds of onward appeal and the grant of permission to appeal laid
    great emphasis on the voluntary separation of the family by the Sponsor
    travelling to the United Kingdom in 2009. As the Court of  Appeal  made
    clear in Rai, this is not of itself a decisive point since one  has  to
    consider whether there was family life at the time  of  the  separation
    and whether that family life continues. The  Respondent's  argument  is
    that at the time of separation and indeed now there was  no  more  than
    normal emotional ties and the Judge was wrong to find on the facts that
    the relationship amounted to more than that.


23. Undoubtedly there is family life between a parent and his children  and
    the threshold to cross to show this is not a particularly high one. The
    issue is whether that family life extends beyond normal emotional  ties
    to become something which incurs the protection of  Article  8  against
    disproportionate decisions. As patterns of family life change, a degree
    of flexibility has to be shown in interpreting what constitutes  family
    life beyond normal emotional ties but the position remains when dealing
    with adult dependents that they must be able to establish the existence
    of that dependency to acquire protection.


24. In Rai the Court of Appeal considered the  issue  of  what  constituted
    dependency. Was there real or committed or effective support  shown  by
    the Sponsor to the Appellant? The Appellant in that case,  as  the  two
    Appellants in the instant case before me, had  never  left  the  family
    home or founded a family of his own. In applying for leave to enter the
    United Kingdom, the Appellant's parents had taken up what had long been
    owed to them, but that, in the face of the financial difficulties, they
    had had to make an unenviable choice between  applying  for  leave  and
    continuing their family life with their  son  in  the  family  home  in
    Nepal.


25. The problem in this case is that the evidence of  financial  dependency
    upon the Sponsor was not so clear cut. The  Appellants  had  a  working
    history in Nepal albeit the Judge did not deal with that in  any  great
    detail. They were aged 41 and 35 at the date of application and were in
    good health. The Appellant in the case of Rai was  unemployed,  as  the
    Appellants are said to be in this case. That there was no  good  reason
    why the Appellants were unemployed would not be necessarily a  decisive
    factor although relied upon by the Respondent in  the  initial  refusal
    decision. One could have a dependency of choice. My concern is  whether
    there was indeed a  financial  dependency  by  the  Appellants  on  the
    Sponsor at the date of application.


26. The Appellant's argument was that they were  living  in  the  Sponsor's
    house in Nepal with their 2 brothers and their brothers'  families  and
    that some cooking was done for them by their sister-in-law.  They  were
    receiving remittances from the Sponsor which  was  evidenced  by  money
    transfers. Even assuming that those money transfers were solely for the
    benefit of the Appellants the issue would still have to  be  determined
    whether the Appellants were mainly or wholly dependent upon those money
    transfers (and the provision of accommodation) or whether they  had  an
    economic capacity which was supplying them with financial  wherewithal.
    I do not consider that the evidence which  was  before  the  Judge  was
    clear enough for him to be able to come to the decision that there  was
    a financial dependency.  The  difference  in  the  standard  of  living
    between Nepal and the United Kingdom could  well  mean  that  a  modest
    income would be sufficient to live on for an applicant in Nepal.


27. That does not deal with the matter because there was still the issue of
    an emotional dependency both at the date of  separation  and  now.  The
    Judge relied on evidence of continuing  contact  in  the  form  of  two
    visits by the Sponsor in nine years and daily telephone  calls.  It  is
    difficult to see how a level of contact such as this  could  amount  to
    more than normal emotional ties. The position might have been different
    if there had been evidence of ill-health on the part of the  Appellants
    whether psychological or otherwise for which the Sponsor was  providing
    assistance to them but that  does  not  appear  to  be  the  case.  The
    Appellants' mother had died in 2002 a substantial period of  time  ago.
    There was nothing in the relationship and the facts  as  found  by  the
    Judge to indicate that the Appellants were emotionally  dependent  upon
    the Sponsor. They were living in a  communal  setting  with  their  two
    brothers and their brothers' families. There may have been a degree  of
    emotional dependency on their siblings but that is not relevant for the
    purposes of this appeal.


28.  What is relevant is whether there was an emotional dependency  on  the
    Sponsor when he was living in the family home in Nepal  and  since  his
    relocation to the United Kingdom. Given the Appellants' ages and  their
    state of health, their ability to work and  the  domestic  arrangements
    which they have made with their siblings, I do not find that the  Judge
    was right to conclude that there  was  emotional  dependency  over  and
    above normal emotional ties. The separation of itself is not conclusive
    against establishing whether family life existed.  Nevertheless,  there
    is some force in the Respondent's argument (as can  be  seen  from  the
    grant of permission  by  Judge  Page)  that  the  voluntary  separation
    demonstrated that the Appellants were deemed to be adults able to  take
    care of themselves in Nepal.  In  other  words  that  at  the  date  of
    separation it was not the perception of the Appellant and Sponsor  that
    the Appellants were in need of emotional support from the Sponsor  over
    and above normal emotional ties.


29. I remind myself that the authorities emphasise  that  these  cases  are
    fact sensitive. That the Appellant in Rai could potentially show  there
    was financial or emotional dependency does not of itself mean that  the
    Appellants in the instant case before me can do the same. On the  basis
    therefore of the analysis required by the decision in Rai, I find  that
    the Judge materially erred in law in finding that Article 8 was engaged
    in this case and the Appellants cannot succeed on that basis.


30. I would reiterate  at  this  point  that  the  appeal  came  before  me
    initially to decide error of law. I set the decision of the  First-tier
    aside and re-make the decision in this determination. I must set out my
    conclusions in some form of order however and therefore have considered
    both the issue of whether Article 8 was engaged at all and  if  it  was
    whether the Appellants could succeed thereunder.


31. There were detailed arguments made to the  Judge  (which  he  accepted)
    that the appeal should succeed under Article 8 because of the  historic
    injustice perpetrated on the Gurkhas. I proceed to consider this appeal
    in the alternative on an "even if" basis as the Judge found that  there
    is family life in this case because there was an element of  dependency
    which attracted protection. The question is whether the decision of the
    Respondent interferes disproportionately with the enjoyment  of  family
    life and the duty to promote family life because of the  weight  to  be
    given  to  the  historic  injustice  argument  in  the  proportionality
    exercise.


32. The  Judge  found  at  [34]  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the legitimate aim of immigration control. The question
    was whether it was proportionate to that legitimate aim. In Ghising the
    Upper Tribunal made clear that a substantial weight should be  attached
    to the historic injustice such that an Appellant  would  succeed  under
    Article 8 outside the rules (in the absence of criminality or deception
    neither of which are relevant in this case) if the  only  argument  for
    the Respondent was  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control. The historic injustice was the delay in allowing  Gurkhas  and
    their dependents to enter  the  United  Kingdom.  But  for  that  delay
    Gurkhas and their dependents would have entered the United Kingdom some
    time ago.


33. This, the Judge pointed out  would  potentially  have  had  a  knock-on
    effect. Coming into the United Kingdom at an early age would mean  that
    persons who are now adults would  have  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the
    English language which the  Appellants  have  been  unable  to  acquire
    living in Nepal. They might have been born here and settled. The  Judge
    dismissed the argument that the Appellants  were  unable  to  meet  the
    financial conditions stating that "the applicable policy in  this  case
    contains no accommodation and maintenance requirements".  That  is  not
    accepted by the Respondent.


34. The Respondent's policy was formulated in 2015  to  take  into  account
    changes  in  the  law.  It  was  reissued  in  2017  with  some   minor
    alterations. It applies to adult dependents who were aged 30  or  under
    at the time of application. It thus excludes these Appellants. It  also
    requires that applicants should not be living  in  a  different  family
    unit with relatives who are caring for them,  which  on  the  facts  as
    found by the Judge would also tend to exclude the Appellants. The Judge
    was wrong to say that the policy made no mention of financial  support.
    The  requirement  is   that   there   be   adequate   maintenance   and
    accommodation. If the policy does not apply, as it  does  not  in  this
    case, one falls back on the financial requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.


35. This is an application by adult dependent relatives. They must  provide
    evidence that they can be adequately maintained, accommodated and cared
    for in the United Kingdom by the Sponsor  without  recourse  to  public
    funds. No particular financial limit  is  specified  in  that  part  of
    Appendix FM and one therefore falls back on the pre-2012 case law  that
    adequate financial provision was satisfied at the income support level.
    There was no financial calculation by the Judge in this case because he
    did not  consider  that  the  financial  requirements  would  apply.  I
    disagree with that but of more difficulty is  whether  the  Sponsor  in
    this case who is in poor health can meet  the  financial  requirements.
    The Judge had no evidence that he would be able to support  two  mature
    adults at or above the income support level. The Judge was aware of the
    Sponsor's failing health. It is as the Respondent submits very unlikely
    that the Sponsor would be able to continue to  support  the  Appellants
    sustainably for a considerable period of time. The likelihood  must  be
    that the Appellants would become a burden on the state.


36. The Appellants do not speak English and their  argument  is  that  they
    have had no opportunity to learn. In the proportionality  exercise,  on
    their side of the scales, they  have:  (i)  their  claimed  dependency,
    which I rejected for the reasons given but which I am  now  considering
    in the alternative; (ii) the historic injustice argument which they say
    extends to matters such as their English language ability;  (iii)  that
    there is no criminality or deception involved in  this  case  and  (iv)
    there is nothing beyond the public interest in immigration control.


37. On the Respondent's side of the scales is: (i)  the  need  to  maintain
    immigration control; (ii) the concern that the Appellants would not  be
    financially independent upon arrival  in  this  country  but  would  be
    dependent on someone in poor health; (iii) they would become  a  burden
    on the state and (iv) they cannot speak English.


38. I remind myself that  the  case  of  Ghising  was  decided  before  the
    statutory provisions in section 117B came into force. I  cannot  ignore
    the section which is mandatory and applies  to  all  applications.  The
    section makes it clear that there is  a  public  interest  against  the
    admission  of  persons  who  cannot  speak  English  and  who  are  not
    financially independent. The issue  of  the  historic  injustice  is  a
    factor to be weighed but its status as something of a  trump  card  has
    been reduced since Parliament enacted the amendments to the  2002  Act.
    Ghising is case law of the Upper Tribunal which I must  pay  particular
    attention to but I am bound by statute and I must therefore  take  into
    account the obvious difficulties in this case faced by  the  Appellants
    in that they  do  not  speak  English  and  they  are  unlikely  to  be
    financially independent for the reasons which I have given.


39. The Appellants argue that they have not had the  opportunity  to  learn
    English because they were not admitted earlier. The  statute  makes  no
    such exceptions. There is a remedy for the Appellants  who  could  take
    lessons and pass the appropriate  test.  That  requirement  is  not  in
    itself  a  breach  of  Article  8  and  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    inconvenience to the Appellants, if any, of having to  do  this  is  of
    such severity that  it  both  forms  part  of  the  historic  injustice
    argument and tips the scales in their favour.


40. The Court of Appeal in Rai  did  not  consider  whether  the  2002  Act
    outweighed the weight to be given to the historic injustice argument. I
    find that even if  the  Appellants  were  dependent  on  their  Sponsor
    (whether financially or  emotionally)  and  had  suffered  an  historic
    injustice, the wording of the statute would still mean that substantial
    weight needed to be attached to the Respondent's side of the scales.


41. These are two mature men with a working history in Nepal  who  have  in
    the past not been financially dependent upon the Sponsor. Even if  they
    could demonstrate emotional  dependency  on  their  Sponsor,  they  are
    enjoying family life with their siblings at present which will  not  be
    interfered with and is on the basis of the evidence  before  the  Judge
    involving some element of care, such as the preparation of meals. I  do
    not consider great weight should be placed on the  dependency  argument
    even if (which I reject) it can be maintained. Nor do I find  that  the
    historic  injustice  argument  outweighs  the  clear  provisions  of  a
    statute.


42. On the facts of this case I do not find that the Respondent's  decision
    to refuse entry clearance  to  the  Appellants  is  a  disproportionate
    interference with  protected  rights.  The  Appellants  cannot  succeed
    outside the Rules and the Judge was wrong in  law  to  find  that  they
    could. There  are  no  exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case.  The
    historic injustice argument has some weight but the provisions  of  the
    statute have substantial weight if the case reaches the proportionality
    stage. As the essential facts of  the  case,  although  not  the  legal
    interpretation of them is not in dispute I am  able  to  re-decide  the
    appeal without a further hearing. I therefore set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal and  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
    Appellants' appeals against the decision of the  Respondent  to  refuse
    them entry clearance. I make no anonymity orders as there is no  public
    policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have  set  it  aside.  I  remake  the  decision  and  dismiss  the
Appellants' appeals  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  entry
clearance.

Appellants' appeals dismissed


Signed this 23rd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have set aside the decision in this case, I set aside the fee award.  I
have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 23rd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

