
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12288/2019
                                                               HU/12289/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2020                |On 18th February 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                biss maya pun
                               hom bahadur pun
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M West, instructed by Bhattarai & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Nepal born  on  1  January  1972  and  1
    January 1977 respectively. They appeal against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff promulgated on 20  March  2020  dismissing
    their appeal against the refusal of entry clearance under  the  Ghurkha
    policy. The Appellants are a daughter and son of the widow of a late ex-
    Ghurkha soldier who served in the British Army for fifteen  years  with
    exemplary service.  He died on 13 May 2005.

2.   The Appellants appealed on four grounds:

    (i)  The judge failed to  give  an  opportunity  to  the  Sponsor,  the
         Appellants' mother and witness in the appeal, to respond to  issues
         ultimately held against the Appellants in the decision;

    (ii) The judge misdirected himself as to the documentary evidence;

    (iii)     The  judge  misdirected  himself  as   to   the   Appellants'
         employment;

    (iv) The judge wrongly concluded that the historic  injustice  was  not
         relevant to the assessment of proportionality because  it  did  not
         apply to the widow of an ex-Ghurkha and her children.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gumsley
    on 15 June 2020 for the following reasons:

         "Although the judge understandably comments on the lack of evidence
         provided on a number of matters, rightly observing that it  is  for
         the Appellants to prove their case,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge formed a  view  adverse
         to the Appellants' case without affording them or their Sponsor the
         opportunity to address his concerns. I am also satisfied that it is
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself  in
         law, in his assessment of whether family life existed  and  in  the
         approach to be taken to Ghurkha cases".



The judge's findings

4.   The judge made the following relevant findings:

         "20. It is difficult to make factual findings in a case  like  this
             when the only witness is  a  very  elderly  lady  with  little
             education who is now nearly 80 years old.  The  answers  given
             were in general terms and the witness did  not  really  engage
             with the question of why her children  had  never  found  work
             simply asserting that they had been unlucky and repeating that
             they were dependent on her.

         21.  She did not seem able to give insight into  why  her  children
             had not found work  before  she  left  the  country  which  is
             notable given that both of them were in  their  30's  at  that
             stage and of an age where one would have expected them  to  be
             well established in work."

         ...

         "23. I have limited information about what the family circumstances
             were prior to the Sponsor moving to the UK. The  Sponsor  left
             Nepal in 2010 and there was no documentary evidence to confirm
             that the Appellants were living at  home  at  that  time.  The
             Sponsor chose to move to the UK leaving  her  children  behind
             and there was no explanation why her daughter did not apply to
             accompany her and why her son did not appeal  the  refusal  of
             his visa.

         24.   It  is  inevitable  that  in  assessing  the  nature  of  the
             relationship said to exist between  the  Appellant  (sic)  and
             their Sponsor that I would need to have significant  knowledge
             of what the circumstances were when the Sponsor chose to leave
             Nepal. The Sponsor's witness statement does  not  address  why
             she chose to leave the children behind or why she insisted  on
             moving to the UK when they could not come with her.

         25.  Looking at the evidence of how family life has been maintained
             since, I do have copies of the  Sponsor's  passport  which  do
             show visits to Nepal in 2011, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2017, 2018 and
             2019 with her returning to the UK in 2020, and these show  the
             Sponsor tending to visit up to six weeks at a  time.  This  is
             not a degree of contact which  would  necessarily  maintain  a
             relationship as closely as it was at the time the whole family
             were living together."

         ...

         "27. I have bank statements covering January 2018 to February 2020.
             These bank statements do show the pension being paid into  the
             Sponsor's bank account and payments being taken out by  cheque
             primarily by the second Appellant although I note  that  money
             was  also  taken  out  by  what  appears  to  be  one  of  the
             Appellants' siblings in July 2018, October 2018, November 2018
             and May 2019. Again this means I have no evidence of what  the
             financial situation and financial support was between 2010 and
             2018  and  no  evidence  about  how  much  of  the  money  the
             Appellants actually need to spend for their living expenses. I
             have no information about whether they are living in an  owned
             property or a rented property and no clear  information  about
             the area in which they are living.

         28.  I do have call records from Viber said to show  calls  by  the
             Sponsor to her children which cover September 2019 to February
             2020. This is a relatively short period of time. I  also  have
             all (sic) records covering 28 August 2018 to 23 February  2019
             apparently for the Appellants calling  their  Sponsor.   These
             were regular lengthy calls which is indicative of closeness.

         29.  There are however significant gaps in the evidence.  I have no
             information about the Sponsor's financial position in  the  UK
             or about how much disposable income she has and  how  much  of
             this  is  being  diverted  to  the  Appellants.   I  have   no
             information about how much money the Appellants need  to  live
             on and how much of the money that goes back is going to  daily
             living expenses. It is also clear that much  of  the  evidence
             that is now available  was  not  provided  with  the  original
             application.

         30.  I am not satisfied having reviewed all of  the  evidence  that
             the Appellants have discharged the evidential burden to  prove
             that there is the degree of support necessary to elevate  this
             to a case in which there can be said to be family life between
             the Appellants and their mother in the Kugathas sense.  I have
             reminded myself of the test and that all  that  is  needed  is
             evidence of real,  committed  or  effective  support  be  that
             financial, emotional or otherwise. I am not satisfied that the
             evidence before me discharges  the  burden  of  proof  on  the
             balance of probabilities to show that such support is presence
             (sic) in this case.

         31.  There is no credible reason why the Sponsor would have  chosen
             to leave Nepal and come to the UK leaving her children  behind
             ten years ago if the family life was as it is now  claimed  to
             be.

         32.  Even if I had not made the  finding  above,  I  would  not  be
             satisfied that this case ought to be regarded as  being  on  a
             footing with all the other Ghurkha cases.  ...

         33.  ... Because the historic injustice is not relevant I  need  to
             take  into  account  all  the  public  interest  factors  when
             assessing Article 8 in this case.

         34.  Accordingly, were I to be satisfied that there was  Article  8
             family life engaged by this decision, which I am not  for  the
             reasons outlined above, the question would be whether  or  not
             the  interference  in  those  family  life  rights  would   be
             proportionate.  ...

         35.  ... There are  strong  public  interest  factors  which  weigh
             against bringing people in view of those circumstances.  There
             is also no reason why the  Sponsor  cannot  simply  return  to
             Nepal. There is no evidence that she has a  particularly  rich
             private life in the UK and her only stated desire to  be  with
             her  family.   The  decision  does  not  prevent  the  Sponsor
             spending time with her family."



Appellants' submissions

Ground 1

5.   Mr West relied on his skeleton argument  dated  7  October  2020  which
    stated the First-tier Tribunal Judge arrived at many  of  his  findings
    which he held against the Appellants without providing any  opportunity
    to the Sponsor, the only witness present, to respond to  those  issues.
    The Sponsor was not given an opportunity to comment on whether  another
    sibling was withdrawing money from the army pension  account.  Mr  West
    submitted there were seventeen pages of bank  statements  and  none  of
    those were referred to or challenged at the hearing. At  no  point  was
    the issue about withdrawals in the bank statements put to  the  Sponsor
    and  the  judge's  conclusion  that  it  appeared  to  be  one  of  the
    Appellants' siblings was wrong in fact.

6.   Mr West submitted the failure to  put  an  issue  to  a  party  in  the
    proceedings whilst nevertheless holding that  issue  adversely  against
    that party was an error of law. The same issue occurred  at  [29].  The
    judge found against the Appellants due to there  being  no  information
    about the Sponsor's financial position in the  UK  or  the  Appellants'
    expenses in Nepal. Neither the Home Office,  in  cross-examination,  or
    the judge asked the Sponsor about her financial position in the  UK  or
    how much the Appellants spent on daily expenses.

7.   The Sponsor was not asked why she had chosen to  come  to  the  UK  ten
    years ago leaving her adult children behind. There was nothing  in  the
    case law to demonstrate that the Appellants had to provide evidence  of
    support at a particular time. The judge only had  to  consider  whether
    the support was real, effective or committed. There was ample  evidence
    from the Sponsor and the Appellants that the  Appellants  were  drawing
    from the ex-Ghurkha's pension supported by the bank statements.   Since
    that account was not challenged, it was deemed to have  been  accepted.
    The  bank  statements  dated  back  to  2018  and  were  sufficient  to
    demonstrate committed support to the relevant standard, the balance  of
    probabilities. The judge's finding in this  respect  was  perverse  and
    compounded by the error of fact.



Ground 2

8.   In his skeleton argument,  Mr  West  submitted  the  judge  misdirected
    himself at [25] and  his  finding  was  perverse.  The  Appellants  had
    provided evidence of seven trips by  the  Sponsor  to  Nepal  over  the
    period of separation since 2010. On any rational view that evidence was
    significant and merited proper weight. That is especially so given that
    the Sponsor is a pensioner with limited means and she had to  travel  a
    long distance from the UK. The  judge's  conclusion  that  evidence  of
    frequent trips to Nepal would not necessarily maintain  a  relationship
    as closely as it was at the time the whole family was  living  together
    was irrational and the judge applied the wrong test. The judge only had
    to be satisfied following Kugathas v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.  The  issue  was  not  whether   the
    relationship was maintained to the same  degree  as  it  was  when  the
    family was living together but whether there  was  real,  committed  or
    effective support between the Appellants and the Sponsor.  Evidence  of
    frequent visits for six weeks at  a  time  was  manifestly  capable  of
    constituting, on the balance of probabilities, support in the  Kugathas
    sense contrary to  the  judge's  finding  at  [25].  The  threshold  of
    engagement for Article 8 was not an especially high one: AG (Eritrea) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 80 at  [28].
    The  judge  had  misdirected  himself  and/or  placed  too  elevated  a
    threshold upon the engagement of Article 8.

9.   In oral submissions, Mr West referred to [34]  of  Pathan  [2020]  UKSC
    41. He submitted it was clear the judge  was  impugning  the  documents
    and, on any fair reading, this was a finding  against  the  Appellants.
    The proportion of the Sponsor's income was not relevant.  The  relevant
    evidence was at [3] of the second Appellant's witness statements:

         "We speak to her regularly, primarily, over the telephone.  I,  Hom
         Bahadur  call  her  from  my  mobile.  She  also  calls  us   using
         international calling cards. I  have  enclosed  the  call  records.
         Although we have lived apart from her since 2010  our  family  unit
         has been maintained as both of us are dependent on her. We are  not
         married and don't own any property. We fully rely  financially  and
         otherwise with our mother. Apart from each other we are  completely
         alone in Nepal. Our other siblings live very  far  and  they  don't
         have means to support us. Our mother has  given  her  authority  to
         withdraw her widow pension to Hom Bahadur. I withdraw  the  pension
         and spend the  money  to  cover  my  own  and  sister  Bish  Maya's
         expenses.  In addition our mother also transfers money from the  UK
         from time to time".

10.  Mr West submitted the judge found that there was no information of  how
    much money the Appellants required to live on. This was not  raised  in
    the notice of refusal and it was clear from the witness statements that
    the money was spent on expenses. This lack of evidence was not relevant
    given the unchallenged evidence of financial support.   The  fact  that
    contact between the Sponsor and the Appellants was not the same as when
    they lived together was not relevant. There were an exceptional  number
    of visits for up to six weeks a  year.  Mr  West  submitted  there  was
    evidence before the judge to show real, committed or effective  support
    sufficient to satisfy the relevant test.



Ground 3

11.  It was submitted, in the skeleton argument, that the judge  misdirected
    himself on the issue of the  Appellants'  employment.  He  stated  that
    there was an expectation in any country and in any economy that healthy
    adults would be able to be economically productive on some  level.  The
    judge suggested the Appellants were dependent out of choice  which  was
    not relevant. There was no authority for the proposition  that  support
    must be out of need. Article  8(1)  protects  the  sphere  of  personal
    autonomy and individual choice. Dependency  is  simply  a  question  of
    fact: see Gurung & Ors, R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8 at [42] and Singh v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at  [24].   Either
    the adult child is or is not dependent. What the Appellants  choose  to
    do or what they might be expected  to  do  is  simply  immaterial.  The
    judge's approach to this  issue  was  misconceived.  It  was  simply  a
    question of fact and the judge therefore erred in law.

12.  Mr West referred to [58] of the grounds and  the  case  of  Countryside
    Alliance v Her Majesty's Attorney General [2007] UKHL 52 at [11]  which
    made it clear that Article 8 protects the sphere of  personal  autonomy
    and therefore the manner in which one chooses to live  their  life.  He
    submitted that it was irrelevant whether the Appellants had chosen  not
    to work. This was an issue of fact to  be  determined.  The  judge  had
    approached this issue in the wrong way and held this factor against the
    Appellants at [21] and [22] of the decision.



Ground 4

13.  In the skeleton argument, the Appellants submitted the judge's  finding
    that the historic injustice was not relevant to the  widow  of  an  ex-
    Ghurkha and her children was plainly wrong in law and in  any  event  a
    finding which was unsustainable. In Padam Bahadur Ale  v  Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department  HU/02021/2016  at  [11]  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Eshun found:

         "I find that the judge erred in law in finding that family life  in
         this case  was  not  engaged  because  the  Appellant  himself  was
         dependent on the dependant. The question of historic injustice  was
         not just limited to the ex-Ghurkha and his dependants.  It  applied
         to all members of the family, including the widow of  the  Ghurkha.
         To that extent I find that the judge's  decision  at  paragraph  31
         disclosed an error of law".

14.  The historic injustice applied to an ex-Ghurkha and his  widow.  R  (on
    the application of Limbu) & Ors v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] EWHC 2261  dealt  with  the  family  as  a  whole  in
    historic justice cases. The Sponsor was granted settlement on the basis
    of her marriage to a former Ghurkha. The  ex-Ghurkha  died  before  the
    Sponsor  obtained  her  settlement  visa  in  August  2009  under   the
    discretionary arrangement for widows of an ex-Ghurkha discharged  prior
    to 1 July 1997. The Respondent at that  point  had  clearly  recognised
    that the historic injustice applied in the Sponsor's case  as  she  was
    granted indefinite leave to  remain  some  four  years  after  the  ex-
    Ghurkha's death. The judge's finding that the  historic  injustice  was
    not relevant in the Appellants' appeal was plainly wrong in law.

15.  Mr West submitted that the historic  injustice  applied  to  the  whole
    family because the Sponsor had obtained her indefinite leave to  remain
    after the death of her Ghurkha husband. The judge had in  the  back  of
    his mind that the Appellants  could  not  succeed  under  Article  8(2)
    because the historic injustice did not apply. The Gurkha policy applied
    and the judge's error vitiated the whole assessment of Article  8.  The
    Appellants'  father  had  an  exemplary  military  record  and  it  was
    important to grasp  the  importance  of  the  historic  injustice.  The
    Appellants would have been British if their father had been allowed  to
    settle in the UK on discharge from the  army.  Mr  West  submitted  the
    judge's finding and reasons were perverse.



Respondent's submissions

16.  In her Rule 24 response,  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  the  judge
    formed a view adverse to the Appellants. The judge had  been  asked  to
    accept the Appellants had never worked their  entire  adult  lives  and
    they were reliant on the Sponsor with little or no evidence to  support
    this assertion. The Sponsor was cross-examined by  the  Respondent  and
    the  judge  also  asked  a  number  of  questions  to  obtain   further
    information of the situation in Nepal but further information  was  not
    forthcoming.  The judge only had evidence of money transfers  from  the
    time of the application to date and nothing from  the  period  2010  to
    2018. There was no evidence to show how the Appellants  were  supported
    in those years. In the circumstances, the judge was entitled  to  reach
    the conclusion that there was no family life between  the  Sponsor  and
    the Appellants having first directed himself following Kugathas and Rai
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320. In the  alternative,  given  the  length  of  time
    between  the  Sponsor  leaving  Nepal  to  come  to  the  UK  and   the
    applications  for  entry  clearance,  the  Respondent's  decision   was
    proportionate.

17.  In oral submissions, Mr Jarvis accepted the Gurkha  policy  applied  to
    the  Appellants  if  they  established  that,  but  for  the   historic
    injustice, they would have settled in the UK. There was nothing in  the
    judge's reasoning to suggest that, because the historic  injustice  did
    not apply, this was relevant to his assessment of Article 8(1).

18.  Mr Jarvis submitted the Appellants were 48 and  43  years  old  at  the
    date of hearing.  Their mother came to  the  UK  in  2010  after  being
    granted indefinite leave to remain in 2009. At  that  time  the  second
    Appellant applied to accompany her but his application was refused  and
    there was  no  appeal.  It  was  not  until  2019  that  there  was  an
    application to enter the UK under the Ghurkha policy. The judge had  to
    try and understand the circumstances of two adults in  their  40's  who
    had done very little in their adult life and who claimed to  have  been
    supported by their mother after she left Nepal and came to the  UK  ten
    years ago. This was an unusual situation and one would expect to see  a
    detailed explanation of what happened in the intervening ten years.

19.  In Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ at [50], the Court of Appeal  concluded  that
    there had to be sufficient emotional  dependence  to  establish  family
    life. This was more than normal emotional  bonds  in  order  to  engage
    Article 8(1). The case of AG related to the test for interference  with
    family life in which the threshold was not particularly  high.  Whether
    the Appellants have established family life protected by Article  8  is
    not a low threshold and was more than  the  care  and  attention  of  a
    family member.

20.  Mr Jarvis submitted the judge was not assisted by the  evidence  before
    him. The Sponsor was not able to give great detail in her oral evidence
    and the judge found that she had no insight into why the Appellants had
    not worked. There was no reason why an application for  settlement  had
    not been made earlier or why the second Appellant did  not  appeal  the
    previous refusal. The judge's findings  were  not  adverse  credibility
    points which were not put to the Appellants. This was not a case  where
    there were inconsistencies in the account given. The judge was  looking
    at  the  burden  on  the  Appellants  and  applying  the   balance   of
    probabilities. The vast majority of  points  made  by  the  judge  were
    because of a lack of evidence to inform him of what was going  on.  The
    Appellants claim that nothing has changed since the Sponsor left  Nepal
    but there was no evidence of what was happening during that intervening
    period. It was open to the judge to find  that  there  was  not  enough
    evidence. The judge's approach in  this  case  was  in  line  with  all
    Article 8(1) authorities. The procedural points fell away.

21.  Mr Jarvis submitted that, in  the  skeleton  argument,  the  Appellants
    relied on Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 at [5] which dealt  with  the
    duties of the judge and the credibility of the parties. If  there  were
    inconsistencies in the Appellants' account there was a manifest problem
    and it was a matter for the representative to either  deal  with  those
    inconsistencies or remain silent.  No unfairness  would  arise  if  the
    judge did not put the issue to the Appellants. The point raised by  the
    judge  was  a  failure  to  meet  the  evidential  burden  rather  than
    inconsistencies in the Appellants' account. The  judge  did  raise  one
    point with Counsel and there was nothing  procedurally  unfair  in  the
    decision or in the conduct of the appeal  hearing.  The  system  is  an
    adversarial one and the judge was entitled to consider how the case was
    put. There were holes in the Appellants' evidence.  It was not  a  case
    where there were overt points of credibility. Even if the judge had put
    the points to the Sponsor it would not have made any difference to  the
    judge's understanding of the case for the reasons  given  at  [20]  and
    [21] of the decision.

22.  Mr Jarvis  submitted  the  Appellants'  reference  to  Pathan  was  not
    relevant because  it  addressed  the  question  of  whether  there  was
    procedural unfairness and substantive unfairness by  the  Secretary  of
    State where the appellant did not know of the  circumstances.  In  this
    case, the Appellants were well  aware  of  the  case  against  them  on
    appeal. The Appellants knew why they had been refused  entry  clearance
    and they had an appeal to  argue  their  case  but  failed  to  provide
    adequate evidence.

23.   Mr  Jarvis  submitted  the  Presenting  Officer  did   challenge   the
    Appellants' case. There was a fundamental lack  of  credibility  in  an
    assertion that someone in their 40's would never have been able to find
    work in their country of origin. There was no credible reason why other
    relatives would not be assisting the Appellants and no evidence of long
    term dependency. It was not  necessary  to  cross-examine  the  Sponsor
    about every document to challenge the core of the Appellants' claim.

24.  Mr Jarvis submitted the  judge  found  the  Appellants  had  failed  to
    provide sufficient evidence to reach the burden and standard of  proof.
    The judge highlighted the obvious  deficiencies  in  the  evidence  and
    there was no misdirection in  law.  The  nature  of  the  relationships
    between the parties was such that it was not unusual for the Sponsor to
    visit Nepal given her length of residence there.

25.   Mr  Jarvis  submitted  the  judge  did  not  misunderstand  or  ignore
    evidence. He highlighted what he should have seen for a case to be made
    out and the Appellants had not produced that evidence. The  visits  did
    not establish an emotional connection sufficient to  satisfy  the  test
    required in the relevant authorities. The absence of evidence elsewhere
    meant that there was little information about what was  going  on  when
    the Sponsor came to the UK and this was relevant to the  assessment  of
    what was going on at the date of hearing.



Appellant's response

26.  Mr West submitted the issue in this appeal was whether the  legal  test
    was properly applied. The Sponsor made visits  almost  every  year  and
    this amounted to more than normal emotional ties.  The  judge  accepted
    this was contact  but  not  to  the  degree  that  would  maintain  the
    relationships as close as it was. This was not a correct application of
    the test. If there was no family  life  between  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellants one would not expect to see an 80 year old visit every year.
    On any view, the judge's finding was  perverse.  Her  visits  to  Nepal
    showed that there was emotional support and dependence.

27.  Mr West submitted it was clear  in  the  witness  statements  that  the
    Appellants and the Sponsor were living together  in  2010.  The  visits
    were clear evidence that family life was maintained following  Rai.  It
    existed then and it does now. The army pension statement was a  crucial
    document and had not been  challenged.  It  was  clear  that  the  army
    pension statement met the threshold of financial support on the balance
    of probabilities. The judge failed to put matters to  the  Sponsor.  It
    was apparent from the attendance note attached to the grounds of appeal
    that there was sufficient evidence before the judge to show that  there
    was real, committed  and  effective  support.  It  was  not  about  the
    ancillary issues raised by the judge. There was sufficient  documentary
    evidence to satisfy the threshold.

28.  Mr West submitted the judge took into account irrelevant  circumstances
    and failed to give the Sponsor a chance to respond. The matters  relied
    on by the judge were not in the refusal  notice.  There  was  no  issue
    taken with the proportion of income  sent  to  the  Appellants  or  the
    expenses they incurred in Nepal. Those issues  were  held  against  the
    Appellants and should  have  been  put  to  the  Sponsor  in  her  oral
    evidence. No questions were asked about the bank statements. The  issue
    of whether family  life  existed  was  not  time  dependent.  The  bank
    statements  from  2018,  the  authority  to  withdraw  money  from  the
    Sponsor's bank account and  the  frequent  visits  were  sufficient  to
    establish family  life.  The  visits  and  the  unchallenged  financial
    evidence met the threshold test. Mr West  submitted  that  if  I  found
    there was an error of law the matter should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing.



Conclusion and reasons

29.  The Appellants were represented at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by Mr West. There was  no  obligation  on  the  judge  to  ask
    questions  or  cross-examine  the  witness.  The  burden  was  on   the
    Appellants to provide sufficient evidence  to  show  that  family  life
    existed and that the refusal of entry clearance interfered  with  their
    family life. The judge's comment at [27]  that  money  was  also  being
    taken out by what appeared to be one of the  Appellants'  siblings  was
    not material to the judge's finding in the same paragraph that "I  have
    no evidence of what the financial situation and financial  support  was
    between 2010 and 2018 and no evidence about how much of the  money  the
    Appellants needed to spend on their living expenses."

30.  The judge did not make adverse findings which he failed to put  to  the
    Appellants. It is apparent from the attendance  note  attached  to  the
    grounds of appeal that the judge asked the Sponsor why  the  Appellants
    had not worked and why there were no money transfers before  2019.  The
    judge's findings at [20] and [21] demonstrated the Sponsor's  inability
    to assist the Tribunal with the 'gaps' in the evidence.

31.  The existence of family life in 2010  at  the  time  the  Sponsor  left
    Nepal was relevant to the assessment of whether Article 8  was  engaged
    because the Appellants claimed that the situation had not changed since
    the Sponsor came to the UK ten years ago. The judge  found  that  there
    was insufficient evidence to show the nature of the  family  life  that
    existed prior to the Sponsor coming to the UK. The judge considered the
    evidence of  how  family  life  had  been  maintained  since  2010.  He
    concluded that financial support from January 2018  to  February  2020,
    telephone calls from September 2019 to February 2020 and  seven  visits
    to Nepal were insufficient to demonstrate a degree of support necessary
    to satisfy the test in Kugathas.

32.  The judge found  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  discharge  the
    evidential burden on the Appellants. There was  no  obligation  on  the
    judge to put matters to the Appellants because  the  onus  was  on  the
    Appellants to provide sufficient evidence  to  show  that  family  life
    existed. On the evidence before the judge, they had failed  to  do  so.
    The judge's finding that the Appellants had failed to establish  family
    life was open to him on the evidence before him. I find that the  judge
    took into account all relevant matters and it is clear from [30] of the
    decision that he applied the correct test to the assessment  of  family
    life.

33.  I find that there was no procedural unfairness in the  conduct  of  the
    appeal hearing.  The Appellants were represented and aware of the  case
    they had to answer from the refusal notice. The  Appellants  failed  to
    provide sufficient evidence to show that, as adult  children  in  their
    40's, they had established family life with their 80  year  old  mother
    who came to the UK ten years ago. I am not  persuaded  that  the  judge
    made  adverse  credibility  findings  or  held   issues   against   the
    Appellants. The judge merely commented on the state of the evidence and
    explained in his reasoning why the evidence was lacking.

34.  There was no error of law in the judge's approach  to  the  documentary
    evidence or misdirection in relation to the Appellants' employment. The
    judge found that there was a lack of evidence from 2010 to 2018 to show
    that the Appellants were financially dependent on the Sponsor such that
    the support she provided was real, committed or  effective.  The  judge
    was asked to believe that the Appellants  had  never  worked  and  were
    dependant on the Sponsor on the basis of assertions  in  their  witness
    statements.

35.  Any error of  law  in  relation  to  the  historic  injustice  was  not
    material because, on the facts of this case, the Appellants  failed  to
    establish family life sufficient  to  engage  Article  8.  The  judge's
    findings on  proportionality  were  in  the  alternative  and  had  not
    affected the judge's assessment under Article 8(1).

36.  The evidence of financial support (drawings  from  the  Sponsor's  bank
    account into which the army pension was paid  from  2018  to  2020  and
    money transfers from 2019), the telephone calls in  2019/2020  and  the
    visits almost every year for six weeks were not sufficient to establish
    family life. The judge's conclusion in that respect was not perverse as
    submitted by Mr West.  The judge looked at the totality of the evidence
    and his findings were open to him on the evidence before him.

37.  Accordingly, I find there was no error of law in  the  decision  of  20
    March 2020 and I dismiss the Appellants' appeals.



Notice of decision

Appeals dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 29 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 29 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

