
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12698/2018
                                                 HU/12700/2018 HU/12705/2018
                                                 HU/12707/2018 HU/12709/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2018                         |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                          a k a d (first appellant)
                         d d e g (second appellant)
                          d s d g (third appellant)
                         d d s g (fourth appellant)
                         d p c a g (fifth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Bloomer of Counsel instructed by Parkview
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge M Davies (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 3rd September 2018.

 2. The first Appellant is the wife of the second Appellant  and  they  are
    the parents of the third, fourth and fifth Appellants who were born  on
    17th January 2007, 20th March 2011, and 1st  April  2010  respectively.
    The first Appellant entered the UK on 25th March 2010 with valid  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 Student until 10th April 2012.  Her  husband  and
    eldest child accompanied her.  The two youngest children were  born  in
    the UK.  On 21st September 2017 the Appellants  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK based upon their family and private lives.

 3. The applications were refused on 30th May 2018.  The Respondent did not
    accept that the  Appellants  could  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1).   In
    relation to the adult Appellants it was not accepted that  there  would
    be very significant obstacles to their integration into Sri Lanka.   It
    was accepted that two of the children had lived in the UK  continuously
    for in excess of seven years, but the Respondent's  view  was  that  it
    would be reasonable for the children to leave the UK and return to  Sri
    Lanka with their parents.

 4. It was not accepted that there were any exceptional circumstances which
    would justify granting leave to remain with reference to Article  8  of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was accepted that one of the  Appellant's  children  suffers
    with autism and attends a special needs school,  but  the  Respondent's
    view was that there was an autism centre in Columbo in Sri Lanka  which
    specialises in education for autistic children and also  offers  speech
    therapy.

 5. The appeals were heard by the FTT on 21st August 2018.  The judge heard
    evidence from the first Appellant.  The  judge  found  the  immigration
    history of the first and second Appellants and the eldest child  to  be
    significant.  The judge found that the  first  Appellant  had  obtained
    leave to enter the UK by deception as she had never intended to  return
    to Sri Lanka.

 6. The judge accepted that the three children are in education in  the  UK
    and that the second child has extreme difficulties connected to  autism
    and attends a special school and receives speech therapy.

 7. The judge did not  find  that  there  would  be  any  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellants' integration  back  into  Sri  Lanka.   The
    judge found there were strong reasons for the Appellants being  refused
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.  Those reasons  relate  to  their
    immigration history and the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    control.  The judge found that if the Appellants had been  given  leave
    to remain they would  benefit  from  their  abuse  of  the  immigration
    system.

 8. The judge  found  that  the  Appellants  could  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(1) and that there were no  exceptional  circumstances,  and  the
    appeals were dismissed.

 9. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    raising a number of grounds, the most relevant being that the judge had
    not undertaken consideration of the best interests of the children, and
    had not considered whether it would be reasonable for the  children  to
    leave the UK, as two of the children had accrued  in  excess  of  seven
    years' continuous residence.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grimmett of the  FTT  on  8th
    October 2018 who found an arguable error of law in that the  judge  had
    not considered the reasonableness test in relation to the children.

11. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending that the judge had not materially erred in law.

12. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Tan advised that he did not  rely
    upon the rule 24 response, and conceded that the judge  had  materially
    erred in law by failing to  carry  out  a  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the children, and failing to consider whether it would  be
    reasonable for the children to leave the UK.

14. I decided, in view of that concession, that I did not need to hear from
    Mr Bloomer as to error of law.  Mr Bloomer suggested that it  would  be
    appropriate to set aside the decision of the FTT and remit the  appeals
    back to the FTT to be heard afresh.  Mr Tan agreed.   I  accepted  that
    the concession made on behalf of the Respondent was  rightly  made  and
    set aside the decision of the FTT and indicated that a written decision
    would be issued setting out my reasons.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I set aside the FTT decision for the following reasons.  At the date of
    application for leave to remain on 21 September 2017 two of  the  three
    children had resided in the  UK  for  in  excess  of  seven  years  and
    therefore were qualifying children.  At the date of the FTT hearing all
    three children had resided in the UK  for  at  least  seven  years  and
    therefore all three were qualifying children.

16. The best interests of children are a primary consideration, but  not  a
    paramount consideration, and not  the  only  consideration.   The  best
    interests of children can be outweighed by other  considerations.   The
    behaviour  of  the  parents  is  not  a  relevant  consideration   when
    considering best interests of children.  In my view the judge erred  in
    not carrying out a specific consideration of the best interests of  the
    children.

17. Once the best interests of the  children  had  been  considered,  there
    should then have been  a  consideration  as  to  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the children to leave the  UK.   This  was  relevant  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in relation to the two children who had accrued
    in excess of seven years' residence at the  date  of  application,  and
    also relevant to section 117B(6)  in  relation  to  all  the  children,
    because the third child had accrued seven years' residence by the  date
    of the FTT hearing.

18. I find no adequate consideration of whether it would be reasonable  for
    the children to leave the UK.  The case law indicates that there  would
    need to be strong reasons for finding that a child should  not  remain,
    if that child has accrued seven years or more continuous residence.

19. The judge considered section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 at paragraphs 48 - 53, with the  exception  of  section
    117B(6) which relates to the same issue as in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    that being whether it would be reasonable for  a  qualifying  child  to
    leave  the UK.

20. As there has not been a consideration of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children or the reasonableness of them leaving the UK, the decision  of
    the FTT is unsafe and contains a material error of law.

21. For those reasons the decision of the FTT is set aside.  I  have  taken
    into account the submissions made by both representatives that it would
    be appropriate to remit these appeals back  to  the  FTT  to  be  heard
    afresh.  I have  considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal
    back to the FTT because of the nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact-
    finding that will be necessary in order for this decision to be remade.

22. The appeal should be heard at the Manchester  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the  time  and  date  in  due  course.   The
    appeals are to be heard by an FTT judge other than Judge M Davies.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeals are allowed to the  extent  that
they are remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings  of  fact
preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             11th December 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             11th December 2018



