
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12524/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 March 2017 and 24 May 2017              |On 3 July 2017                 |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                      Eaton RICHARD VALENTINE O'CONNOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 20 November 2015 to make a deportation order  under  s.5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  21  March  1977.   He
    arrived in the UK on 6 May 2008 with  entry  clearance  valid  until  5
    March 2010 as the spouse of a settled person and on 7 April 2010 he was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in that capacity.  On 11 March 2015,
    following his conviction of two counts of possession of  cannabis  with
    intent to supply, he was  sentenced  to  136  days'  imprisonment.  The
    appellant  was  notified  of  the  respondent's  intention  to  make  a
    deportation order.  He  made  representations  based  on  human  rights
    grounds but by a decision made on 7 July 2015 the  respondent  rejected
    those submissions and refused the claim, certifying her  decision  with
    the result that there was no  in-country  right  of  appeal.   However,
    following the lodging of a pre-action protocol letter  before  judicial
    review proceedings, a  new  decision  was  made  on  20  November  2015
    withdrawing the certification. The appellant was then  able  to  appeal
    against the decision arguing that the deportation order  infringed  his
    rights under article 8 in respect of both private and family life.

3.   The appellant is married to a British national born  on  6  June  1970.
    They met in 2000 when the appellant was in the UK with a  visa.   Their
    relationship developed and in 2003 when his visa was coming to  an  end
    they decided to return together to  Jamaica,  the  appellant's  partner
    taking her son, LA born on 22 July 1992, from a  previous  relationship
    with her.  The appellant and his partner were married on 24 March  2004
    and there are three children, EW, born on 6 June 2004, EV on 4  January
    2011 and AM on 9 March 2012.

4.   The judge accepted that the appellant's wife  and  his  three  children
    were British citizens and that he and his wife were in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship which had lasted for many years  and  certainly
    since 2003. The appellant's wife, LV and EW returned to the UK in  2005
    because of the difficulties they had there and the  appellant  came  to
    the UK with entry clearance as a spouse in May  2008.   LA  is  now  an
    adult age 23 and no longer lives with the family.  The  judge  accepted
    that the appellant's relationship with his  children  was  genuine  and
    subsisting and that there was no doubt that their  best  interests  lay
    with both parents but, alternatively, certainly with their mother.  The
    judge accepted that  EV  had  a  continuing  health  issue  as  he  had
    swallowed a battery some years ago but there was evidence that, subject
    to him requiring further treatment, his condition had stabilised to the
    point when a negligence claim could be settled  in  August  2016.   She
    accepted that EW was a gifted child, who had won  a  scholarship  to  a
    major public school in England but, nonetheless, found that  there  was
    no reason why the children would not adapt to life in Jamaica, it being
    reasonable to assume that there were private and international  schools
    there which the children including EW could attend.

5.   The judge considered the sentencing remarks made  by  the  trial  judge
    when imposing a sentence to enable the appellant's  immediate  release.
    The appellant had pleaded guilty on the basis that the cannabis was for
    personal use and for family and friends with no financial  reward.   It
    was argued that his custodial sentence of 136 days was at the lower end
    of the sentencing options given that the guidelines ranged from a high-
    level  community  order  to  six  months'  imprisonment.    The   judge
    disagreed, saying that it equated  to  four  months'  imprisonment  and
    reflected a guilty plea to two counts of possession of a cannabis  with
    intent to supply, albeit that  the  intent  to  supply  was  not  on  a
    commercial basis.

6.   The judge set out the relevant legal framework  under  paras  398,  399
    and 399A of HC 395  as  amended  ("the  Rules")  and  referred  to  the
    provisions of part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, as amended, and in particular to  s.117B  and  C.   She  reminded
    herself that all family members affected by the  respondent's  decision
    had to be taken into account and that the best interests of  any  minor
    child should be determined by reference  to  the  child  alone  without
    reference to the immigration history or status of either parent.

7.   The judge was satisfied that para 398(c) of the Rules  applied  as  the
    appellant had been convicted of an offence meeting the requirement that
    "in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has  caused
    serious harm".  The judge said that the seriousness of the offence  lay
    in the intent to supply the drug to others, whether for profit or on  a
    commercial  scale  or  not.   The  appellant  had  also  allowed  large
    quantities of cannabis to be kept in his home where his young  children
    lived and had supplied cannabis to his own wife despite being aware  of
    her mental health issues, she having given  evidence  that  she  was  a
    former drug addict addicted  to  class  A  drugs  before  she  met  the
    appellant.  The judge found that on balance  the  interference  in  the
    appellant's family and private life was necessary in the  interests  of
    the prevention of disorder or crime, his deportation was in the  public
    interest  and  there  was  nothing  before  her  to  suggest  that  his
    deportation had been or would be in  the  future,  unduly  harsh.   The
    respondent's decision was therefore proportionate to a legitimate  aim.
    Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   The grounds raise five  issues.   Ground  1  argues  that  the  judge's
    assessment of undue harshness under paras 399 and 399A failed  to  take
    proper account of relevant evidence: the  independent  social  worker's
    report ("ISW report") dated 15 February  2016  (A/B1-37),  the  medical
    evidence from the appellant's wife's GP dated 24 March 2015 (A/D4)  and
    the letter from the head teacher at  the  children's  school  (A/C7-9).
    Ground 2 argues that the judge failed to take  proper  account  of  the
    length of sentence and the basis  of  the  plea  when  considering  the
    public interest as the judge had imposed a custodial  sentence  on  the
    basis that it would not be fair to give the appellant a community order
    when he had already spent time in custody.

9.   Ground 3 argues that the judge failed to consider the evidence  of  the
    appellant's rehabilitation and Ground 4 that she erred in finding  that
    the appellant's offence came within  the  provisions  of  para  398(c),
    having failed to make a proper or  lawful  assessment  of  whether  his
    offending had caused serious harm.  Ground  5  argues  that  the  judge
    failed to  take  into  account  the  appellant's  right  to  derivative
    residence pursuant to the judgment in Zambrano CJEU  C-34/09.  Finally,
    in ground 6, it is argued that Supreme Court judgment in Hesham  Ali  v
    Secretary of State [2016] UKSC 16 meant that the Tribunal  decision  in
    KMO (Section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT  543  was  wrongly
    decided and could not stand given that it was  premised  on  the  Rules
    being a complete code in deportation appeals.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge had failed  to  consider  the
    evidence in the ISW report, the medical evidence from  the  appellant's
    wife's GP and the letter from the children's head teacher and she could
    have taken a less serious view of the appellant's  offending  as  there
    was evidence that the sentencing judge  would  have  made  a  community
    order if the appellant  had  not  already  spent  substantial  time  in
    custody prior to sentencing. The  remaining  grounds,  however,  merely
    showed a disagreement with the judge's findings.

11.  When this appeal was listed  for  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Supperstone J and DUTJ Latter) on 17 January 2017, Mr Saini  indicated
    that he wished to rely on all the grounds of appeal and not simply  the
    two grounds identified by the First-tier  Tribunal  as  arguable.   The
    panel was satisfied that, had the judge meant to refuse  permission  on
    the other grounds, he would have made that clear with  the  consequence
    that the appellant would have had the right to renew his application to
    the Upper Tribunal on the refused grounds.  Accordingly, the panel  was
    satisfied that it was open to the appellant to argue all  the  grounds.
    The hearing was adjourned to give  the  respondent  an  opportunity  of
    filing a Rule 24  reply.   This  had  not  been  done  as,  through  an
    administrative oversight, a copy of the grounds  of  appeal  and  other
    documents had not been properly served. A full Rule 24 response has now
    been filed by the respondent and there is a skeleton  argument  setting
    out the appellant's submissions. Although Mr Saini relied  on  all  his
    grounds, he indicated that he relied primarily on grounds 1, 2 and 4.

Assessment of whether there is an error of law

12.  Ground 1 argues that the judge  failed  to  deal  adequately  with  the
    evidence in the ISW report, the medical report and the letter from  the
    head teacher.  It is submitted that, although the judge referred to the
    social worker's report at [30] of the decision, this was  only  to  the
    extent of noting that the report confirmed that the  behaviour  of  the
    children greatly improved when the appellant was around but the  report
    goes much further, so it is argued, as it expresses an opinion that  it
    was not in the best interests of the children for the appellant  to  be
    removed in the light of the impact that separation would  have  on  the
    children which might give rise to problems in their  development.   The
    report also confirmed that if  the  appellant  were  removed  it  would
    impact upon the care given by his wife  to  the  children  and  that  a
    family breakdown would have significant  consequences,  especially  for
    the children.  The report also set out the wishes and feelings  of  the
    children but it is argued that these were not taken into account by the
    judge.

13.  Mr Saini submitted  that  this  indicated  a  failure  to  give  proper
    consideration to the best interests of the children in accordance  with
    the Supreme Court judgments of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC and Makhlouf v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department (Northern Ireland) [2016] UKSC 59.  In consequence,
    the Tribunal did not give sufficient consideration  to  the  children's
    best interests.  So far as the GP's  report  was  concerned,  Mr  Saini
    argued that the judge had not carried out a satisfactory  appraisal  of
    that evidence and its implications on the children's well-being if  the
    appellant was removed.  Finally, he  argued  that  the  head  teacher's
    letter had been completely overlooked.

14.  Mr Melvin submitted that the judge had considered  the  ISW  report  as
    part of the evidence as a whole. There was  no  reason  to  believe  in
    respect of the GP's evidence and the headmaster's letter that the judge
    was not aware of the mental health issues of the appellant's wife  and,
    whilst there was no express finding on the head teacher's letter,  that
    was not fatal to the decision.   The  judge  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to refer at length to those reports.

15.  I am satisfied that ground 1 is made out and that the judge  failed  to
    take into account the social worker's conclusions set out at [76] or to
    explain what weight she gave to them, if any.  I am also satisfied that
    the judge failed to consider the  points  raised  in  the  GP's  letter
    which, in the absence of any reasoned finding  why  the  GP's  evidence
    that the appellant's wife was depressed  was  not  accepted,  indicates
    that a relevant matter, the consequences of separation on  her  ability
    to look after the children if the appellant is removed, was left out of
    account.

16.  So far as ground 2 is concerned Mr Saini argued that the  judge  failed
    to take proper account of the circumstances leading to the  appellant's
    sentence of 136 days.  There was evidence of the  basis  on  which  the
    appellant pleaded guilty in a  letter  from  the  higher  advocate  who
    represented  him  at  the  Crown  Court  referring  to  the  sentencing
    guidelines that the starting point was a community  order  but  as  the
    appellant had  served  a  lengthy  period  on  remand,  the  judge  had
    concluded that it was not fair to give him a community  order  when  he
    had already spent time in custody.   Further,  so  it  is  argued,  the
    sentencing  remarks  indicated  that  the  judge  had   not   taken   a
    particularly serious view of the offence.  Mr Melvin submitted that  it
    was not incumbent  on  the  judge  to  go  behind  the  sentence.   The
    appellant had been convicted of  drugs  offences,  supplying  drugs  to
    family and friends.  The First-tier Tribunal had been fully entitled to
    proceed on the basis that this was a serious offence.

17.  I am satisfied that the judge erred by failing  to  take  into  account
    the circumstances in which the Crown Court imposed a  sentence  of  136
    days.  The basis of the sentence appears to be clear and  there  is  no
    obvious reason not to accept  the  contents  of  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's advocate about why he was sentenced to imprisonment  rather
    than a community order.  In consequence, the judge failed to  take  all
    relevant matters into account when considering the public interest.

18.  I am satisfied that these errors are such that the decision  should  be
    set aside as relevant factors were not taken into account  in  relation
    to the consequences for the family if the appellant is to  be  deported
    and when assessing the nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence  when
    considering the public interest.

19.  In these circumstances, I can deal briefly with grounds 3-6.  I am  not
    satisfied there is any substance in ground 3.  There is  no  reason  to
    believe  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's rehabilitation.  Ground 4 argues that  the  judge  made  an
    unlawful assessment of the precedent  fact  necessary  to  engage  para
    398(c), that in the view of the Secretary of State  his  offending  had
    caused serious harm.  Mr Saini argues that the judge failed properly to
    consider the instructions set out in  chapter  13  of  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions on criminality and article 8  ECHR  cases  and
    particularly paras 2.1.2 to 2.1.5, dealing with serious harm but  I  am
    not satisfied that there is any substance in this ground.

20.  The provisions of paras 2.1.2 - 2.1.5 are  perfectly  clear.   At  para
    2.1.5 it says that where a person has been convicted  of  one  or  more
    violent, drugs or sex offences he will usually be  considered  to  have
    been convicted of an offence that has caused  serious  harm.   I  agree
    with Mr Melvin's submission that the judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the appellant fell within this category.   He  had  been  convicted  of
    possessing cannabis with intent to supply and this is an offence  which
    falls within the provisions of 2.1.3 of contributing  to  a  widespread
    problem causing serious harm to a community or to society  in  general.
    The judge's findings on this issue were properly open to  her  for  the
    reasons she gave.

21.  Ground 5 seeks to rely on the appellant's  derivative  rights  pursuant
    to the judgment in Zambrano but there is no substance in this argument.
     The appellant's removal would not inhibit the exercise by his wife  or
    his children of their treaty rights as they can remain in the  UK  with
    their mother: see Secretary of State v AQ (Nigeria) and Ors [2015] EWCA
    Civ 250.

22.  Ground 6 seeks to argue that KMO (Nigeria)  is  inconsistent  with  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali.  I do not need  to  decide
    this issue in the  light  of  my  previous  findings.   If  it  becomes
    relevant when the decision is re-made, the issue can  be  addressed  at
    that stage but in any event in so far as KMO (Nigeria) is  inconsistent
    with Hesham Ali, it has been overruled by the later superior authority.

23.  For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that  the  judge  erred  in
    law and that the decision should be  set  aside.   On  the  information
    before me I am satisfied  that  this  is  an  appeal  which  should  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for the decision to be re-made.

24.  In accordance with directions issued at the end of  the  error  of  law
    hearing further evidence was filed on behalf of the appellant including
    both  witness  statements  and  further   reports.    The   appellant's
    documentary evidence is set out in the original bundle  A  indexed  and
    paginated A1 - I10 and a supplementary bundle SA indexed and  paginated
    A1-F8.  The respondent's documents are annexed to the appeal papers  in
    Annexes  A-H.   Both  Mr  Saini  and  Mr  Melvin  have  filed   written
    submissions both dated 24 May 2017.

Further Oral Evidence

(i)  The Appellant

25.  The appellant adopted his two witness statements and a  letter  written
    for this hearing which are at SA/ A1-20.  In the letter  the  appellant
    says that contrary to the comment by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  at
    [42] of  her  decision  that  the  appellant  introduced  his  wife  to
    cannabis, that was not the case.  His wife had been taking both class A
    drugs and cannabis and he supported her to get off class A  drugs.   He
    also says that in the two years since being released from prison he has
    religiously adhered to his reporting conditions and there have been  no
    further incidents of misconduct and there will be no more.

26.  In his oral evidence he explained that the current situation has had  a
    great impact on his  wife's  health  causing  her  considerable  mental
    stress.  He explained that  he  was  initially  arrested  in  2011  and
    because of the quantity of cannabis found in his possession  he  feared
    that he would be facing four to six years' imprisonment.   He  and  his
    wife decided to divert the consequences of his actions, as he described
    it, and the family went to live in Zambia but his wife did not find  it
    easy to integrate and she and the children returned in  December  2013.
    He remained in Zambia until October 2014 when he returned  to  the  UK.
    There was then a period of three weeks when he returned to  Jamaica  to
    arrange for the burial of his  grandmother.   On  his  return,  he  was
    arrested and remanded in custody pending his trial.  He explained  that
    he had been a long-term cannabis user and had  been  in  the  habit  of
    buying cannabis for personal use and when  he  had  an  opportunity  of
    buying a large amount (seven pounds), he thought it  would  be  a  good
    idea to have a stockpile.  He had not intended to supply it for  profit
    but to keep it for his and his wife's personal use.  He explained  that
    he no longer took cannabis and again expressed his regret for what  had
    happened. He had previously owned his own transport  business  and  now
    worked as a transport manager.

(ii) The Appellant's Wife


27.  The appellant's wife adopted her  witness  statements  at  SA/  A21-41,
    where she sets out fuller details of her background  than  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In very  brief  outline  she  says  that  her
    mother was a heavy drug user and an alcoholic and  that  when  she  was
    about 5 she and her brother were taken into care  by  Social  Services.
    She went back home when she was  12,  by  which  time  her  mother  had
    married and was expecting a baby.   Later,  her  mother  ran  off  with
    another man leaving her and her brother with her  husband.   After  she
    left school at 16 she took a job in Madrid as a nanny.  She  came  back
    at 18 and managed to get a council flat and a YTS job.   She  describes
    being abused by a relative. She drifted into what she  describes  as  a
    wild lifestyle, starting to take drugs which led up to class  A  drugs.
    She had a child and described herself as a bad mother following in  the
    footsteps of her own mother.  In her statement, she says that she hated
    and loathed herself.

28.   However,  things  began  to  change  when  she  met   the   appellant.
    Initially, he was unaware that she used class A drugs.  She was subject
    to extreme outbursts of temper and could be violent and aggressive  but
    the appellant stuck with her and encouraged her to obtain  help.   With
    his support and the help of her GP and the counselling service, she was
    able to stop using class A drugs and smoking skunk  weed.   She  weaned
    herself down by using natural weed to come off the  other  drugs.   She
    had got free of class A drugs and skunk weed before 2008 and since 2012
    has stopped using weed and does not smoke cigarettes anymore.  She  has
    spent her whole life feeling anxious and unable to cope  and  that  the
    appellant was the only stable person she had.  She was very  frightened
    of what would happen without him.

(iii)    Witness Statement of EW


29.  There is witness statement dated May 2017 from the EW, the  appellant's
    eldest son (SA/A42-7) in which he updates his statement of  March  2016
    A/B66-68.  In his statements, he explains why he  would  not  be  happy
    living in either Jamaica or Zambia.  He also says that his mother could
    not cope as a single mother and he  fears  what  would  happen  if  his
    father were deported to Jamaica.  Neither representative wished to  ask
    EW any further questions about his statement.


Submissions

30.  Mr Melvin relied on his written submissions.   He  confirmed  that  the
    respondent accepted that there was a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the  appellant  and  his  children  and  that  his
    removal would have an impact on the stability of the  family  unit  but
    not such that they would suffer the psychological problems set  out  in
    the ISW report. He submitted that any medical observations made in that
    report should be treated with caution.  There was no evidence that  the
    appellant's wife had had any problems managing the  children  when  her
    husband was on remand or when he remained in Zambia following the  rest
    of the family returning to the UK.  There was little  medical  evidence
    that she had had problems with class A drugs in the  past.   Whilst  it
    may be the case that she  was  suffering  from  depression  and  taking
    medication, that did not without more mean that she would be unable  to
    cope with the children should the  appellant  be  deported.   The  fact
    remained that the  appellant  had  been  convicted  of  two  counts  of
    supplying class B drugs to family and friends and that by buying  drugs
    in large volume, he had added  to  the  drugs  problem  and  kept  drug
    dealers in business.

31.  Mr Saini repeated his  submission  that  the  appellant  did  not  fall
    within para 398(c)  as  the  respondent  had  unlawfully  assessed  the
    precedent fact necessary to engage that paragraph as the respondent had
    failed to show there was a proper basis for taking the  view  that  the
    appellant's offending had caused serious harm.   The  offence  had  not
    contributed to a widespread problem causing serious harm to a community
    or to society in general, so he submitted, given that it  was  for  the
    appellant's personal use and any supply was to his wife or friends  and
    was non-commercial.  He further submitted that deporting the  appellant
    would be unduly harsh in the particular circumstances  of  his  family.
    He relied on the ISW report and its addendum, the medical evidence from
    his wife's GP, and the evidence from EW's school.

32.  He submitted that when the evidence was taken  as  a  whole,  the  fact
    remained that if the appellant's wife and children remained in the  UK,
    his wife would be unable to  cope  with  the  situation.  It  would  be
    unreasonable in the light of their  past  experiences  in  Jamaica  and
    Zambia to expect the family to go to Jamaica.  He further  argued  that
    the removal of the appellant would interfere with the children's rights
    as Union citizens  within  the  principles  set  out  in  Zambrano,  as
    recently considered by the Grand Chamber in Chavez-Vilchez ECtHR 10 May
    2017, C113-15.

33.  Mr Saini argued that when  considering  the  public  interest  and  the
    factors set out in s.117C, proper account must be  taken  of  the  fact
    that the appellant's sentence was 136 days'  imprisonment.   There  was
    evidence from the higher advocate representing him at the  Crown  Court
    that the starting point in the sentencing guidelines  was  a  community
    order but as the appellant had served a lengthy period on  remand,  the
    judge had concluded that it would not be fair to give him  a  community
    order when he had already spent time in custody and for this reason the
    judge sentenced him to the length of imprisonment calculated to  effect
    his immediate release.

Assessment of the Issues

34.  I have already set out the  factual  background  in  [2]  -  [7].   The
    appellant's offences arise from the fact that on 7  May  2012  officers
    conducted a search of his home and a large  quantity  of  cannabis  was
    found.  Fearing the consequences, the appellant and his family left the
    UK in November 2012 to live in Zambia but his family returned to the UK
    in December 2013 and he followed in October 2014.   Following  a  brief
    visit to Jamaica to arrange for his grandmother's funeral, he  returned
    to the UK and was arrested.  He  was  remanded  in  custody  until  his
    conviction and sentencing on 11 March  2015  at  Warwick  Crown  Court.
    Previously, on  6  October  2014  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  a
    Magistrates' Court of failing to surrender to custody and was sentenced
    to one day's detention.

35.   I  must  first  consider  whether  the  appellant  falls  within   the
    provisions of para 398 which identifies  foreign  criminals  liable  to
    deportation  whose  claims  under  article  8  must  be   assessed   by
    considering whether paras 399 and 399A apply.  The appellant  does  not
    fall within the provisions of paras 398 (a) or (b) but  the  respondent
    argues that he falls within para 398 (c) which provides:

         "the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm ...".


36.  For the reasons I have already set out at [19] - [20] above I  was  not
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  law  in  finding
    that the requirements of para 398(c)  were  met.   Mr  Saini  has  made
    further submissions on this issue arguing that  the  respondent's  view
    that the appellant's offending had caused serious harm was not properly
    open to her in the light of the sentence  passed  by  the  Crown  Court
    Judge, the offending could not rationally be deemed to be serious  harm
    given the guidance at 2.1.3 of the relevant IDI, and the appellant  did
    not fall within para 2.1.5 which required that a person be convicted of
    one or more offences when  there  was  no  mention  of  several  counts
    arising from  one  offence.   He  submitted  that  there  was  a  stark
    difference between two counts and two offences and, in consequence, the
    seriousness of harm has not been properly assessed.


37.  I do not accept this submission.  The statute makes it  clear  that  it
    is for the Secretary of State to take a view as to whether  an  offence
    has caused serious harm.  I am satisfied that she was entitled to  take
    such a view in the circumstances of this  particular  case.   The  fact
    that there may be, and clearly are  in  the  present  case,  mitigating
    factors which led the judge to pass a lenient sentence does not without
    more mean that the Secretary of State was not entitled to regard it  as
    a serious offence.  I agree with Mr Melvin that the seriousness lies in
    buying and storing prohibited drugs in a  large  quantity,  so  keeping
    drugs dealers in business and supporting  the  current  drugs  problem.
    The arguments based on the IDI are ill-founded for the reasons  I  have
    already set out in [20] above.   I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the
    appellant falls within the provisions of para 398(c) as the  respondent
    was entitled to regard the offending as causing serious harm.

38.  It follows that I must  consider  whether  para  399  or  399A  applies
    because if not,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
    outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in those  paragraphs.   It
    is accepted that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his children who are under the age of 18, are in  the
    UK and are British citizens.  The issues to be considered  are  whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the children to live  in  the  country  to
    which the appellant is to be deported  and whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh for them to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the  appellant:  (para
    399(a)(ii)(a) and (b)).

39.  The issue of undue harshness  has  been  considered  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ  617.   Laws
    LJ said as follows:

         "22. I turn to the interpretation of  the  phrase  'unduly  harsh'.
             Plainly it means the same as in  s.117C(5)  as  in  rule  399.
             'Unduly harsh' is  an  ordinary  English  expression.   As  so
             often, its meaning is coloured by its  context.  Authority  is
             hardly needed for such a proposition but is  anyway  provided,
             for example, by VIA Rail Canada [2000] 193 DLR  (4th)  357  at
             paras 35 to 37.


         23.  The context in these cases invites emphasis  on  two  factors,
             (1) the public interest in the removal  of  foreign  criminals
             and (2)  the  need  for  a  proportionate  assessment  of  any
             interference with article 8  rights.   In  my  judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors.  The first  of  them  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by parliament in s. 117C(1).  S.117C(2) then  provides
             (I repeat the provision for convenience):


                  'The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal'.


         24.   This  steers  the  Tribunals  and   the   Court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the public interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.   Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   'unduly   harsh'
             provisions  from  their  context.   It  would  mean  that  the
             question of undue hardship would  be  decided  wholly  without
             regard to the force of the public interest in  deportation  in
             the particular case.  But in that case the  term  'unduly'  is
             mistaken for 'excessive' which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history".


40.  Therefore, the assessment of undue harshness in this  context  requires
    regard to be had to all the circumstances with  proper  regard  to  the
    public interest, the impact  on  family  members  and  the  appellant's
    immigration and criminal history and of course I must take into account
    as a primary consideration the best interests  of  the  children.   The
    correct approach has been set out by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v Secretary of State  [2013]  UKSC  74.   The
    children's best interests are a primary consideration.   They  are  not
    determinative but should be considered in advance of other matters  and
    no other single consideration should be regarded as more important.

41.  When assessing the best interests of the  children  of  the  family,  I
    take into account the ISW report at A/B 1-37 and the addendum at SA/F1-
    8.  In his first report the social worker sets out his conclusion  that
    deporting the appellant would not be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children. He set the wishes of the children and says at [86]  that  any
    decision that compels the breakup of this family unit  is  contrary  to
    the children's  best  interests  so  much  that  the  risk  of  further
    separation due to deportation is of irreversible harm to them  by  that
    break up. He further expresses the view  that  removing  the  appellant
    from the family unit is likely to have a negative impact on his  wife's
    ability to meet her children's needs and that if he is  separated  from
    the family unit that could have an impact on the quality of  care  that
    is given by her to the children.


42.  In his supplementary report of 11 May 2017 he makes the point  that  EW
    has chosen his  GCSE  subjects  and  it  is  a  critical  time  in  his
    education.  AW has now started in reception and EW is in year 1 and  is
    described as an active class member.  In  his  conclusions  the  social
    worker says that it is  his  considered  view  that  the  children  are
    currently settled in the care of their parents who are supporting  each
    other to enable them to meet their developmental needs and the  current
    structure, routine and stability is  of  paramount  importance  in  the
    three children's lives and that removing the appellant from the  family
    unit would not be in the best interests of the children and  would  not
    be consistent with  safeguarding  and  promoting  their  welfare.   The
    supplementary bundle also includes a long research report on the impact
    of family breakdown on children's wellbeing prepared for the  Institute
    of Education, University of  London  2009.   I  have  also  taken  into
    account the reports and letters from  the  children's  schools  and  in
    particular the recent reports at SA/B1-9.

43.  I accept that in the present case that the wishes  and  best  interests
    of the children are for them to remain in the  family  home  with  both
    their mother and  father  and  to  remain  at  their  present  schools.
    However, I must keep in mind, as the Court of  Appeal  said  in  EJA  v
    Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 10, that there  must  be  relatively
    few cases in which there is a meaningful relationship between a  parent
    and children where deportation of the parent, with consequent  physical
    separation, will not have an adverse impact on the children. Whilst the
    best interests of the children are a primary consideration, they can be
    outweighed by the public interest considerations particularly in  cases
    of serious criminality.

44.  I must  also  consider  the  position  of  the  appellant's  wife,  and
    particularly the impact on the welfare of the children if she were left
    to cope by herself without his presence.  I accept that she has  had  a
    very difficult background and upbringing, as set out  in  her  evidence
    and witness statements.  I also accept that, having resorted to class A
    and B drugs in the past, she has now freed herself from them.  However,
    she is still receiving medical treatment and support, as set out in the
    medical evidence. The letter from her GP of 24 March 2015 (A/D4) refers
    to the distress and impact to  the  whole  family  of  the  appellant's
    pending deportation as being enormous. She refers  to  the  appellant's
    wife as struggling  with  the  severe  exacerbation  of  stress-related
    depression and having suicidal thoughts.   The letter from the  medical
    practice of 5 May 2017 (SA/C1-2) refers to her  being  supported  "with
    her worsening mental-health issues" and  expresses  concern  about  her
    mental-health.  Looking at her background as set out in  her  evidence,
    the medical evidence and the statements of her brother-in-law at A/B61,
    her son, LA, at A/B63-4 and her aunt and uncle at A/B69,  I  find  that
    there is a very  real  risk  that  she  would  have  very  considerable
    difficulty in coping by herself with her three children.  I accept that
    she has no-one else to turn to who could provide the support  that  the
    appellant provides: see the further statements from her  sister,  uncle
    and aunt at AS/A48-9.  I also accept that she was unable to  settle  in
    Jamaica for the reasons given in her statement of March 2016 at [5]-[8]
    and [52]-[54] (AS/A33, 40-41).

45.  I must also take into account the public interest  in  deportation  and
    the fact that the respondent was entitled to regard this as  a  serious
    offence so bringing the appellant within para  398(c).   The  appellant
    made his position by leaving with his family for  Zambia  but,  on  the
    other hand, when it became clear that his  wife  could  not  cope  with
    living there and returned  with  the  children  for  the  UK,  he  also
    returned to join them and to face the consequences of the offences  for
    which he had been arrested. The fact that  the  appellant  had  in  his
    possession a large quantity of cannabis gives rise to concern about the
    basis of the  plea  accepted  by  the  prosecution.   However,  in  his
    sentencing remarks the judge addressed that issue and commented that  a
    judge could only see what was on the papers of a  drug  case  and  that
    those who prosecuted and investigated it would have  more  information.
    He noted that the police had been satisfied that the money found in the
    premises were not the proceeds of crime  and  that,  having  given  the
    matter careful thought  and  discussions  having  taken  place  between
    Counsel, the officers  in  the  case  and  the  reviewing  lawyer,  the
    prosecution had decided to accept the plea on the basis set forward.

46.  The basis of the plea is set out at A/E1-2.  The  appellant  said  that
    he pleaded guilty to supplying cannabis on the following basis.  In his
    culture cannabis was a way of life and when  he  came  to  the  UK,  he
    continued to smoke it. He accepted that he  had  supplied  cannabis  to
    others but not on a commercial basis and that he  would  simply  supply
    friends and family with the smoke  but  it  would  not  be  financially
    rewarded.  At A/E3-4 there is a letter from  the  higher  advocate  who
    represented the appellant at the Crown Court confirming that the  judge
    sentenced the appellant on that basis and adds:

           "The judge found that the sentencing guidelines  starting  point
           was a community order but as [OC] had served a lengthy period  on
           remand the judge concluded that it would not be fair to give  him
           a community order when he had  already  spent  time  in  custody.
           Consequently, the judge sentenced him to 136 days on counts 2 and
           3 to run concurrently, the sentence was calculated to  facilitate
           his immediate release."

    I accept what the higher advocate says about the reasons for the length
    of the sentence with the clear inference that, but for  being  remanded
    in custody or if reports had been obtained, the likelihood is that  the
    appellant would have been sentenced to a community order.

47.  When assessing whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  children  to
    return with the appellant to Jamaica, I take into account the fact that
    the family did live in Jamaica from 2003  to  2005  but  I  accept  the
    evidence that the appellant's wife found this very difficult and  I  am
    satisfied that she and the children would face considerable hardship in
    living in Jamaica and that the interruption to their current education,
    in particular EW's, would have a serious impact on the children. I also
    accept that it would be very harsh  for  the  appellant's  children  to
    remain in the UK without him not least in the light of  the  continuing
    concerns about their mother's mental health and her ability to cope  as
    a lone parent.

48.  Looking at the evidence as a whole, I find  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children either to have to leave  for  Jamaica  with  the
    appellant or remain in this country  without  him.   A  combination  of
    factors and their cumulative effect satisfy me that this would  be  the
    case:  firstly, it is in the best interests of the children for them to
    remain within their current family home with both parents and for their
    education not to be disturbed; secondly, I am satisfied that there  are
    very real concerns as to whether the appellant's wife would be able  to
    manage and hold the family together without the help she receives  from
    the appellant; thirdly, in the light of the basis on which the plea was
    accepted,  this  offence,  whilst  serious,  was  less   serious   that
    originally appeared to be the case; fourthly, this was the  appellant's
    first offence save for the breach of bail condition, which arises  from
    his arrest for these offences and fifthly, I accept that the  appellant
    genuinely regrets his actions both in purchasing such a large  quantity
    of cannabis and in seeking to evade  the  consequences  by  taking  his
    family to Zambia. Applying the approach set out in MM (Uganda), I  find
    that in the circumstances of the appellant  and  his  family  that  his
    deportation would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  and  that  the
    requirements of para 399(a)(ii) (a) and (b) are met.

49.  In the light of this finding, I need not  consider  whether  there  are
    very compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paras
    399 and 399A such as to outweigh the public interest in deportation nor
    need I deal with the submissions based on  the  principle  set  out  in
    Zambrano.    I should add that after I made the error of law  decision,
    the judgment of the CJEU (Grand Chamber) in Chavez-Vilchez ECtHR 10 May
    2017 C113/15 has been issued and indicates that a  more  fact-sensitive
    and individualised approach should be taken in  assessing  this  issue.
    However, in the light of my findings on  the  appeal  under  the  Rules
    there is no need for me to re-open this issue.

50.  The judgment of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali has made it clear  that
    the Rules do not provide  an  exclusive  code  for  the  assessment  of
    article 8 and that the obligation remains on the Tribunal  to  make  an
    assessment of proportionality when considering whether a decision  made
    under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect  for  a
    private and family life under article 8.  I will briefly  consider  the
    appeal in the alternative outside  the  Rules.  Here  again,  the  best
    interests  of  the  children  are  taken  into  account  as  a  primary
    consideration and the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals must be given proper weight in the light of the provisions of
    the Rules and, more significantly, the provisions of s.117B  and  C  of
    the 2002 Act as amended.

51.  Dealing with the provisions of s.117B in so far as they  apply  to  the
    appellant, he is able to speak English and is financially  independent.
    In the past he  has  run  his  own  haulage  business  which  not  only
    supported himself and his family but also  generated  employment.   His
    presence in the UK has been in accordance with  the  Rules.   When  his
    leave expired he returned to Jamaica with his wife.   When  the  family
    returned to the UK, the appellant  obtained  entry  clearance  and  was
    subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain.  S.117C provides  that
    the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest and  the
    more serious the offence, the greater is that public interest.  Where a
    foreign criminal has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    four years or more the public interest  does  not  require  deportation
    where the applicant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying partner or a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child and the effect of deportation on the partner or
    child would be unduly harsh.  This provision raises  factors  virtually
    identical to those considered under para 399(a)(ii).

52.  I must also take into account the  relevant  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
    and in particular the Maslov [2008] ECHR 46  criteria.   These  require
    consideration  of  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the   appellant's
    offences.  The offence of possession of cannabis with intent to  supply
    is a serious offence but the Crown Court accepted  that  the  appellant
    had bought the cannabis for his own use and for supply  to  family  and
    acquaintances with no financial gain so leading the  judge  to  pass  a
    more lenient sentence than otherwise would have  been  the  case.   The
    appellant has no previous convictions save for the  related  breach  of
    bail offence and has not  committed  any  further  offences  since  his
    conviction.  On balance, I accept that his expressions of regret relate
    not to just to the fact that he was caught but also to his  involvement
    in criminal activity.  I accept his evidence that  he  has  now  ceased
    using cannabis and is all too well aware of the effects  his  behaviour
    has had on his family.  I take into account the children's ages and the
    fact they are UK citizens and  have  already  referred  to  their  best
    interests and to the reasons why I find that it would be  unduly  harsh
    to expect them to go to Jamaica or to remain in  this  country  without
    the appellant.  I also take into account  the  effect  the  appellant's
    removal would have on his wife and the consequential impact on the life
    of the family in this country.

53.  Clearly deportation would  be  an  interference  with  the  appellant's
    right to respect for his family life and that of his family.  It is  in
    accordance with the law and is for the  legitimate  aim  of  preventing
    disorder and crime within article 8(2). The  critical  issue,  adopting
    the words of Lord Reed at [50] of Hesham Ali,  is  whether  giving  due
    weight to the strength  of  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    deportation, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh  it
    and that in  general  only  a  claim  which  is  very  strong  or  very
    compelling will succeed.  For the reasons I have  given,  I  find  that
    this is such a case and that deportation would be  disproportionate  to
    the legitimate aim.

Decision

54.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was in error  of  law  and  has
    been set aside.  I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal  against
    the deportation order on both immigration and human rights grounds.




Signed                                  Dated: 28 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


