
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12392/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st February 2019                         |On 5th April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           Ms ADAR MOHAMED HUSSEIN
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Agata Patyna (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Howells (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lebasci, promulgated on 29th August 2018, following a hearing  at
    Columbus House in Newport on 28th July 2018.  In the determination, the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia, was born on 15th March 1953, and
    is a female.  She appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent,
    dated 30th September 2017, refusing her application for entry clearance
    to the UK on the basis of her family life with her daughter, Sahra [A].



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is 65 years of age, has a family life
    with her sponsoring daughter, which can be described as  "exceptional";
    has  no  other  family  life  independent  of  her  daughter;  and  the
    Appellant's daughter in the UK cannot relocate to Ethiopia to care  for
    her mother, because she has no right of residence there.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the documentary evidence, presented on behalf of
    the Appellant, was not challenged at  the  hearing  by  the  Presenting
    Officer (paragraph 17).  The Appellant's sponsoring daughter in the UK,
    had been brought up by her aunt, who took her away when she was 3 years
    of age because of the  war  in  Somalia,  until  much  later  when  the
    sponsoring daughter overheard the aunt talking to two other women about
    the circumstances in which the sponsoring daughter had been taken away,
    such that it was only then that she realised, that she had a mother who
    was now living in Ethiopia.  This is important because "the history  of
    Ms [A]'s relationship with her mother and how they came to be  reunited
    was not challenged" by the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing  (see
    paragraph 20).

 5. This history was that the sponsoring daughter, Ms [A], at the age of 18
    years, in 2014, went in search of her  mother.   After  two  months  of
    searching she travelled to the border of Ethiopia and found her  mother
    working for a family there who  gave  her  refuge  in  return  for  her
    looking after their animals (paragraph 19).  It is this that  made  the
    relationship between mother and sponsoring daughter so "exceptional".

 6. Thereafter, the sponsoring daughter set about findings  ways  in  which
    she could provide some security and  stability  for  her  mother.   She
    decided it was not safe to take her back  to  Somalia.   She  therefore
    took her to Ethiopia where she found a woman who agreed to  look  after
    her mother for regular payment.  The sponsoring daughter, Ms [A],  sent
    money on a regular basis for three years thereafter.  However, she then
    discovered that the woman, in whose care the Appellant was staying, was
    keeping the money for herself, and not spending it on her mother.

 7. Ms [A], the daughter, then made further  alternative  arrangements  for
    the mother to be looked after by somebody else until March 2017.   That
    other person left Ethiopia and that is why  the  arrangement  ended  in
    March 2017.  The judge observed that "since that time the Appellant has
    been sharing a house with a Somali family in Ethiopia and  Ms  [A]  has
    been sending money to her, so she could pay for her life and expenses".
     The judge went on to say that, "I find Ms [A] did what  she  could  in
    relation to her mother's living arrangements after they  were  reunited
    in 2014.  I also accept she has been making regular payments to support
    her mother in Ethiopia" (paragraph 21).

 8. In terms of the medical condition of the  Appellant,  the  judge  noted
    that there was a medical certificate from  the  Hayat  Hospital,  dated
    21st April 2017, and this suggested  that  the  Appellant  had  Type  2
    diabetes (paragraph 23).  There was evidence before the judge that  the
    Appellant needs help in looking after herself, but there was no medical
    evidence to this effect (paragraph 24).  The judge also held that there
    was no objective evidence about the systems of health or social care in
    Ethiopia before the Tribunal  (paragraph  25).   There  was  a  medical
    report from Dr Teklu, but the judge concluded that this report was  "of
    limited assistance" because he  had  only  met  the  Appellant  on  two
    occasions before writing the report (paragraph 25).

 9. The appeal was allowed on the basis that "the continued  separation  of
    the  Appellant  from  her  daughter  has  a  special  impact  and   the
    circumstances justify a finding that  this  is  an  exceptional  case".
    This is because Ms [A] "was separated from her mother at a  very  young
    age and for many years she believed her mother had willingly given  her
    into the care of her aunt", and it was only after  Ms  [A]'s  discovery
    that "she was essentially abducted and had  not  been  told  the  truth
    about what happened" that she realised what had happened and this  "had
    a very significant impact on her and resulted in her becoming estranged
    from the only  family  she  had  knowledge  of  up  until  that  point"
    (paragraph 29).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge  had  wrongly  utilised
    Article 8 ECHR as a general dispensing power, substituting  this  power
    for the Rules, once it was found that the Appellant could  not  satisfy
    the Rules.  This devalued the public interest in maintaining a fair and
    just system of immigration control.

12. On 11th December 2018, the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal.



Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 21st February 2019, Mr  Howells,  appearing
    on behalf of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  argued  that  the
    Appellant had not produced evidence of long term  medical  care  needs.
    The judge allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  "outside  the  Immigration
    Rules" on the basis that this was an "exceptional" case.   However,  in
    doing so, the judge did  not  consider  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise, because this required a consideration  of  the  Section  117B
    public interest in favour of immigration control.

14. Second, this was of added importance, given that the judge had observed
    that the Appellant did not speak English, and despite the fact that the
    judge observed that "there is a real possibility, given  her  age,  she
    will require potential significant levels of healthcare and thus become
    a burden on UK taxpayers" (paragraph 27).

15. For her part, Ms Patyna submitted that the judge had  not  ignored  the
    Section 117B  considerations  at  all.   But  the  fact  remained,  she
    submitted, that the relationship was absolutely crucial to the  finding
    of family life in this case.  The judge did refer to all  the  factors.
    Consideration was given to Section 117B, as it was to  the  Immigration
    Rules, and so there  could  be  no  error  of  law.   Long  established
    authority, such as in the case of Marcx  v  Belgium,  established  that
    there would be "interference" in family life, if it is not  allowed  to
    develop normally.

16. In reply, Mr Howells submitted that, although the judge had  considered
    the Section 117B factors at paragraph 27  of  the  determination,  when
    alluding to the fact that the Appellant  did  not  speak  English,  and
    would potentially require significant levels of  healthcare,  this  was
    not factored into the findings of fact eventually made at paragraph  29
    of the determination.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.   The  facts  of  this  case  are
    uncontested.  When the sponsoring daughter was a young child, her  aunt
    clandestinely took her away from the Appellant, because of  the  strife
    in Somalia, moving together to Ethiopia, and then  eventually  settling
    in the UK.  The sponsoring daughter had always been led to believe that
    her mother had given up on her, and only found out the truth  in  2009.
    At that stage, the sponsoring  daughter  immediately  embarked  upon  a
    search for her mother and eventually found her  living  on  the  border
    with Ethiopia in 2014.  She has since then been supporting  her  mother
    both financially and emotionally.  None of this is in contention.

18. The Secretary of State challenges the decision  of  the  judge  on  the
    basis that Article 8 ECHR was used as a "general dispensing power" once
    it had been found that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  In putting such an argument, one  must  be  careful
    not to imply that just because an appeal fails  under  the  Immigration
    Rules,  it  is  bound  also  to  fall  under  freestanding  Article   8
    jurisprudence, because with regard to the latter, there  has  to  be  a
    proportionality assessment carried out.

19. In this case, the judge's finding that family life existed between  the
    Appellant and her sponsoring daughter in the UK, is unchallenged.   The
    judge applied the principles in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31,  in  that
    the relationship between the two adults  was  one  of  dependency  that
    involved more than normal emotional ties.  That decision is set out  at
    paragraph 26 of the determination.

20.  Thereafter,  the  judge  presented  a  structured  approach   to   the
    determination of the issues before him.  It  is  true,  as  Mr  Howells
    submits, that the Section 117B considerations were set out at paragraph
    27.  However, after that the judge went on to say that  "the  remaining
    issues to be considered are  whether  the  decision  is  necessary  and
    proportionate" and in that regard  made  reference  to  the  well-known
    decision in Huang [2007] UKHL 11, even observing that  decisions  taken
    in the pursuit of lawful  operation  of  immigration  control  will  be
    proportionate in the majority of cases (paragraph 28).

21. The crux of the decision, however, then fell to be  made  at  paragraph
    29, where the judge observed that "it is necessary to be  sensitive  to
    the facts of this case".  Given the unchallenged factual background  to
    the family life between the Appellant and her sponsoring daughter,  the
    judge concluded that "the continued separation of  the  Appellant  from
    her daughter has a special impact" on both of  them.   As  far  as  the
    sponsoring daughter was concerned, "she has done all she can to support
    her mother from a long distance, but this has been challenging  and  Ms
    [A] clearly finds the continued  separation  from  the  Appellant  very
    difficult".

22.  It is on this basis that the judge concludes  that  the  circumstances
    here are "exceptional".  It is  also  on  this  basis  that  the  judge
    concludes that the two of them, between them, "are effectively the only
    family each other has" (paragraph 29).  It would have been otherwise if
    the judge had neglected to mention the Appellant's inability  to  speak
    English and to support herself.

23. But these public interest considerations were expressly mentioned.   It
    was then concluded that the Respondent Secretary of State had  accepted
    that the financial requirements under the Rules  were  satisfied.   The
    judge himself was satisfied that the Appellant's daughter had the means
    to provide for the Appellant.

24. Consideration was properly given to the fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    likely to  require  healthcare  in  the  future.   However,  given  the
    "exceptional" nature of the facts, the judge concluded that the  appeal
    fell to be allowed.  In terms of the well established Rule in R  (Iran)
    [1985],  there  is  nothing  here  to  suggest  that  the  decision  is
    "perverse" or "irrational", and the decision stands.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction is made.

27. The appeal of the Secretary of State is refused.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd April 2019
