
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12670/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 November 2016                          |On 09 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                     VSB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bazini, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14:  The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity was not granted at an earlier stage of the  proceedings,  however,
a motion was made before this Tribunal for an anonymity order.  We  find  it
appropriate to make such an order with respect to the  appellant  given  the
interests of the children in this case.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family.  This direction applies to both  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is  a  national  of  India  born  on  1  June  1979.   He
    currently resides in India.  He made representations  on  27  May  2014
    that he should not be deported which were  considered  to  be  a  human
    rights claim.  On 14 August 2014 the respondent provided the  appellant
    with a notice of decision in which it was determined that the  decision
    to deport the appellant was  not  a  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
     Further the respondent determined that the decision was not  a  breach
    of Article 3 thereof.  The respondent certified the claim under Section
    94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  on  6  April  2007  with  a
    marriage visa valid from 6 March 2007  until  6  September  2007.   The
    appellant married on 3 September 2007 and applied for further leave to
    remain on 4 September 2007 which was granted until 12  September  2009.
    Indefinite leave to remain was granted on 2 March 2010.

3.   On 10 March 2014 the appellant was  convicted  of  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm and on 9 April 2014 he was sentenced to  a  term  of
    twelve months' imprisonment.  On 12 May 2014 the appellant  was  served
    with notice of liability to be deported.

4.   The appellant appealed the above decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and it dismissed his appeal under the Rules.

5.   He sought permission to appeal the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    to the Upper Tribunal and this was granted on 20 September 2016.

Family History

6.   The appellant is in a long term relationship with KO who is  a  British
    national whose family came from East Africa.  They met  in  2008,  when
    they   were   both   married.    They   have    had    a    clandestine
    friendship/relationship since  2008,  even  when  KO  was  forced  into
    another marriage arranged by her  family  in  2011.   They  have  lived
    openly together since February 2014 in a relationship akin to marriage.



7.   However, since 2008 and the  breakdown  of  KO's  first  marriage,  the
    appellant has been the father figure to KO's  daughter  K.   Her  birth
    father has had no contact with her since the breakdown of the  marriage
    in 2008.

8.   On 19 November 2014 KO gave birth to a daughter, T who is the child  of
    the appellant.  The appellant was granted  bail  in  November  2014  to
    support and be present at the birth of T.  He remained living  with  KO
    and the children until he was  detained  and  then  removed  to  India.
    During that time KO ran her business, and the  appellant  looked  after
    the children.

Submissions for the Appellant

9.   The submissions were in a  number  of  discrete  chapters  and  can  be
    summarised as follows.

10.   Counsel's  first  submission  was  this:  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    approach to the issue of unduly harsh was wrong in law in light of  the
    guidance in MM (Uganda) and Another v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617, 450 at paragraphs 22 to 26.

11.  It was  his  submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  no
    findings as to how the conviction of  the  appellant  impacted  on  the
    public interest.  There was no reference to the  issue  of  risk  which
    arose as a result of his conviction.  There was no consideration of the
    appellant's statement as it impacted on the issue of risk.   There  was
    no consideration of the appellant's immigration history.  All of  these
    were relevant and material factors which should have formed part of the
    consideration in terms of the unduly harsh test.  Where these  had  not
    been considered there was a clear material error of law.

12.  Secondly the First-tier Tribunal had  failed  to  properly  assess  the
    expert evidence.  It did not state adequate reasons for  rejecting  the
    terms of the report, if indeed it rejected the terms of the report.  It
    says at paragraph 48 it fully took into account the report, but it does
    not articulate what it took from the report regarding the issues before
    it, if anything.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal wholly failed to deal with the child T.   There
    was no reference to the child T by the Tribunal when it considered  the
    core issues before it.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal's reasons for holding  that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for  K  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    appellant  were  unsound.   In  particular  there  appeared  to  be  no
    consideration of what would be in the best interests of the children.

Reply on Behalf of the Respondent

15.  Mr Clarke began by reminding the Tribunal that the First-tier  Tribunal
    was not aware of the case of  MM  at  the  time  when  it  issued  this
    determination, that decision only having been published on the same day
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision was promulgated.

16.  At the outset of his submissions on the  substance  of  the  matter  he
    accepted that the case was a thin one.  However, it was his  submission
    that the decision could be sustained.

17.  With respect to the way that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  dealt  with
    the expert report it was his position that  it  was  rightly  concerned
    that it was prepared on the basis of a two hour interview.  Beyond that
    it was his position that the report amounted to no  more  than  setting
    out  what  happened  where  a  family  was  separated  in  the   normal
    circumstances of a deportation.  It added nothing.

18.  With reference to the failure by the First-tier Tribunal  to  refer  to
    the child T it was his position this did not amount to a material error
    of law in that there was full consideration of the position of K.   The
    First-tier Tribunal found with regard to  her  that  notwithstanding  a
    parental relationship with the appellant, it would not be unduly  harsh
    for her to remain in the UK with her primary carer, namely her  mother.
    It was his position that  the  crux  of  the  assessment  fell  on  the
    relationship with K in that T was only 16 months old at the date of the
    hearing.  It was his position that if T had been considered  separately
    then on the basis of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  regarding
    K the outcome would not have  been  materially  different.   There  was
    accordingly no material error of law.

19.   It  was  his  position  that  despite  not  being  aware  of  MM   the
    proportionality assessment was properly carried out  and  there  was  a
    full consideration of all relevant factors.

Error of Law

20.  I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  has  materially  erred  in
    law in that its approach to  the  issue  of  unduly  harsh  is  not  in
    conformity with the guidance in the case of MM.  Laws LJ  at  paragraph
    24 observes as follows:

         "What is due or undue depends on all the circumstances, not  merely
         the impact on the child or partner  in  the  given  case.   In  the
         present  context  relevant  circumstances  certainly  include   the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history."

21.  I do not believe that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  properly  engaged
    either with the appellant's criminal history or  with  his  immigration
    history.  In particular no account seems to be  taken  as  to  how  the
    index conviction impacts on the public interest given that the  offence
    was at the lower end of the  spectrum  identified  by  the  rules.   No
    consideration is given to the issue of on-going risk of offending.   In
    the  appellant's  statement  the  background   circumstances   to   his
    committing the index offence are set out.  A very specific trigger  for
    this  offence  is  set  out.   That  trigger  no  longer  exists.    No
    consideration of that trigger having disappeared  is  set  out  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination.  It does not appear to have  taken
    into account the immigration history.  In this case the  appellant  was
    not unlawfully in this country  at  the  relevant  time.   This  was  a
    further relevant factor which require to be taken  into  consideration.
    Overall the consideration of unduly harsh falls well short of  what  is
    required in terms of MM.  This amounts to a material error of law.

22.  With respect to the First-tier Tribunal's finding regarding the  expert
    report the following is said at paragraph 45 of the determination:

         "I have noted the report from ......, an independent social worker.
          I have noted that this is an  independent  report  that  has  been
         based on a single meeting with KO, K and T on 24 March  2016.   The
         report was written on the same day.  I have considered  the  report
         and while I have noted its conclusions  I  am  concerned  that  its
         conclusions tend  to  be  generalisations  which  is  possibly  not
         surprising in light of the speed of its preparation."

23.  On one reading of that paragraph the First-tier Tribunal appears to  be
    rejecting the terms of  the  report  in  their  entirety  or  at  least
    attaching no weight to any of these.  If that is a correct reading then
    I conclude the reasons for its rejection are inadequate.   The  reasons
    for rejection fail entirely to consider the detail of the report  which
    dealt with among other matters as set out in the grounds of appeal:

         "(a) The nature of the relationship between the  appellant,  KO,  K
             and T.

         (b)  The impact of the appellant's removal from the  UK  on  family
             members.

         (c)  Whether the appellant's removal is in the best interests of  K
             and T taking into account K's own wishes and feelings.

         (d)  The importance of K's contact with the appellant and  how  his
             removal has impacted on T and K.

         (e)  The effect of the decision on the family  of  the  appellant's
             removal from the UK."

    These are not generalities, these matters rather go to the core of  the
    issues which were before the First-tier Tribunal.

24.  The First-tier Tribunal if it was rejecting the  entire  terms  of  the
    report had to give better reasons than those set out in paragraph 44 as
    to why it was rejecting the report.   The  grounds  for  rejecting  the
    report are at best cursory and in my view not soundly based.  As I have
    set out above the report deals with more than mere generalities.

25.  However, it may be that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  reject  the
    report in its entirety as at paragraph 48 it states:

         "I have fully taken into account Miss ...... report."

    If it did take the terms of the report into account it  has  failed  to
    set out what matters were accepted and what matters were  rejected  and
    what weight was given to the various parts  of  the  report.   It  does
    appear that the First-tier Tribunal has failed to engage properly  with
    the content of this report.

26.  Overall, whatever approach was taken by the First-tier Tribunal to  the
    expert report it is materially flawed and I am  in  no  doubt  that  it
    amounts to a material error in law.

27.  Turning to the failure to refer to T within the determinative  part  of
    its decision I note the position of the respondent and  I  am  entirely
    unconvinced that this answers the appellant's point.  T is entitled  to
    a proper assessment of her individual position.  It cannot be a  proper
    approach to T's position that it should be looked at  entirely  through
    the lens of her sibling without any consideration of her position as an
    individual.  I without  difficulty  hold  that  this  failure  to  deal
    individually with T's position amounts to a material error of law.

28.  I also find myself in agreement with the appellant's Counsel  that  the
    specific findings regarding the issue of unduly harsh made with respect
    to K at paragraph 48 of the determination are deficient.  This  finding
    does no more than state that she and her mother are remaining in the UK
    and therefore it is not unduly harsh for K to remain in the UK  without
    the appellant.  This fails to consider all of the other  factors  which
    are relevant in such an assessment.  First  it  fails  to  take  proper
    account of the expert report.  All that is said  regarding  the  expert
    report is that it, has been fully taken into account.  It does not  say
    how it has been taken into account, what parts of it  have  been  taken
    into account and how it has affected the decision on the  issue  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  This simply reinforces the material error  of
    law point to which I have earlier referred.  Moreover,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was bound to consider the  issue  of  what  was  in  the  best
    interests of K.  There is no reference to what is in the best interests
    of this child.  This I believe is a further material error of law.

Decision

29.  For the foregoing reasons I find that  there  are  material  errors  of
    law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot  be  sustained  and  is
    therefore set aside.  I remit the matter to a  differently  constituted
    First-tier Tribunal in order that this matter can be reheard.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

