
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12022/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 28th October 2019                  |On 05 November 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               Md saiful islam
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Poddar, Solicitor from Hamlet Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cohen promulgated on 17 April 2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    application dated 15 May 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 8 February 1981,  who
    originally entered the United Kingdom with leave to remain as a student
    in 2009, initially  valid  to  28  February  2013  and  extended  to  8
    September 2015.  The Appellant's leave to remain  was  curtailed  on  1
    October 2013 to expire on 30 November 2013, during which time he made a
    further application for leave to remain  which  was  granted  until  16
    January 2017.  The Appellant most  recently  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his private  life  established  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  human  rights  application  the
    basis that he did not meet the suitability grounds for a grant of leave
    to remain, specifically that  he  had  relied  on  a  fraudulent  TOIEC
    English language test in 2013: and on the basis  that  the  substantive
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules were not met.
     This was because the Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom  for
    long enough and  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in Bangladesh given he still  speaks  the  language,  has
    family there and has  spent  the  majority  of  his  life  there.   The
    Respondent did not find any  exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Judge Cohen dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 17  April
    2019.  There was a finding in the Appellant's favour in relation to the
    suitability  criteria  and  the  TOIEC  allegation  made  against   the
    Appellant, which  was  found  not  to  have  been  established  by  the
    Respondent who relied on the wrong English language certificate number,
    the wrong date of birth and the wrong test centre such that  the  Judge
    was not satisfied that this Appellant had used  deception  as  claimed.
    However, the appeal was dismissed on human rights  grounds  as  in  any
    event the Appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules, it was not accepted that he had lost  contact
    with his family in Bangladesh and he would be able to re-establish  his
    private life there utilising  the  skills  and  qualifications  he  had
    obtained.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on four  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in failing  to  follow  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Khan & Ors v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1684 by allowing the  appeal  following  the
    positive finding which would  have  required  the  Respondent  to  have
    granted the Appellant 60 days leave to remain in  order  to  regularise
    his  immigration  status.   Secondly,  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    materially erred in  law  in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    separating the decision under appeal into  a  suitability  part  and  a
    distinct substantive part when the former is inexorably linked  to  the
    refusal as a whole.  Thirdly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    erred in law by failing to have regard to the considerations set out in
    section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    specifically that the Appellant could  speak  English,  is  financially
    independent and formed his private life at a time when he  was  in  the
    United Kingdom  unlawfully.   Finally,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in attaching no weight to evidence based  on  a
    discrepancy, a conclusion which does not follow logically.

 6. At the appeal hearing, Mr Poddar on behalf of the Appellant was  unable
    to coherently expand upon the first ground of appeal or explain in what
    way the Court of Appeal's decision in  Khan  assisted  the  Appellant's
    case, or identified a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Rather than making any reference to the  specific
    facts or details of the consent agreements reached by  the  parties  in
    Khan, Mr Poddar made repeated and un-evidenced  factual  assertions  of
    what essentially amounted, at their highest, to substantive  unfairness
    to the Appellant who is said  to  have  suffered  because  of  a  false
    allegation made against him meaning that he was unable  to  finish  his
    studies in the United Kingdom.

 7. There was however no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal or  before
    me in the Upper  Tribunal  that  this  Appellant  had  been  unable  to
    continue or complete any of his studies,  to  the  contrary  there  was
    evidence that he completed his  previous  course  in  2015.   There  is
    nothing  to  suggest  any  further  studies  were  commenced,  nor  any
    application for further leave to remain as a student was made prior  to
    or since the expiry of his leave to remain in January  2017.   Nor  was
    there any evidence of any difficulties encountered by the Appellant  in
    obtaining a CAS because of TOIEC other issues as  also  claimed  by  Mr
    Poddar.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Kotas noted that there was a  reference
    by the Appellant in the cover letter to his most recent application for
    leave to remain to being unable to complete his studies in  the  United
    Kingdom because of the previous revocation  of  his  sponsors  licence,
    although that appears to relate to the  situation  in  2013,  following
    which the Appellant was granted further leave to remain  as  a  student
    and did in fact complete his course in 2015.

 9. In relation to the case of Khan, Mr Kotas noted that this argument  was
    not raised before the First-tier Tribunal and in any event  was  of  no
    assistance to the Appellant in this appeal as it is not  authority  for
    the proposition that an appellant who is successful having had a  right
    of appeal, would be given any further period  of  leave  to  remain  to
    regularise  his  or  her  immigration  status.   The  appeals  in  Khan
    specifically related to the situation where  a  person  had  no  remedy
    against a curtailment or section  10  decision  and  in  which  it  was
    accepted fairness required a right of appeal should be given to  enable
    a challenge to be  made  to  an  allegation  of  deception  in  English
    language test.

10. Neither party made any oral submissions on the second, third or  fourth
    grounds of appeal.

Findings and reasons

 1. The grounds of appeal advanced in this case are, on all grounds, wholly
    without merit and it is notable  that  the  Appellant's  solicitor,  Mr
    Poddar was unable to advance any coherent argument in support of any of
    them at the oral hearing.

 2. In relation to the first ground of appeal, the Appellant's reliance  on
    the Court of Appeals  decision  in  Khan  is  wholly  misplaced.   That
    decision  concerned  individuals  who  had  pursued  applications   for
    Judicial Review against decisions by the Respondent  to  curtail  their
    leave to remain, refuse further leave to remain and/or made section  10
    removal decisions against them solely on the basis of an allegation  of
    deception in a TOIEC English language test, against which there was  no
    statutory right of appeal or suitable remedy including  a  fact-finding
    determination on the issue of deception.  In such cases, agreement  was
    reached between the parties and the Respondent  accepted  that  it  was
    appropriate for this issue of deception should be determined within the
    context of a statutory human rights appeal.  The  further  consequences
    were set out in paragraph 43 of the decision, quoting  paragraph  8  of
    the note from the Respondent which was as follows:

         "Nonetheless, for the avoidance of doubt, the SSHD confirms that:

         (v) For those individuals whose leave was curtailed, and where that
         leave would still have time to  run  as  at  the  date  of  an  FTT
         determination that there was no deception, subject to  any  further
         appeal to the UTA, the curtailment decision would be withdrawn  and
         the  effect...  Would  be  that  leave  would  continue   and   the
         individuals would not be disadvantaged in  any  future  application
         they chose to make;

         (vi) For those whose leave has been curtailed,  and  whether  leave
         would in any event have expired  without  any  further  application
         being made, the Respondent will provide a further  opportunity  for
         the individuals to obtain leave with the  safeguards  in  paragraph
         (iii) below.

         (vii) For those whose leave had  expired,  and  who  have  made  an
         interim application for further leave to remain which  was  refused
         on ETS grounds, the effect of an FTT determination that  there  was
         no deception would be that the refusal  would  be  withdrawn.   The
         applicant in question was still have an outstanding application for
         leave to remain  and  the  Respondent  will  provide  them  with  a
         reasonable  opportunity  to  make  any  further  changes   to   the
         application which would be considered  on  the  basis  of  the  not
         having employed any deception  in  the  obtaining  of  their  TOIEC
         certificate, and they would in  no  way  be  disadvantaged  in  any
         future application they chose to make.

         (viii)   (iii) In all cases, the Respondent confirms that in making
         any future decision he will not hold any previous Leave  caused  by
         any erroneous decision in relation  to  ETS  against  the  relevant
         applicant, and will have to take into account all the circumstances
         of each case.

         (ix) However, the Respondent does  not  accept  that  it  would  be
         appropriate for the Court now to find him to the approach  that  he
         would take towards still further applications in  the  future,  for
         example by stating  that  each  applicant  has  already  accrued  a
         certain period of lawful leave.  The potential factual permutations
         of the cases that may need to be considered are many  and  various.
         In some cases, for example, it will be apparent that, whilst on the
         facts as presented at the appeal and appellant's human rights claim
         is successful, he would not  been  able  to  obtain  leave  at  the
         previous states.  Again, this issue will have to be dealt with on a
         case-by-case basis."

   3. The Appellant's situation is markedly different from those  appellants
      in Khan in respect of whom and their  cohort  agreement  was  reached.
      Although there was an earlier curtailment decision in 2013 in relation
      to this Appellant, it was not in relation to any  TOIEC  or  deception
      issue which was first raised by the  Respondent  only  in  2018.   The
      earlier curtailment appears to be due to the  loss  of  the  sponsor's
      licence and the Appellant's circumstances were  relatively  unaffected
      given that he was able to successfully  apply  for  further  leave  to
      remain as a student during which time he completed his course in 2015.
       The Appellant has not made any  further  applications  for  leave  to
      remain as a student and has only made  an  application  for  leave  to
      remain on human rights grounds, which  carried  with  it  a  statutory
      right of appeal.  Although an initial decision on 24 January 2018  was
      certified meaning that such a right of appeal was exercisable only out
      of country, that decision was withdrawn and replaced with  a  decision
      dated 15 May 2018, which provided an in-country right of appeal, which
      is the subject of these proceedings.  The Appellant has therefore been
      provided with an effective  remedy  and  determination  of  the  TOIEC
      deception issue, upon which findings were made in his  favour  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  His circumstances do not fall within any of  the
      scenarios set out above in Khan, which in  any  event  relate  to  the
      effect of  and  consequent  actions  of  the  Respondent  following  a
      successful appeal and  are  not  directed  to  any  action  or  result
      required by the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The Appellant's case appears to be that following  a  finding  in  his
      favour on the allegation of deception, his  appeal  should  have  been
      allowed on human rights  grounds,  further  to  which  the  Respondent
      should have granted him a further period of  leave  to  remain.   That
      approach is flawed as  a  ground  of  appeal  and  in  establishing  a
      material error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  following
      reasons.  First, any period of leave to remain following a  successful
      appeal is a matter for the Respondent  and  could  not  in  any  event
      constitute a material error of law by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who
      have no power to direct any  particular  grant  of  leave  to  remain.
      Secondly, the Appellant has  not  been  disadvantaged  at  all  by  an
      unappealable decision from the Respondent, but in fact has always  had
      a right of appeal against refusal of his human rights claim, which  he
      has exercised.  Thirdly, the respondent's refusal of leave  to  remain
      was not solely on TOIEC/deception grounds but also on the  basis  that
      the Appellant could not  meet  the  other  requirements  of  paragraph
      276ADE of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to  remain.   The
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal goes on to similarly find that the
      Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for  a
      grant of leave to remain, nor that in any event his removal  from  the
      United Kingdom would be a disproportionate interference with his right
      to respect for private life under Article 8 of the European Convention
      on Human Rights.  For the reasons set out below, the second, third and
      fourth grounds of appeal establish no material error  of  law  in  the
      assessment of the First-tier Tribunal on human rights grounds  and  as
      such, it was inevitable that the appeal would  have  to  be  dismissed
      even with positive findings for the Appellant on the deception issue.

   5. For these reasons, the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Khan  does  not
      provide any assistance to this Appellant  and  there  is  no  material
      error of law in the First-tier Tribunal not expressly  considering  or
      following it, particularly in circumstances where it  was  not  raised
      relied upon by the Appellant at first instance.  Khan primarily  deals
      with the consequences of  an  appeal  by  the  Respondent  in  certain
      situations where findings made in the course of an appeal against  the
      refusal of a human rights application impact on  an  earlier  decision
      based on an allegation of deception which did not  itself  generate  a
      right of appeal.  It does not expressly require or direct a First-tier
      Tribunal to take any particular course of action in cases such as  the
      present one.

   6. The second ground of appeal is framed as a reasons challenge but which
      in fact suggest that the Respondent's reasons for  refusal  cannot  be
      lawfully separated into two distinct parts.  There is no  legal  basis
      for such an  assertion  and  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to deal with all of the reasons for refusal,  which  in  this
      case clearly raised two distinct issues under the  Immigration  Rules.
      The Appellant's  application  did  not  fail  solely  for  suitability
      reasons based on the  allegation  of  deception,  but  also  on  other
      grounds; as did his appeal.  There is no error of law in the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal on this basis.

   7. The third ground of appeal suggests that the First-tier Tribunal erred
      in failing to give  any  positive  credit  to  the  Appellant  in  the
      balancing exercise for his ability to  speak  English,  his  financial
      independence and his private life being formed  when  he  was  in  the
      United Kingdom lawfully, pursuant to section 117B(2), (3) and  (5)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   However,  that  is
      contrary to the decision in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2010] EWCA Civ 803 that at best, such factors  as  English
      language and financial independence are neutral.  There is no error of
      law on this ground.

   8. Finally, the fourth ground of challenge amounts only to a disagreement
      with the findings in paragraph 18 of the decision in which it was  not
      accepted that the Appellant had lost all connections with  his  family
      members.  It does not identify any error of law in the  decision,  let
      alone one which would be material to the outcome of the appeal.

   9. For all of these reasons, there is no error of law in the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal and the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
      human rights grounds is therefore confirmed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]             Date     31st October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
