
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12763/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 April 2019                               |On 30 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                            Taonga Trish Manhovo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (PRY1576973)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Benfield of Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors (Merton Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 27 February  2000.   She
    applied in June 2017 to join the sponsor, her  mother,  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her father also resides in the UK but is separated  from  her
    mother.  The application was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

2.   At the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Judge  on  8  June  2018  the
    appellant's then representative submitted that the matter  should  have
    been considered under paragraph 297 of HC 395 rather than Appendix  FM.
    The First-tier Judge stated, somewhat confusingly, that "it appears  to
    me that a decision under either is within  the  both  provisions."   He
    appears to have  opted  for  paragraph  297  and  refers  to  paragraph
    297(i)(e) which raises the issue of sole responsibility.  The judge did
    not find that the appellant came  within  that  sub-paragraph  or  sub-
    paragraph (f).

3.   The judge dismissed the appeal.  In the application for  permission  to
    appeal among other points it was argued that the judge  had  determined
    the appeal under the wrong sub-paragraph.  The application should  have
    been determined under paragraph  297(1)(a)  on  the  basis  that  "both
    parents are present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom...".   It  was
    submitted that the right sub-Section had been brought to the  attention
    of the First-tier Judge in the skeleton argument.

4.   The judge it was further submitted had misunderstood the way  in  which
    the appeal was brought and had made no reference to 297(i)(a)  at  all.
    He had misunderstood the footing of  the  appeal  before  him  and  had
    failed to apply the correct part of the Rules.  Further complaints were
    made in relation to Article 8 and in relation to the  judge's  approach
    to the evidence generally giving rise to the perception of unfairness.

5.   Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 13 March 2019.   It  is
    common ground that the reference in the  grant  of  permission  to  the
    failure to consider  paragraph  271(i)(a)  should  be  taken  to  be  a
    reference to paragraph 297(i)(a).

6.   Counsel relied on the grounds and submitted that the  First-tier  Judge
    had made a fundamental error in his approach.

7.   It was accepted by both sides that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    erred in considering the matter under Appendix FM.  The appellant was a
    child at the material time and  the  matter  was  correctly  determined
    under paragraph 297.  Both the appellant's parents were settled in  the
    United Kingdom and the appropriate paragraph was paragraph 297(i)(a) as
    the appellant had contended.  It was submitted that it was  clear  that
    the application had been made by reference to both parents being in the
    UK.

8.   Mr Tarlow helpfully accepted that the First-tier  Judge  had  erred  in
    considering  the  appeal  under  the  wrong   sub-paragraph.    Counsel
    requested that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    fresh hearing.  Mr Tarlow agreed with that approach.

9.   I have come to the conclusion that  there  is  no  alternative  to  the
    course proposed by the parties.  The First-tier  Judge's  approach  was
    flawed from the start and the factual  assessment  was  based  on  that
    flawed appreciation of what was involved.  Among the other points  made
    was that the judge had raised  matters  which  were  not  in  issue  in
    relation to the credibility of  the  witnesses.   There  were  question
    marks about his approach to the issue of family  life  given  that  the
    appellant was at the relevant time a child and numerous other  concerns
    including the conflation of issues  under  the  Rules  with  Article  8
    outside the Rules.   Realistically  nothing  can  be  saved  from  this
    determination  and  accordingly,  given  the  extent  of   fact-finding
    required, a remittal of this appeal to be heard afresh by  a  different
    First-tier Judge is the only reasonable outcome.

10.  This appeal is allowed by  agreement  for  the  matter  to  be  reheard
    afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.

Anonymity Direction

12.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

13.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award and as the matter has yet to  be
    finally determined it would be premature to consider the matter. I make
    no fee award


Signed                                  Date: 25 April 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
