
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/12855/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 April 2019                     |      On 8 May 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                             Md Mutaharul Hassan
                             (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner, instructed by Universal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant and proceedings

 1. The appellant Secretary of State was the respondent before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and for ease of reference I refer to the parties as  they
    were then.

 2. The appeal  is  brought  with  permission  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 21 January 2019.

 3. The grounds in summary are that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (FTTJ)
    erroneously self-directed when allowing the appellant's appeal  against
    the  last  in  a  series  of  decisions  refusing  to  regularise   his
    immigration status on article 8 grounds.

Background

 4. The immigration history as set out in the reasons for refusal  was  not
    disputed. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  with
    his mother and sister on 11 June 2006. On arrival he  was  12  years  8
    months and 22 days old. The respondent had been  made  aware  that  the
    appellant had not left  when  he  was  listed  as  a  dependent  in  an
    application that  his  sister  made  in  2007.  The  application  as  a
    dependent was refused in 2010, and the appellant advised he should  put
    in an application in his own right. In the event the appellant made his
    1st application 2 years later in 2012, and when it was refused 2  weeks
    later he applied again in March 2012, and that application was  refused
    in April 2013. In November 2014 the appellant made an  EEA  application
    as a carer for his maternal grandmother. That application  was  refused
    in January 2015. Next an application was made in 2018 on the  basis  of
    family and private life and long residence, the refusal decision is the
    subject of this appeal.

 5. The refusal set out that  no  partner,  parent  or  dependent  children
    bringing him within the family life rules of appendix FM. So far as his
    private life  arising  from  his  length  of  residence,  applying  the
    Immigration Rules at paragraph 276 ADE (1), he  had  not  obtained  the
    necessary eligibility either through the requisite pathways of:

      a) 10 years lawful residence, or

      b)  20 years continuous residence, or

      c) being under 25 years of age having lived continuously in the UK for
         at least half of his life, or

      d) there  were  no  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
         Bangladesh: his argument that his  11  years  11  months  residence
         combined with the strong relationships he had established with  his
         sister's aunts and uncles and cousins and  friends  in  the  United
         Kingdom, loss of contact with  people  in  Bangladesh,  absence  of
         financial resources or accommodation in Bangladesh would result  in
         degrading and inhumane conditions, was rejected. In this regard the
         respondent gave prominence to the  demonstrated  contact  with  the
         appellant's mother in Bangladesh and his ability to return to  her,
         the appellant's continued  cultural  links  to  Bangladesh  through
         extended family members  in  the  UK  of  Bangladeshi  origin,  his
         language abilities, including his A grade in Bengali, his  numerous
         other  educational  qualifications.  The  conclusion  is  that  the
         appellant would  be  able  to  use  his  qualifications  to  obtain
         employment in Bangladesh.

      e) the respondent concluded the application  revealed  no  exceptional
         circumstances outside of the  rule  and  removal  would  not  cause
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for him or others  as  those  here
         had close family ties with others and their immediate  family  life
         and private lives would be maintained even were the  appellant  not
         here. The appellant would be able to rebuild his life in Bangladesh
         with support of family.



The decision at the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The FTTJ held the  decision  to  return  the  appellant  to  Bangladesh
    disproportionate taking as his starting point in  the  context  of  the
    immigration rules at paragraph 276 ADE that although the appellant  did
    not meet the requirements I set out at paragraph 5 (c)  above,  at  the
    date of application or decision or hearing, he would be able to  do  so
    four months later when he would be able to show that he had spent  half
    his life in the United Kingdom as opposed to  Bangladesh.  Further  the
    FTTJ found that the delay or failure to  take  enforcement  proceedings
    against the appellant reduced the public interest  in  the  appellant's
    removal.

The hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal

 7. Mr Kandola submitted, in line with  the  grounds,  that  the  FTTJ  had
    erroneously  self-directed  in  respect  of  the  article  8  balancing
    exercise in the following ways:

      a) Wrongly concluding that the appellant would ever be able  to  bring
         himself within the rule at 276 ADE  requiring  the  applicant  have
         spent half their life under the age of 25  in  the  United  Kingdom
         because given his age even at the point of  entry  he  had  already
         spent more than half of his life under the age of 25 in Bangladesh.

      b) Wrongly reducing the weight to be attached to the  public  interest
         in immigration control when saying that because there had  been  no
         enforcement proceedings there is shown no strong public interest in
         his removal. Although the FTT J says that he is following the  case
         in fact his conclusion runs contrary to EB  (Kosovo)  v  SSHD  2008
         UKHL 41. Whilst the respondent had  not  taken  enforcement  action
         that  was  an  insufficient  basis  to  say  that  the  appellant's
         immigration history cannot be criticised, and in doing so the  FTTJ
         failed to take into account that the appellant ought to  have  left
         the UK when his application was refused.

      c) In light of the finding that the position  in  Bangladesh  did  not
         amount to very significant obstacles to integration, and  the  fact
         that his private life, allowing that when he arrived as a  teenager
         in 2006 he had no agency, since he became  an  adult  in  September
         2011, has been unlawful, the judge needed to give full reasons  for
         concluding why there were compelling circumstances in  the  context
         of article 8.

 8. Mr Turner for the appellant argued that  the  grounds  amounted  to  an
    irrationality challenge because there had been no misdirection  as  the
    FTTJ was entitled to find that delay in initiating removal  proceedings
    was a relevant  matter  which  acted  to  reduce  the  public  interest
    attached to immigration control, as was the  fact  that  the  appellant
    would, shortly after the hearing date, be able  to  show  that  he  had
    spent half his life in the United Kingdom.

 9. In those circumstances given the finding that the appellant  enjoyed  a
    strong private life in the United Kingdom and  little  if  anything  to
    return to in Bangladesh he was entitled to reduce  the  weight  to  the
    public interest in immigration control  and  draw  the  proportionality
    balance in favour of the appellant.

Discussion

10. Paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules sets out that to be eligible
    under the private life rule the  FTTJ  found  pertinent  the  appellant
    would have to have shown as at the date of application, which  in  this
    case was 13 March 2018, that he was under 25 years old  and  had  spent
    half of his life in the United  Kingdom.  It  is  self-evident  on  the
    undisputed chronology he had  not.  Mr  Kandola  reiterated  the  point
    correctly made in the grounds that the appellant was never going to  be
    able to succeed under that rule because he had already reached the  age
    of 12 years and 8 months in 22 days before he entered the UK on 11 June
    2006.

11. The FTTJ does not set out the rule. As the  decision  at  paragraph  46
    shows the FTTJ was not assisted by the  appellant's  representative  Mr
    Saini of counsel when he submitted that because the appellant was  born
    in September 1993 and entered at 12 years and 9 months  in  June  2006:
    "he is about 4 months away from meeting the rule at 276 ADE (1)."

12. The FTTJ plainly found the argument significant as shown  at  paragraph
    41, "I suggested that the appellant has spent about half his life  here
    and that brings in the private life rules."

13. The FTTJ goes on  to  mis-state  the  position  at  paragraph  58  "the
    appellant is only months away from meeting  the  Private  Life  Rules".
    Self-evidently no regard is paid to the age cap of 25 years.  The  FTTJ
    considers the human rights position at paragraph 64 "through  the  lens
    of my findings  above",  and  again  at  paragraph  67  refers  to  the
    appellant "being very close to success under the  rules  which  affects
    proportionality." I am satisfied the FTTJ has misapprehended  the  rule
    and incorrectly believed that the appellant would be able to  meet  the
    rules shortly.

14. The FTTJ concludes that the decision was correct at the  date  that  it
    was made, which was May 2018, but that the duty on him was to  look  at
    the position  as  at  the  date  of  hearing  and  that  was  "the  key
    difference" because as at the date of hearing "there is  a  nudge  over
    the centre point founded on material facts", plainly  the  only  matter
    which had changed between the  date  of  application  of  the  date  of
    hearing was the passage of time and the FTTJ's  mistaken belief that as
    a result the appellant would shortly be able  to  satisfy  the  private
    life immigration rules.

15. I find it is evident that on the face of the decision the  misdirection
    about the rule infected the proportionality exercise  as  conducted  by
    the FTTJ, and so is material. Mr Turner asserts that it was open to the
    judge to find that the policy as set out in the  rules  should  not  be
    restricted to  a  bright  line  of  25  years  in  the  proportionality
    exercise, that is a different argument than that before  the  FTTJ  and
    offers an alternative reasoning to that of the  FTTJ  as  justification
    for the allowing of the appeal  and  does  not  deal  with  the  FTTJ's
    misapprehension of the rule.

16. I find the error means that the FTTJ's article 8 assessment is  flawed,
    and the decision cannot stand.

17. There is the additional matter of  the  treatment  of  the  absence  of
    enforcement proceedings.

18. The  FTTJ  concludes  that  the  failure  of  the  respondent  to  take
    enforcement proceedings reduces the public interest. The FTTJ found the
    absence of enforcement proceedings significant as can be seen from  his
    reference at paragraph 64 that since the appellant was never  subjected
    to any attempt at removal:

      a) "there are shown no strong public interest in his removal", and

      b) at 67: "has a long track record of precarious status but  the  Home
         Office never removed him and he has nearly half his lifetime  here,
         which means he is very close to success under the  rules  and  that
         does affect proportionality. The Home Office  have  given  no  sign
         that they actively seek to prevent that outcome", and

      c) at 69: "the balancing exercise under Razgar should not  give  great
         weight to the public interest in lawful  immigration  control.  The
         appellant has on his side the infringement of his  own  rights  and
         those of British citizens in his circle. It would be  unjustifiably
         harsh to be separated from them all after some 12  years,  with  no
         clear return date. I might  not  have  not  formed  that  view  had
         removal procedures been started but my  information  is  that  they
         never were."




19.  E B Kosovo (FC) (Appellant) v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  41  says  this  about
    delay:
    Delay

    13.  In Strbac v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA
    Civ 848, [2005] Imm AR 504, para 25,  counsel  for  the  applicant  was
    understood  to  contend,  in  effect,  that  if  the  decision  on   an
    application for leave to enter or remain was made after the  expiry  of
    an unreasonable period of time, and if the application  would  probably
    have met with success, or a greater chance of success, if it  had  been
    decided within a reasonable time, and  if  the  applicant  had  in  the
    meantime established a family  life  in  this  country,  he  should  be
    treated when the decision is ultimately made as  if  the  decision  had
    been made at that earlier time. For reasons given by Laws LJ, the Court
    of Appeal rejected this submission, for which it held Shala v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 233, [2003] INLR  349
    to be no authority. While I consider that Shala was correctly decided
    on its facts, I am satisfied that the Court  of  Appeal  was  right  to
    reject this submission. As Mr Sales QC for the respondent pointed  out,
    there is no specified period within which, or at which, an  immigration
    decision must be made; the facts, and with them government policy,  may
    change over a period, as they did here; and the duty of  the  decision-
    maker is to have regard to the facts, and any policy in force, when the
    decision is made. Mr Drabble QC, for the appellant, did not  make  this
    submission, and he was right not to do so.

    14.  It does not, however, follow that delay  in  the  decision-making
    process is necessarily irrelevant to the decision. It may, depending on
    the facts, be relevant in any one of three ways. First,  the  applicant
    may during the period of any delay develop closer personal  and  social
    ties and establish deeper roots in the community  than  he  could  have
    shown earlier. The longer the period of the delay, the likelier this is
    to be true. To the extent that it is true, the applicant's claim  under
    article 8 will  necessarily  be  strengthened.  It  is  unnecessary  to
    elaborate this point since the respondent accepts it.

    15.  Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way. An immigrant
    without leave to enter or remain is in  a  very  precarious  situation,
    liable to be removed at any time. Any relationship into which  such  an
    applicant enters is likely to be, initially, tentative,  being  entered
    into under the shadow of severance by administrative order. This is the
    more true where the other party to the relationship  is  aware  of  the
    applicant's precarious position. This has been treated as  relevant  to
    the quality of the relationship. Thus in R (Ajoh) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 655, para 11, it was noted that
    "It was reasonable to expect that both [the applicant] and her  husband
    would be aware of her precarious immigration status". This reflects the
    Strasbourg court's listing of factors relevant to  the  proportionality
    of removing an immigrant convicted of crime: "whether the  spouse  knew
    about the offence at the time when he or  she  entered  into  a  family
    relationship" see Boultif v Switzerland (2001)  33  EHRR  1179,  para
    48; Mokrani v France (2003) 40 EHRR 123, para 30. A  relationship  so
    entered into may well be imbued with a sense of  impermanence.  But  if
    months pass without a decision to remove being made, and months  become
    years, and year succeeds year, it is to be expected that this sense  of
    impermanence will fade and  the  expectation  will  grow  that  if  the
    authorities had intended to remove the applicant they would have  taken
    steps to do so. This result depends on no  legal  doctrine  but  on  an
    understanding of how, in some cases, minds may work and it  may  affect
    the proportionality of removal.

    16.  Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight  otherwise
    to be accorded  to  the  requirements  of  firm  and  fair  immigration
    control, if the delay is shown to be  the  result  of  a  dysfunctional
    system which yields unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes. In
    the present case the appellant's cousin, who entered  the  country  and
    applied for asylum at the same time and whose position is not  said  to
    be materially different,  was  granted  exceptional  leave  to  remain,
    during the two-year period which it took the respondent to correct  its
    erroneous decision to refuse the appellant's application on grounds  of
    non-compliance. In the case of JL (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court of
    Appeal at the same time as the  present  case,  there  was  a  somewhat
    similar pattern of facts. JL escaped from Sierra Leone  with  her  half
    brother in 1999, and claimed asylum. In 2000 her claim was  refused  on
    grounds of non-compliance. As in the appellant's case this decision was
    erroneous, as the  respondent  recognised  eighteen  months  later.  In
    February 2006 the half brother was granted humanitarian protection. She
    was not. A system so operating  cannot  be  said  to  be  "predictable,
    consistent and fair  as  between  one  applicant  and  another"  or  as
    yielding "consistency of treatment between one aspiring  immigrant  and
    another". To the extent that this is shown to be  so,  it  may  have  a
    bearing on the proportionality of removal, or of requiring an applicant
    to apply from out of country. As  Carnwath  LJ  observed  in Akaeke  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 947, [2005]
    INLR 575, para 25:

    "Once it is accepted  that  unreasonable  delay  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State is capable of being  a  relevant  factor,  then  the
    weight to be given to it in the particular case was a  matter  for  the
    tribunal"

20. Applying that here, this is not a case where it has  been  shown  there
    has been  delay  by  the  respondent  in  reaching  a  decision  on  an
    application, so that what ensued was a catalogue of  failures  to  deal
    with the application, and over a very long period,  and  for  which  no
    explanation was ever made.

21. This is not a case where it can be said:

         "delay is shown to be the result of a  dysfunctional  system  which
         yields unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes."

22. The history  of  applications  and  refusals  as  an  adult  shows  the
    appellant has long been aware that the  respondent  does  not  consider
    that because he came here as a visitor at the age of 12 with his mother
    and sister, and his mother returned to Bangladesh leaving  him  in  the
    care of her sister and brother in the United Kingdom, or his family and
    private life with his relatives and school and community  as  developed
    here, gives him any entitlement to remain.

23. Following the rationale of the Supreme Court at  [25]  -  [35]  of  the
    judgement in Patel v SSHD [2013] UK at 72 the  Secretary  of  State  is
    entitled to proceed on the basis that those unlawfully in the  UK  will
    leave of their own accord; s/he is not obliged to remove an  individual
    or issue a removal decision.

24. This is however a case where the failure to take enforcement action has
    allowed the appellant to deepen the character and quality of  his  ties
    in the UK relevant to the article  8  assessment,  and  in  that  sense
    strengthen factors which can operate in his  favour  in  the  balancing
    exercise. Accordingly, whilst the failure to remove  the  appellant  is
    relevant in the first two ways described in EB Kosovo there is no basis
    upon which to find, as the judge did  here,  that  the  third  has  any
    application. I am satisfied that  this  error  has  also  infected  the
    assessment of the public interest and the article 8 assessment.

Error of law decision

25. In summary the approach of the FTTJ  has been to treat the  failure  to
    enforce removal as a culpable delay detracting from the  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest, and appears to have concluded  that  a
    character and quality of private life which would  not  otherwise  have
    resulted in a breach of article 8, when viewed through the lens of that
    culpability and taking account of the likely prospect of success  in  a
    future application,  allowed  a  factual  matrix  which  he  would  not
    otherwise have found sufficient to "tip" the weight  of  the  balancing
    act in the article 8 assessment from the usual position of  it  resting
    with the public interest in immigration control to the interests of the
    individual. For all the reasons  above  I  find  the  approach  to  the
    proportionality exercise conducted by the FTTJ is flawed  by  incorrect
    self-direction and set the decision aside.

The remaking of the decision

26. On the face of the grounds the factual matrix was not significantly  in
    contention. The First-tier Tribunal hearing was recent (January  2019),
    and there has been no rule 32  application  to  adduce  any  additional
    evidence. I indicated I proposed remaking the  decision.   I  canvassed
    with the representatives whether I  would  need  to  hear  any  further
    evidence  before  re-making  the  decision.  Mr  Turner  briefly   took
    instructions and told me that there had been no change in  circumstance
    but invited me to allow his client to adopt his witness statement and I
    concurred. Mr Turner had no supplemental questions. Mr Kandola  briefly
    confirmed with the appellant his recollection of his responses  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and in particular he could return to live with his
    mother in the family home in Bangladesh. He queried with him as to  why
    it was that he thought he would not,  as  a  25-year-old,  be  able  to
    establish himself in Bangladesh and obtain work,  particularly  as  his
    evidence was that he has now obtained an accountancy qualification. The
    appellant told me that as his spoken Bengali was the Sylheti dialect he
    did not have the language skills to be  able  to  use  his  accountancy
    qualification in Bangladesh, and that his obtaining an "A" grade in his
    Bengali qualification would not help him because it was some years  old
    and he had not practised the language  or  script.  There  was  no  re-
    examination.

27. Mr Kandola submitted that given that at paragraph 73 the FTTJ had found
    the position to be finely balanced only being nudged  over  the  centre
    point to the appellant's side following erroneous self  direction,  and
    nothing new had transpired in the evidence today, once the errors  were
    corrected, it was plain that this was a perfectly ordinary private life
    case adequately covered by  the  application  of  the  rules.  Applying
    section 117 little weight should be attached to  the  private  life  at
    least since the appellant was an adult as the entirety was  established
    in the face of unlawful status. The findings were that there  were  not
    very significant obstacles to his integration to Bangladesh,  he  would
    be able to readapt, had the language skills, support of his mother  and
    family, accommodation was available, and he was employable. Removal was
    proportionate.

28.  Mr  Turner  on  the  other  hand,  submitted  that   the   appellant's
    circumstances were exceptional and compelling. My error of law decision
    was horribly wrong but even discounting the  errors  I  had  found  the
    positive outcome would not be affected. The facts were exceptional: the
    appellant had now lived half his life here, and the policy rule  should
    not be treated as having a bright line at the age of 25.    He  pointed
    to the FTTJ's finding that the  appellant  had  a  strong  private  and
    family life in the UK with his maternal aunt and her family  with  whom
    he had initially lived, and his maternal uncle and his family with whom
    he now lived, he was very well integrated into the country as shown  by
    the number of people  who  had  attended  the  first-tier  tribunal  to
    support him,  and with his long residence and the finding that  he  had
    little private or family life in Bangladesh ( as he  barely  knows  his
    mother) the decision was plainly disproportionate. To suggest he  could
    use his accounting qualifications was akin to suggesting that Mr Turner
    could  expect  to  use  his  bar   qualifications   in   a   common-law
    jurisdiction;  plainly  without  the  necessary  language  it  was  not
    possible. Mr Turner said that the appellant should not be punished  for
    his mother's decision to dump him here. The failure of  the  respondent
    to take enforcement action meant that his private life was entitled  to
    respect and commanded leave to remain.



Discussion

29. The framework for my decision is Article 8 ECHR and I am guided by  the
    case of Razgar 2004 UKHL.  Whilst Mr Kandola in response to Mr Turner's
    submission sought to persuade me that  there  was  no  relationship  of
    dependence in the Kugathas sense so as to  establish  ties  beyond  the
    normal emotional ties between a young adult and his family. The grounds
    challenged  the  self-direction  rather  than  the  factual   findings.
    Specifically, there had been no challenge in the  respondent's  grounds
    to the FTTJ's conclusion that there was family life, and I had found no
    error of law in that regard. The threshold is not high.  The  appellant
    has always lived in the household of either his aunt or his  uncle  and
    remains living in the uncle's home now. His evidence to me is  that  he
    has continued in education,  obtaining  an  accountancy  qualification.
    Looked at in the round I am satisfied that I  should  not  disturb  the
    FTTJ's finding on family life.

30. I adopt  the  factual  findings  of  the  FTTJ  that  this  Bangladeshi
    appellant has a strong family and private life in the UK with his close
    relatives and within  his  local  community  and  that  the  disruption
    precipitated by removal amounts to a significant interference.  I  find
    the first two questions in Razgar are answered positively and the  case
    turns on the question of proportionality.

31. My decision in respect of remaking this  human  rights  appeal  is  not
    governed by  the  Immigration  Rules  but  I  must  not  disregard  the
    respondent's decision. If a rules-based entitlement is not  shown,  but
    the refusal of the application  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences such that refusal would not  be  proportionate,  then  the
    appeal  will  succeed  on  the  basis  that  outside  the   Rules-based
    provisions  there  are  "exceptional  circumstances".  It  remains  the
    position that the ultimate question for me is how a fair balance should
    be  struck  between  the  competing  public  and  individual  interests
    involved, applying a proportionality test. As Hesham Ali  v  SSHD  2016
    UKSC 60 makes clear the desired practice is to list out and  weigh  the
    competing factors  put  forward  and  balance  them,  informed  by  the
    provisions of section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

Factors argued in favour of removal

32. The Immigration Rules specify a number of routes relevant to  types  of
    family relationships and or lengths of residence  at  appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276 ADE, and of very significant  obstacles  to  integration.
    The appellant does not meet any of them. The appellant has no basis  to
    remain under the rules, not just in terms of his  length  of  residence
    but also in the context of the findings I have adopted that  there  are
    no very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in  Bangladesh.  In
    particular he has  close  relatives  in  Bangladesh,  accommodation  is
    available albeit cramped, he has the right accent and dialect for  life
    in that part of the country. More widely  he  has  a  qualification  in
    Bengali so there is "really strong proof of ties of language";  he  has
    qualifications sufficient to go to  University;  he  is  employable  in
    Bangladesh and can save his earnings to pay for further study there, or
    his family can be relied on, according to the evidence. He is an  adult
    with agency who has adapted to a different country and  could  re-adapt
    if he left. He has family support for fees.  The  FTTJ  found  that  he
    could also come back if given leave as a student, but "that  is  not  a
    certainty" and "would break his continuity".

33. The policy as reflected in the rules results  in  the  public  interest
    lying in the removal of the appellant. That then must  be  my  starting
    point in my article 8 proportionality or balance  sheet  assessment.  I
    give considerable weight to a decision which, as here,  is  correct  in
    terms of the Secretary of State's policy in relation to the  assessment
    of proportionality as set out in the rules and endorsed by  Parliament.
    He has also never been a qualifying child in  the  context  of  section
    117B (6) because due to the age at which he arrived in the  UK  he  has
    never accumulated 7 years residence as a minor and so  cannot  pray  in
    aid s117 B (6) of the NIAA 2002.

Neutral factors

34. The appellant has been educated in the UK, and it is not disputed  that
    he has good English language abilities. Although he is not  working  it
    was  not  suggested  that  he  would  not  be  self-sufficient  if  his
    immigration status permitted him to work. There is no dispute that  the
    appellant is a fit and healthy young adult.

Factors argued for against removal

35. Whilst section 117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    directs that I should give little weight to a family  or  private  life
    obtained in the face of a precarious or unlawful immigration status, as
    here, that is not to say that I can give it no weight.  Every  case  is
    fact sensitive and it is for me to decide. The character and quality of
    family and private life is well described in the FTTJ decision and  has
    not been challenged in the appeal to the UT and I  have  adopted  those
    findings. I do give it positive weight, not least because it  commenced
    when the appellant was a minor, and,  in  line  with  the  respondent's
    concluding in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  the  appellant's
    immigration history does not contravene the suitability requirements of
    the Immigration Rules, I do not penalise him on that account.

36. The appellant arrived as a young teenager at the age of 12 and so  most
    of his teenage development has occurred here. The appellant has adapted
    well to life in the United Kingdom. He  is  happily  ensconced  in  the
    bosom of his maternal family here, he has  done  well  in  school,  and
    subsequently in obtaining accountancy qualifications,  he  enjoys  good
    relationships with his sister,  maternal  aunt  and  uncle,  and  their
    children.  He has integrated in the local community as reflected in the
    witness evidence and his involvement in local cricket. Although this is
    not a case where for example the evidence shows that any  other  person
    will be significantly detrimentally affected by his absence, none being
    dependent on him, and he being at an age where naturally,  and  as  the
    arguments  acknowledge,  he  would  be  focussed  on   developing   his
    independent life spending time outside of his uncle's home, by  working
    for example, or by studying  at  university,  I  count  positively  the
    length of his residence from the age of 12, the strength of his  family
    and social ties, and the level of integration obtained over the period.



37. In terms of the character of family and private  life  here  Mr  Turner
    emphasised that his mother had "dumped" him, inferring  this  gave  his
    residence and development of family and private life here a quality not
    adequately encompassed in the  Rules.  Further  he  argued  significant
    weight should be given  to  the  difficulties  he  would  face  in  re-
    establishing himself and for  example  finding  accountancy  employment
    because of his limited abilities in Bengali because he ordinarily  uses
    the Sylheti dialect. I attach little weight to either point.  They  are
    answered on the evidence relevant to the issue of obstacles on  return.
    Contrary to the points initially made in the application process of his
    having lost contact with those in Bangladesh, as the  FTTJ  noted,  the
    evidence subsequently shows that the relationship is  maintained,  with
    his mother remaining in contact and supporting his appeal. Further  the
    FTTJ noted that whilst the appellant says his mother cannot financially
    support him, her financial position is not explained,  and  his  family
    here have in any event said they will fund  his  further  education  at
    university. There is nothing to suggest that support  is  dependent  on
    his being here. In respect  of  language  he  has  a  Bengali  language
    qualification and so plainly has some ability, and the evidence of  his
    having obtained a raft of qualifications shows he has  the  educational
    skills to improve as necessary. From the evidence he  appears  a  well-
    adjusted resilient and personable young man in his  mid-twenties,  with
    an established ability to build relationships with  others  and  engage
    socially.  I  am  satisfied  he  will  be  able  to  integrate  without
    significant difficulty.

38. Standing back and weighing the  positives  and  the  negatives  of  all
    factors relied upon I find that the balance falls clearly in favour  of
    the public interest in immigration control. There  is  nothing  in  the
    appellant's family  and  private  life  circumstances  individually  or
    cumulatively which outweighs the weight to be attached  to  the  public
    interest.

Decision

39. The SSHD has shown that the First-tier Tribunal decision  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal is marred by legal error and I have set it aside.  I
    re-make the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.




Signed                              Date 11 April 2019



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

