
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12128/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 26 October 2020                   |On 29 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             BELLA KVARTSKHELIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Georgia, born on  2  October  1983.   She
    came to the UK as a visitor in 2018.  After expiry of  her  leave,  she
    applied for leave to remain as the wife of a Georgian citizen  who  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

 2. The respondent refused that application on 1 July 2019.  The respondent
    declined to accept that there is a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor.

 3. The application also failed in various respects under the rules,  which
    the  appellant  does  not  dispute  -  immigration  status,   financial
    requirements, and English language.

 4. The appellant appealed to the FtT, stating in her grounds that  removal
    would end her family life, and that there were insurmountable obstacles
    or exceptional circumstances, as her previous partner  would  persecute
    her if she were to return to Georgia.  At the hearing, she  argued  her
    case on domestic violence she had suffered from her former husband  and
    risk of such treatment on return.

 5.  FtT  Judge  Aula  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 November 2019, because he rejected her account of her
    personal circumstances.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on the grounds that
    the judge (a) failed to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness and
    (b) failed to adequately consider her evidence of her marriage, and  of
    domestic violence.  The FtT refused permission, on the  view  that  the
    grounds were only disagreement.

 7. The appellant sought permission from the UT on the same grounds.  On 15
    July 2020 UTJ Owens granted permission, on the view that  although  the
    judge was properly able to  take  account  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence, he might have erred in failing to take account of
    quite substantial evidence that the relationship did exist.  Ground (a)
    was  thought  to  have  less  potential  merit,   given   the   primary
    responsibility on the appellant's representative, but was not excluded.
     It was pointed out that the materiality of any error had to  be  dealt
    with.

 8. The UT also issued directions with a view to deciding without a hearing
    (a) whether the FtT erred in law, and, if so (b) whether  its  decision
    should be set aside.

 9. Both parties have made submissions in response.  Neither has  suggested
    that a hearing is required.  The UT may now proceed, in terms of  rules
    2 and 34, to decide (a) and (b).

10. The appellant says that she should have been  considered  a  vulnerable
    witness due to her experience of domestic violence and  that  this  was
    "raised at the outset of the hearing".  On ground (b), she specifies at
    [19 - 21] of her submissions the extensive evidence of her relationship
    with the sponsor, and argues that the judge failed to take  account  of
    it,  relying  solely  on  discrepancies  with   her   entry   clearance
    application.   She  submits  that  this  error  led   to   absence   of
    consideration of insurmountable obstacles to family life being  carried
    on in Georgia "because of the interference of her  ex-husband  and  her
    family" and that the judge  "simply  failed  to  carry  out  a  factual
    enquiry of this sort".

11. The SSHD submits that there is no  record  of  the  vulnerable  witness
    aspect being raised, and no statement from counsel to support it; there
    was no allegation of an impact on her ability to give evidence; primary
    responsibility to raise the matter  was  on  her  side;  there  was  no
    challenge in the grounds to the numerous [adverse] credibility findings
    relating to her ex-husband; there was no challenge to  the  finding  at
    [30] that even if there was abuse, it was  historic;  she  remained  in
    Georgia for 4 years; there are no exceptional circumstances or  reasons
    preventing her return; it was correct to deal firstly with this  issue;
    and even if there were any errors, they were immaterial.

12. I find that the grounds do not disclose any error on a  point  of  law;
    and alternatively, if there is any error, that it is  not  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

13. The grounds and submissions are rather  ambiguous  on  whether  it  was
    contended throughout that the appellant was a  vulnerable  witness,  or
    that she claimed to be a victim of  domestic  violence;  matters  which
    might overlap considerably, but which are not one and the same.  It  is
    plain that far from being overlooked, the  latter  contention  was  the
    theme of the case.

14. The appellant did not refer to  the  guidance;  did  not  ask  for  any
    adjustment to be made to the  conduct  of  the  hearing;  and  has  not
    submitted that the discrepancies in her  evidence  could  be  explained
    away by her experiences or vulnerability.

15. What the judge was  analysing  by  reference  to  the  entry  clearance
    application was the appellant's  evidence  about  her  relationship  in
    Georgia, not her relationship in the UK.

16. The appellant's evidence about her past  relationship  in  Georgia  was
    hopeless, as explained by the judge at [26 - 30].  There is nothing  in
    ground (a) to disturb that conclusion.

17. The judge at [29] "totally rejects" the appellant's account.   However,
    it is plain from the decision as a whole that the rejection goes to the
    live issue identified at the hearing  by  her  counsel,  [24],  alleged
    domestic violence and problems on return.  Although  the  SSHD  doubted
    the appellant's relationship, that was not the focus in the  FtT.   The
    reason  for  not  mentioning  the  evidence  about  it  is  that   both
    representatives treated it as immaterial.

18. The judge's observation at [31] that the appellant had  the  option  of
    applying from Georgia and meeting the terms of the rules suggests  that
    his rejection of her account did not necessarily extend to her  current
    relationship.  Rather, it was beside the point.  Her case did not  fail
    because she failed to show that her relationship in the UK is  genuine.
    An explicit finding that it is  genuine  would  not  have  changed  the
    outcome.

19. There is also force in the respondent's submission  that  even  if  the
    appellant did suffer domestic  violence  in  Georgia,  and  taking  her
    account at its highest, that is a historic and local matter which  does
    not stand in the way of her return.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      26 October 2020
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





