
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: HU/12085/2017         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|Decision & Reasons Promulgated                                              |
|                                                                            |
|On 29 October 2018                                                          |
|On 9 November 2018                                                          |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                  |Respondent   |
|           |A T                                               |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |

                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify  the  original  appellant  as  any
such identification  may  lead  to  identification  of  his  son  who  is  a
vulnerable minor child. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the original appellant and his  child.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:

For the appellant:         Ms. A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer.
For  the  respondent:         Ms  S  Ferguson,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
                 Londonium Solicitors.

                            Decision and Reasons


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Samimi  (hereafter  the
    "judge" unless otherwise stated) who, in a decision promulgated  on  19
    July 2018 following a hearing on 12 July 2018, allowed the appeal of A.
    T. (hereafter the "claimant"), a national  of  Bangladesh  born  on  20
    January 1985, against a decision of the respondent of 27 September 2017
    to refuse his human rights claim of 16 December 2016.

 2. In relation to the Immigration Rules, the Secretary  of  State  refused
    the application on the ground  that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirement in S-LTR 4.2 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules. The Secretary of State considered that, in his application of 20
    April 2011  for  leave  to  remain,  the  claimant  had  used  a  TOEIC
    certificate that had been fraudulently obtained. The TOEIC  certificate
    had been issued by Educational Testing Service ("ETS") following a test
    supposed to have been taken by the claimant on 14 December 2011 at Opal
    College. It was concluded that a the claimant's  certificate  had  been
    obtained by the use of a proxy test taker. As a result, the  claimant's
    scores from the test taken on 14 December 2011 at Opal college had been
    cancelled by ETS.

 3. As a result of the fact that the claimant did not meet the  suitability
    requirement, the Secretary of State considered that the applicant could
    not succeed under EX.1(a) or EX.1(b) of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules or under para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. In relation to his
    Article 8 claim, the Secretary of State considered that, given the fact
    that the claimant had used deception to gain leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, it was proportionate  to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
    Bangladesh to enjoy family life there or, in the alternative,  for  him
    to return to Bangladesh and make an entry clearance application.

 4. The judge's decision did not deal  with  the  claimant's  private  life
    claim. The claimant did not file a cross-appeal and no issue was  taken
    before me in relation to the judge's failure to decide  the  Article  8
    private life claim.

 5. In dealing with the claimant's Article 8 family life claim,  the  judge
    dealt exclusively with the claimant's relationship with his  son,  born
    on 28 March 2015. The child was born to the claimant and his wife. They
    were married on 12 April 2014. The child is a British  citizen  and  is
    autistic. As at the date of the hearing before the judge, the  claimant
    and his wife had been separated for 3 years 1 month. There was evidence
    before the judge that the claimant had made  repeated  applications  to
    the family court in order to resume contact with his son.

 6. The judge's decision dealt with the claimant's claim  that  he  enjoyed
    family life with his son. Although  I  will  need  to  quote  from  the
    judge's decision later in my decision, it suffices to say, for  present
    purposes, that the judge found as follows:

     (i)  (paras  8-10(a)  of  her  decision)  that  the  claimant  had  not
         practised deception in obtaining his TOEIC certificate from ETS;

     (ii)     that he had taken,  and  intended  to  continue  to  take,  an
         active role in his son's upbringing and that he had a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his son.

      The  judge  therefore  purported  to  allow  the  appeal   under   the
         Immigration Rules.

     (iii)    The judge  also  said  that  she  allowed  "the  appeal  under
         Article 8 of ECHR grounds". This followed  her  assessment  of  the
         Article 8 claim outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  She  found  that
         removal  would  be  a  disproportionate   interference   with   the
         claimant's right to his family life with his son.

The Secretary of State's grounds and submissions

 7. There are three grounds. They challenge  both  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the claimant had not obtained his TOEIC certificate  by  deception
    (grounds 1 and 2) as well as her decision to allow the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules by reference to Appendix FM (ground 3).

 8. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

     (i) (Ground 1) In stating that the  respondent  had  not  produced  any
         specific evidence relating to the claimant's TOEIC certificate, the
         judge had overlooked considering the Secretary of State's bundle of
         documents (the "Secretary of State's bundle") submitted under cover
         of a letter dated 4 July 2018 in advance of the hearing  and  which
         contained such specific evidence, namely, the ETS  'look  up  tool'
         showing that the results of the claimant's test had been  cancelled
         by ETS and a second 'look up tool' which provided  a  breakdown  of
         the results for the tests taken on the day of the  claimant's  test
         and which stated the number and percentage of the tests  that  were
         invalid and that were questionable. The judge's failure to consider
         this evidence meant that the Secretary of State had not had a  fair
         hearing.

     (ii)     (Ground 2) The judge had misapplied the burden of  proof  when
         considering the deception issue. She was wrong  to  find  that  the
         initial evidential burden  had  not  been  met  as  the  Tribunal's
         decision in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of  proof)
         [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC)  makes  it  clear  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's evidence does meet the initial evidential burden. The judge
         erred by failing to consider whether the claimant had  provided  an
         innocent explanation and therefore erred  in  concluding  that  the
         Secretary of State had not discharged the overall legal  burden  of
         proof.

     (iii)    (Ground 3) The judge materially erred in law in  reaching  her
         decision on the Article 8  claim  irrespective  of  any  errors  in
         relation to the deception issue. The grounds contend that the judge
         materially erred in law in reaching her finding that  the  claimant
         had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his son. The grounds
         contend that the claimant  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
         Appendix FM given that he had  neither  access  to  nor  a  genuine
         parental relationship with his son  and  that  the  family  contact
         order that he had managed to obtain  required  him  to  complete  a
         course on how to manage and parent an autistic child before  he  is
         allowed unsupervised access to his son. The grounds state  that  it
         should be noted that it was the claimant who had abandoned his wife
         and autistic child in May 2017 only to seek contact as a  means  of
         remaining in the United Kingdom. It is  contended  that  the  judge
         failed to consider the context in which the  family  contact  order
         was obtained and that this failure infected the finding that  there
         was a genuine and subsisting relationship with a British child.

 9. I shall dealt with  the  parties'  submissions  in  the  course  of  my
    assessment.

Assessment

10. On page 11 of her decision, in the section under the heading "Notice of
    decision", the judge said:

         "I allow the Appeal under Immigration Rules.
         I allow the appeal under Article 8 of ECHR grounds".

11. However, the decision was dated 27 September 2017, i.e. after  s.82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002  Act")  had
    been amended with effect from 20 October 2014 by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014 so as to abolish rights of appeal against decisions made under the
    Immigration Rules and the ground of appeal that the decision was not in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules. The Tribunal's duty, as set  out
    in s.86, was also amended with effect  from  20  October  2014  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

12. By virtue of the amended version of s.82 of the 2002 Act,  a  right  of
    appeal only arises where the Secretary of State has decided  to  refuse
    an individual's protection claim or a human rights claim or has decided
    to revoke an individual's protection claim. By virtue  of  the  amended
    version of s.84 of the 2002 Act, the grounds of  appeal  are  similarly
    restricted. Insofar as relevant to this appeal, the amended version  of
    s.84 does not permit an individual to bring an  appeal  on  the  ground
    that the relevant decision is not in accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules. Under the amended version  of  s.86,  the  Upper  Tribunal  must
    determine, inter alia, any matter raised as a ground of  appeal.  Since
    the amended version of s.84 restricted the grounds of appeal so that it
    is not possible to appeal on the ground that the  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules,  it  follows  that  the  amended
    version of s.86 does not permit judges to allow  an  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

13. In the instant case, the claimant's human rights claim was made  on  16
    December 2016 and the decision was made  on  27  September  2017,  i.e.
    after ss. 82, 84 and 86 had been amended by the Immigration  Act  2014.
    Accordingly, the current versions of ss.82, 84 and 86,  as  amended  by
    the Immigration Act 2014, applied.

14. It follows that the judge had no jurisdiction to "... allow the  appeal
    under Immigration Rules". It was only possible for the judge  to  allow
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

15. Nonetheless, it is generally understood that, if any relevant  criteria
    set out in Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules are satisfied  so  that
    an appeal would have been allowed under the Immigration Rules  if  that
    right of appeal and ground of appeal were still available, the decision
    to refuse the individual's human rights claim would be disproportionate
    for that reason alone, when  assessing  the  Article  8  claim  of  the
    individual. In that event, it would not be necessary to conduct a wider
    examination of the individual's Article 8 claim outside the  Rules.  If
    the criteria set out under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules are not
    satisfied but the individual satisfies, for example, s.117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act, then the decision to refuse  the  individual's  human  rights
    claim would be disproportionate for that reason alone. Again,  in  that
    event, it would not be necessary to conduct a wider examination of  the
    individual's Article 8 claim.

16. Following the amendments of ss.82, 84 and 86 of the 2002 Act,  it  does
    not make sense for judges to say that they allow  an  Article  8  claim
    under the Immigration Rules, for the simple reason that they no  longer
    have jurisdiction to allow any appeals under the Immigration Rules. Nor
    does it make sense to say that the appeal is allowed  under  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules, for the simple reason that the ground of
    appeal is that the decision is in  breach  of  the  individual's  human
    rights, without there being any concept of any Article  8  claim  under
    the Immigration Rules or outside the Rules.

17. I shall therefore construe the judge's decision, as set out at my  para
    10 above, as a decision to allow the claimant's appeal on human  rights
    grounds:

     (i) by reference to the Immigration Rules because she  found  that  the
        claimant satisfied the suitability requirement and: (x) that he had
        access rights to his son and he was taking and intended to continue
        to take an active role in his son's upbringing; and/or (y) that  he
        had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son,  a
        qualifying child, and that it was unreasonable  for  the  child  to
        leave the United Kingdom.

         In relation to (x), the relevant provisions  are  R-LTRPT.1.1.  (c)
        and E-ECPT.2.4(a)(ii) and (b).

         In relation to (y), the relevant provisions  are  R-LTRPT.1.1.  (d)
        and EX.1(a).

         These provisions are set out in the Annex  to  this  decision,  for
        ease of reference.

     (ii)     by reference to s.117B(6) of the 2002  Act  (para  23  of  the
        judge's decision) because she found  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
        subsisting parental relationship with his son, a qualifying  child,
        and that it was unreasonable for the  child  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom (para 15 of the judge's decision).

             Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act reads:


                     "In the case of a person who is not liable to
                     deportation, the public interest does not require the
                     person's removal where-


                     (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                           relationship with a qualifying child, and

                     (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                           to leave the United Kingdom.

     (iii)    by reference to the balancing  exercise  carried  out  in  the
        wider  analysis  of  the  claimant's  Article  8  claim   involving
        consideration of all of the circumstances of the claimant  and  the
        weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the  balancing
        exercise.

18. If the judge materially erred  in  law  in  reaching  her  decision  on
    whether the  claimant  satisfied  the  suitability  requirement,  which
    turned on whether she erred in law in her consideration of whether  the
    Secretary of State had established that the claimant had used deception
    in his previous application for leave to remain, this would be material
    to her decision to allow the  Article  8  claim  by  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules and also by reference to the  balancing  exercise  in
    the wider analysis of the applicant's Article  8  claim.  However,  any
    such error in relation to the suitability requirement would not  affect
    her decision to allow the appeal by reference to s.117B(6) of the  2002
    Act because the claimant does  not  need  to  satisfy  the  suitability
    requirement in order to succeed in his appeal on human  rights  grounds
    for it to be allowed by reference to s.117B(6).

19. There is no dispute that the  claimant's  son  is  a  qualifying  child
    because he is a British  citizen.  Ms  Holmes  accepted  that,  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the claimant's son to leave the United Kingdom. It follows  that
    she accepts that the judge did not err in law in reaching that finding.



20. Accordingly, Ms Ferguson and Ms Holmes agreed that, if I were to decide
    that the judge did not materially err in law in  reaching  her  finding
    that the claimant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with his son, then this would be  determinative  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal before the Upper Tribunal. They  agreed  that,  in  that
    event, any error of law in relation to grounds 1 and  2  would  not  be
    material to the outcome of this appeal because  the  judge  would  have
    been entitled to  allow  the  appeal  in  any  event  by  reference  to
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

21. I  therefore  turn  to  consider  ground  3,  i.e.  whether  the  judge
    materially erred in law in reaching her decision that the claimant  had
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son.

Ground 3

22. The judge considered this aspect of the case  at  paras  16-25  of  her
    decision. In addition, her reasoning, at paras 11-15,  in  relation  to
    whether the claimant had taken and intended to  continue  to  take,  an
    active role in his son's upbringing is also relevant to  the  issue  of
    whether he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his
    son. Omitting quotations from decided cases and other material that she
    considered relevant, paras 11-25 of the judge's decision read:


        "11. The [claimant] married his  British  wife  on  12.4.2014.  The
             couple had a child namely [...] on 28.3.2015.  The  [claimant]
             and his wife have now separated, and the [claimant]  has  made
             repeated applications to the family court in order  to  resume
             contact  with  his  son.  The  [claimant]  has  been   granted
             supervised contact (once every two weeks) from 15.00 to  16.00
             at a contact centre. In answer to questions  put  by  me,  the
             [claimant] confirmed that prior to the separation he had lived
             with his wife for 3 years and one month and that  during  that
             time he had played an extremely active role in his son's  care
             and upbringing. It has not been disputed that  the  [claimant]
             is the biological [sic] of a British child. The [Secretary  of
             State]  has  found  however,  that  in  order  to   meet   the
             requirements of Paragraph R-LTRPT.2.4.(b), the [claimant] must
             show that he is taking and intends  to  continue  to  take  an
             active role in their child's upbringing.


        12.  I find that the [claimant's] evidence relating to  the  nature
             of his relationship, and in particular  the  repeated  efforts
             made by him to resume and extend the nature  and  duration  of
             his  contact  with  his  son  are  matters   that   I   attach
             considerable weight  to.  The  CAFCAS  report  dated  1.6.2018
             provides:


             After four weeks, [the  claimant's  son]  should  be  able  to
                  manage  a  little  more  time  and  the  [claimant]  could
                  introduce an activity familiar  to  [the  claimant's  son]
                  such as visiting a caf� at [xxx] shopping centre, which he
                  says they used to do together.  ...  After  four  sessions
                  like this, the [claimant] should be  able  to  spend  time
                  with [his son]  unsupervised.  It  is  important  that  he
                  completes a course for parents of children with ASD before
                  commencing with unsupervised arrangements so that both  he
                  and [the claimant's ex-wife] can be  confident  about  his
                  ability to manage [his son] alone.


             Following two or three sessions  like  this,  [the  claimant's
                  son] should be  able  to  spend  the  afternoon  with  his
                  father, up to four hours. This leaves room for a meal  and
                  an activity. the [claimant] should inform [his ex-wife] at
                  least three days prior to where he intends to go  so  that
                  she can prepare [his son],  for  example  by  showing  him
                  pictures of  the  location,  as  she  has  admirably  done
                  already with the  contact  centre.  Eventually  [his  son]
                  should be able to spend a full day with the [claimant]  at
                  weekends to include going to his home".


        13.  In this  context,  I  have  regard  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
             findings in JA ( Meaning of "access rights) India [20151  UKUT
             00225 (IAC):


             "..."


        14.  The [claimant] has confirmed in oral evidence before me,  that
             he has every  intention  to  continue  to  proceed  with  full
             hearing in order to determine the increased  level  of  direct
             contact with his son and that he hopes he will soon be able to
             spend weekends and holidays with his son, and that his job  as
             a security guard does enable him to do this.


        15.  I find that I accept [the  claimant's]  oral  and  documentary
             evidence of his direct and indirect contact (in the form Skype
             phone calls referred to in the CAFCAS report) with his British
             child as set out above. As [the claimant's] child  is  only  3
             years old, and lives with her British  mother  in  the  United
             Kingdom there is no prospect of him being able  to  enjoy  her
             relationship with his father in the same way if the [claimant]
             is forced to return to Bangladesh. The  [claimant]  wishes  to
             remain in the United Kingdom, so he can maintain the visits to
             his son and that he is able  to  maintain  the  emotional  and
             parental bond. In the circumstances, it is not  reasonable  to
             expect [the claimant's] child [sic] leave the United  Kingdom.
             I find that given  that  the  [Secretary  of  State]  has  not
             satisfied the the [sic] legal burden of proving the [claimant]
             having obtained his TOEIC results by deception, the [claimant]
             does meet the suitability requirements of the  rules.  I  find
             that on the totality of the evidence before me, the [claimant]
             has met the requirements of Paragraph  R-LTRP.2.4  (a)(i).  In
             accordance with EX1.(a), the [claimant] does  have  a  genuine
             and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child.


        16.  In considering [the claimant's] article 8 outside  the  rules,
             the interest of [the claimant's] child whom he  has  a  father
             and child relationship with, and his  ability  to  continue  a
             positive and  meaningful  relationship  with  him  are  highly
             relevant factors that I attach considerable weight to. I  have
             regard to E-A (Article 8 - best interests  of  child)  Nigeria
             120111 UKUT 00315 (IAC).


             "..."


        17.  At paragraph 29 of the judgment Lady Hale considers what might
             been encompassed in the 'best interests of the child':


             "..."


        18.  The existing guidance of the Upper Tribunal in LD (Article 8 -
             best interests of child) (Zimbabwe) [20101 UKUT 278 (IAC), and
             in particular to paragraph 3 of the guidance:


             "..."


        19.  I note that the [Secretary of State has not  had  any  or  any
             sufficient  regard  to  S.55  of  the  Borders,  Citizens  and
             Immigration Act 2009. In the circumstances of this  case,  and
             given  [the  claimant's]  son's  age,  and  his  inability  to
             independently visit his father in Bangladesh  [sic]  would  be
             that his welfare would be adversely affected if the [claimant]
             is forced to return to Bangladesh. I have particular regard to
             the fact the [claimant] did live with his son  for  the  first
             two years of his life, during which he was  taking  an  active
             role in his care. [The claimant's] son is  autistic  and  this
             renders [the claimant's] positive parental  relationship  with
             him all the more important. The issue of the consideration  of
             the best interests of the children was considered  in  Zoumbas
             (Appellant) v SSHD (Respondent) 120131 UKSC  74 that  provides
             as to the following:


                       "..."


        20.  The [claimant] is his son's biological father with whom he has
             developed a father  and  child  relationship  with  since  his
             birth. The CAFCAS report has recommended an increase  in  [the
             claimant's] current contact with his  son.  I  find  that  the
             totality  of  the  factors  in  [the  claimant's]  case   does
             constitute compelling factors. I have  regard  to  SS  (Congo)
             [20151 EWCA  Civ  387,  which  provides  that  there  must  be
             something 'compelling' about a claim  for  it  to  succeed  on
             Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules. As set out in
             Iftikhar Ahmed  120141  EWHC  300  (Admin),  when  considering
             paragraph 3.2.8 of the October 2013, exceptional circumstances
             have been considered:


                  "..."


        21.  In Forman (SS 117A Considerations) [20151  412  (IAC)  it  was
             held that:


             "...


        22.  I have regard to Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002, as implemented by S.19 of the Immigration Act
             2014. S.117B provides:


             "..."


        23.  In accordance with paragraph [sic] 117  B(6),  the  [claimant]
             has since his separation from his ex wife continued to have  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship with his child.


        24.  I find that the public interest factors in this  case  do  not
             justifying removal of the [claimant] as this would deprive him
             and his  child  of  any  prospect  of  developing  a  positive
             parental relationship with his minor  British  child.  I  find
             that [the claimant's] removal from the  United  Kingdom  would
             cause a disproportionate interference with the prospect of the
             [claimant] and his children resuming and rebuilding  a  family
             relationship that they have previously enjoyed. In this regard
             I have regard to Razgar [20041 UKHL27 at paragraph  17  (1-5).
             At paragraph 17 of the decision of the House of Lords  in  the
             case of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 Lord  Bingham  formulated
             the questions, which have to be  answered  by  an  Immigration
             Judge in a case where  removal  is  resisted  in  reliance  on
             Article 8, as follows:


             "..."


        25.  I find that these are reasons that do render the  Respondent's
             decision a disproportionate interference with family  life  of
             the [claimant], and that of his  child.  I  allow  the  Appeal
             under Article 8 of ECHR."

23. I have to say that ground 3, which challenges the judge's finding  that
    the claimant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
    his son, amounts to no more than a  disagreement  with  her  reasoning.
    There is no reason to think that she was not aware of the fact that the
    claimant had recently taken family court proceedings to obtain  access.
    However, it is plain that she  placed  weight  on  the  fact  that  the
    claimant had lived with his son for two years after the  son  was  born
    and that during that time he took an active  role  in  his  son's  care
    (para 19). It is plain that she was aware that the claimant had limited
    contact by way of supervised access and that it was necessary  for  him
    to complete a course for parents of children with ASD before commencing
    unsupervised contact.

24. At the hearing, Ms Holmes  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the fact that it was necessary for the claimant to  undergoing
    such a course, implying that attendance  on  such  a  course  would  be
    unnecessary if the claimant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his son. I do  not  see  the  connection.  Given  the
    nature of the condition of autism, it may well be that it is considered
    sensible for adults who may be spending time with autistic children  to
    attend such courses before a family court permits unsupervised  contact
    irrespective of the nature of their relationship with the children.  In
    any event, there was no evidence before the judge that any parent  with
    an autistic child may reasonably be expected to  have  the  ability  to
    spend unsupervised time with the child without needing to attend such a
    course.

25. Accordingly, in my judgement, the  mere  fact  that  the  family  court
    decided that it was necessary for the claimant to attend such a  course
    before he could  have  unsupervised  contact  does  not  undermine  the
    judge's  finding  that  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with his son.

26. The grounds contend that the claimant only sought to contact his son as
    a means of remaining in the United Kingdom. This simply  amounts  to  a
    disagreement with the judge's view (para 12 of her decision)  that  the
    claimant had made repeated efforts to resume and extend the nature  and
    duration of his contact with his  son.  It  is  plain  that  the  judge
    considered the "repeated efforts" made  by  the  claimant  against  the
    background, as she had found it, of the claimant having lived with  his
    wife and son for two years after the son's  birth  and  taking  an  "an
    extremely active role in his son's care  and  upbringing"  during  that
    time (para 11), whereas the grounds ignore that background.

27. Accordingly, I have concluded that ground 3  is  not  established.  The
    judge did not materially err in law in reaching her  finding  that  the
    claimant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  his
    son.

28. It follows that the judge was entitled to allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds by reference to s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

29. Although Ms Ferguson and Ms Holmes agreed that, in  the  event  that  I
    decided that the judge did not err in reaching  her  finding  that  the
    claimant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  his
    son, it would not be necessary for me to decide grounds 1 and 2, I will
    nevertheless decide grounds 1 and 2 for reasons which  I  will  explain
    later (see para 45 below).

Grounds 1 and 2

30. The judge's consideration of the deception issue is set out at paras 8-
    10(a) of her decision, the relevant parts of which read as follows:


     "8.  In cross-examination, the [claimant] confirmed that he  had  taken
         the TOEIC test at Duru House, in East Ham at 101 Commercial  Road.
         The [claimant] explained  that  he  had  taken  the  Speaking  and
         Writing test first and this had taken two and half-hours.  He  had
         paid �140 for the test in cash. The Reading test is said  to  have
         had four components, which included  a  listening  component.  The
         [claimant]  has  adamantly  denied  the  [Secretary  of   State's]
         allegation  of  having  obtained  [sic]   TOEIC   certificate   by
         fraudulent means. In cross-examination, the [claimant]  reiterated
         that he had taken the TOEIC test himself and has provided  details
         of the various components of the test, and the location.


     9.   I have regard to the Tribunal's findings in SM & Qadir v SSHD (ETS
         - Evidence - Burden of Proof) 12016] UKUT (MC), at  Paragraph  63.
         The  Tribunal  referred  to  the  following  shortcomings  in  the
         evidence relied upon by  the  [Secretary  of  State],  as  to  the
         following;


          (i)     Neither witness has  any  qualifications  or  'expertise,
              vocational or otherwise, in the scientific subject matter  of
              these  appeals,  namely  voice  recognition  technology   and
              techniques.


          (ii)    In making its decisions in  individual  cases,  the  Home
              Office was entirely dependent on the information provided  by
              ETS. At  a  later  stage  viz  from  around  June  2014  this
              dependency extended to what was reported by  its  delegation,
              which went to the United States.


          (iii)   ETS was the sole arbiter of the information disclosed and
              assertions  made  to  the  delegation.  For  its  part,   the
              delegation - unsurprisingly, given its lack  of  expertise  -
              and  indeed,  the  entirety  of  the  Secretary  of   State's
              officials   and   decision   makers   accepted   uncritically
              everything reported by ETS.


          (iv)    The Home Office has at no time had advice or input from a
              suitable expert.


          (v)     There was  no  evidence  from  any  ETS  witness  -  this
              notwithstanding  the  elaborate  critique  of   Dr   Harrison
              compiled over one year ago.


          (vi)    The test results of  the  33,000  suspect  TOEIC  scores,
              coupled with the information disclosed and assertions made to
              the Secretary of State's delegation during a one-day meeting,
              constitute the totality of the material provided by ETS.


          (vii)   Almost remarkably, ETS provided no evidence, directly  or
              indirectly, to this Tribunal.  Its  refusal  to  provide  the
              voice recordings of these two  Appellants  in  particular  is
              mildly astonishing.


          (viii)  While the judgment of this Tribunal in  Gazi  promulgated
              in May 2015, raised significant questions about  the  witness
              statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington, these  were  not
              addressed, much less  answered,  in  their  evidence  at  the
              hearing. See in particular Gazi at  [9]-[15]  (reproduced  in
              [19] above).


          (ix)    While certain documentary evidence, highlighted  in  [15]
              above, might have fortified the Secretary  of  State's  case,
              none was produced.


          (x)     Similarly, although requested, Dr Harrison provided  none
              of the voice recording files pertaining to the Appellants for
              analysis and consideration.

     10.  I do not find that there is before me any explanations or specific
         and cogent evidence relating to the [claimant's] TOEIC  individual
         test results that would satisfy the burden of proof on balance  of
         probabilities that the [claimant] had used a  proxy  in  order  to
         achieve the results set out in the test result that the [Secretary
         of State] has submitted. The documents submitted by the ETS do not
         provide evidence  to  show  that  [the  claimant's]  results  were
         obtained through fraudulent participation and misrepresentation of
         the English Test certificate by the use of a proxy, which is  said
         to have been made on [the claimant's] behalf. I have regard to the
         Court of Appeal Judgment, in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department v Shehzad & Anor [20161 EWCA Civ 615;

     "30.     It appears that no material was put in front of  the  tribunal
              to show that Mr Shezad's TOEIC speaking English Test had been
              adjudged to be 'invalid" as opposed  to  "questionable....But
              in  circumstances  where  the   generic   evidence   is   not
              accompanied by evidence showing  that  the  individual  under
              consideration's test was categorised as "invalid", I consider
              that the Secretary of State faces a difficulty in respect  of
              the evidential burden at the initial stage."

     10(a).   In the particular circumstances of [the claimant's] case,  his
         solicitors have not made any endeavours to  obtain  the  recording
         evidence relied upon by the [Secretary of State] to show that  the
         [claimant] had allegedly used a proxy to undertake the TOEIC test.
         Nevertheless, I do not find that  the  [Secretary  of  State]  has
         satisfied the burden of proof on balance of probabilities to  show
         that his specific test results were obtained through deception  in
         the manner that has been suggested by the  [Secretary  of  State].
         There is no voice recording evidence. The [Secretary of State] has
         also found that on  the  date  of  [the  claimant's]  test  namely
         14.12.2011 taken at  Opal  College,  the  majority  of  the  tests
         results were found to be invalid. I  do  not  find  that  this  is
         sufficient to satisfy the legal burden to establish to the balance
         of  probabilities  that  the  [claimant]  has  used  deception  in
         relation to a previous application for leave to remain."

31. It was agreed at the hearing before me that, pursuant to  the  judgment
    in SM and Qadir, there was a three-step approach to be  followed  by  a
    judge in deciding whether the Secretary of  State  has  discharged  the
    burden of proving, to the standard of  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    that an  individual  claimant  had  obtained  a  TOEIC  certificate  by
    deception. The first step is to decide whether the Secretary  of  State
    had  discharged  the  initial  evidential  burden.  If  so,  then   the
    evidential burden shifted  to  the  claimant  to  provide  an  innocent
    explanation, which is the second step.  The third step is  to  consider
    whether the Secretary of State had discharged the overall legal  burden
    to establish deception. It was also agreed before me that the  Tribunal
    decided in SM and Qadir that the evidence relied upon by the  Secretary
    of  State  in  that  case  was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial
    evidential burden (in  the  first  step)  of  proving  that  the  TOEIC
    certificates of the appellants  in  that  case  had  been  procured  by
    dishonesty.

32. Ms Ferguson relied upon her "Rule 24 response"  dated  7  October  2018
    (hereafter the "Reply"). In the  Reply,  Ms  Ferguson  submitted  that,
    although it is well-understood that the Secretary  of  State's  generic
    and specific evidence is enough to  discharge  the  initial  evidential
    burden, the Secretary of State's generic and specific evidence was  not
    conclusive, in that, it is  always  open  (in  her  submission)  to  an
    applicant to offer an innocent explanation in his oral evidence  before
    the Tribunal. Accordingly, Ms Ferguson  submitted  that,  although  the
    judge did  not  explicitly  note  the  specific  evidence  provided  in
    relation to the claimant that his test results were deemed invalid, she
    was nevertheless entitled to conclude on the evidence before  her  that
    the Secretary of State had not discharged the overall legal  burden  of
    proving deception.

33. It is clear from Ms Ferguson's submissions in  her  Reply  and  at  the
    hearing that she accepted that the judge had failed to follow the three-
    step approach. In her submission, this was not material for the reasons
    she explained and which I have summarised.

34. Ms Holmes drew my attention to the  Secretary  of  State's  bundle.  At
    Annex A1 was  evidence  that  the  claimant's  test  results  had  been
    cancelled by ETS as invalid. At Annex A2 was  evidence  which  provided
    the breakdown of the results for the tests taken at Opal College on  14
    December 2011. This stated that 21% of all the tests for that day  were
    questionable and 79% were invalid.

35. At para 10(a) of her decision, the judge referred to the fact that  the
    Secretary of State's evidence showed that  the  majority  of  the  test
    results at Opal College were found to be invalid. I  accept  that  this
    shows that the judge took into account the evidence at Annex A2 of  the
    Secretary of State's bundle.

36. However, I have no hesitation in concluding that the  judge  failed  to
    take into account the Secretary of State's specific evidence, i.e.  the
    evidence at Annex A1 of the Secretary of State's bundle. Not  only  did
    the judge make no reference, in terms, to this specific  evidence,  she
    said, in terms, in the first sentence of para 10 that  she  found  that
    there were no "explanations or specific and cogent evidence relating to
    [the claimant's] TOEIC individual test results ..." and then  proceeded
    to quote para 30 of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Shehzad  to
    the effect that the Secretary of State faces a difficulty in respect of
    the evidential burden at the  initial  stage  if  no  material  is  put
    forward to show that the TOEIC speaking English test  for the  claimant
    Shehzad in  that  case  had  been  adjudged  "invalid"  as  opposed  to
    "questionable". In addition, it is to be noted that the judge  did  not
    (contrary to Ms Ferguson's submission) consider  whether  the  claimant
    had provided an innocent explanation.

37. In these circumstances, the only reasonable inference that one can draw
    is that the judge simply overlooked the specific evidence at Annex  A1.
    Ms Ferguson did not seek to suggest otherwise.  To  conclude  otherwise
    would make no sense as it would then be impossible  to  understand  why
    she said what she said in the first sentence of para  10  and  why  she
    quoted para 30 of  Shehzad.  It  is  because  she  had  overlooked  the
    specific evidence that she did not consider whether  the  claimant  had
    provided an innocent explanation and therefore proceeded from the first
    step to the third step to conclude that the Secretary of State had  not
    discharged the  overall  legal  burden  of  proof  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

38. I am therefore satisfied that ground 1 is  established.  For  the  same
    reasons, given what the judge said in the first sentence of para 10  of
    her decision and the fact that she quoted from para 30 of Shehzad, I am
    also satisfied that, irrespective of ground 2, ground 1 is fatal to the
    judge's conclusion that the Secretary of State had not  discharged  the
    overall burden of proof to establish deception.

39. I turn to ground 2.

40. By failing to take into account the specific evidence at Annex  A1,  it
    is clear that the judge materially erred in law in her consideration of
    the first step. In addition, there is no consideration  of  the  second
    step, i.e. whether the claimant had provided an  innocent  explanation,
    nor did the judge reach any finding as  to  whether  he  had  given  an
    innocent explanation. It is true that  she  summarised  the  claimant's
    evidence in cross-examination at para 8 of her decision  but  she  does
    not assess the evidence and reaches no  conclusion  as  to  whether  it
    amounts to an innocent explanation. She simply states,  in  effect,  at
    paras 10 and 10(a) that, by reason of the fact that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not  provided  any  specific  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    claimant,  he  had  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of   proof   in
    establishing on the balance of probabilities that the claimant had used
    deception in his previous application for leave to remain.

41. I do not accept Ms Ferguson's submission that the  judge's  failure  to
    follow the three-step approach explained in SM and Qadir is  immaterial
    because she concluded that the Secretary of State  had  not  discharged
    the overall burden of proof. It is misconceived and simply  wrong.  The
    failure to follow the three-step approach was not merely a  failure  to
    follow a process.  It  resulted  in  material  evidence  being  omitted
    entirely and set the judge on an incorrect path, omitting consideration
    of the second step and therefore leading her to equate  the  conclusion
    in the third step with the answer she had arrived at in relation to the
    first step.

42. It is therefore inevitable that the errors  in  failing  to  take  into
    account the specific evidence at Annex A1 and  failing  to  follow  the
    first and second steps of the three-step approach mean that the judge's
    conclusion in the third step is also fatally flawed.

43. I am therefore satisfied that ground 2 is also established.

44. Accordingly, the judge erred in law in reaching her conclusion that the
    Secretary of State had not  established  that  the  claimant  had  used
    deception in his previous application  for  leave  to  remain  and  her
    finding that the claimant satisfied the suitability  requirement.  This
    is plainly material to her finding  that  the  claimant  satisfies  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and EX.1(a).

Whether to set aside the judge's decision, in whole or in part

45. The question  whether  an  individual  has  practised  deception  in  a
    previous application for leave is a very important  one.  Although  the
    errors of law made by the judge in deciding this issue  do  not  affect
    the outcome of this appeal, this is not say that it will  never  be  of
    relevance or importance. No one can say for  certain  what  the  future
    holds. It would be wrong for me to leave the judge's  findings  on  the
    deception issue in place notwithstanding the errors  of  law  she  made
    simply because the errors of law do not  affect  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal on this occasion.

46. I have therefore decided to set aside the judge's decision and  to  re-
    make the decision on  the  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.

47. For the reasons given by the judge at paras 11-25 of her  decision  and
    my reasons in relation to ground 3, as set out at paras 22-29 above,  I
    re-make the decision on the claimant's appeal by  allowing  his  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision on human rights  grounds  (by
    reference to s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act).

48. There is no need to give the parties an opportunity to make submissions
    on the re-making because my ultimate decision, i.e. as  stated  in  the
    preceding paragraph, is not materially different from  my  deciding  to
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal on the basis  of  the  parties'
    agreed position (as summarised at para 20 above) to the effect that, if
    ground 3 is not established,  then  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    stands to be dismissed without it being necessary to consider grounds 1
    and 2. It was therefore within  the  reasonable  contemplation  of  the
    parties that the Secretary of State's appeal would be dismissed in such
    event without a lawful determination of the deception issue.

49. I record that there has been no lawful determination of  the  Secretary
    of State's allegation that the claimant had used  a  TOEIC  certificate
    obtained by fraud in his application dated 4 December 2011 for leave to
    remain and that  he  does  not  meet  the  suitability  requirement  in
    Appendix FM.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside. The  Upper  Tribunal  re-
made the decision on the claimant's appeal by allowing  the  appeal  against
the Secretary of State's decision on human rights grounds (by  reference  to
s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 1 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
                                    ANNEX


        "R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited or  indefinite
        leave to remain as a parent or partner are-
        (a)  the applicant and the child must be in the UK;
        (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application  for  limited
           or indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner; and either


        (c)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  Section  S-
           LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and (ii) the  applicant  meets
           all of the requirements of Section ELTRPT: Eligibility for leave
           to remain as a parent, or
        (d)  (i) the applicant must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  S-LTR:
           Suitability leave to remain; and (ii) the  applicant  meets  the
           requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and  E-  LTRPT.3.1.;
           and (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies."


     "Relationship requirements
        E-ECPT.2.1. The applicant must be aged 18 years or over.


        E-ECPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-
              (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application;
              (b) living in the UK; and
              (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK.


        E-ECPT.2.3. Either -
              (a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for
        the child; or
              (b) the parent or carer with whom the  child  normally  lives
        must be-
                       (i) a British Citizen in the UK or  settled  in  the
        UK;
                       (ii)    not the partner of the applicant; and
                  (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply  for
                      entry clearance as a partner under this Appendix.


        E -ECPT.2.4.       (a) The applicant  must  provide  evidence  that
        they have either-
                           (i) sole parental responsibility for the  child,
                               or that the child normally lives with  them;
                               or
                      (ii) access rights to the child; and
                  (b) The applicant must provide  evidence  that  they  are
                           taking, and intend to continue to, take an active
                           role in the child's upbringing."




    Paragraph EX.1:
        "This paragraph applies if
        (a)  (i)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
        relationship with a child who-
             (aa) is under the age of 18 years;
             (bb) is in the UK
             (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously
               for at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
               application;
        and
         (ii)     it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
        the UK..."



(emphasis supplied)
