


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/12885/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th November 2017                       |On 8th November 2017           |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                 LATIF AHMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Price, instructed by Morgan Mark solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, sought and was refused leave  to
      remain on human rights grounds. The respondent, in her decision  dated
      30th November 2015  considered  his  application  under  Appendix  FM,
      paragraph 276ADE, Article 3 and Article 8. The  appellant  had  sought
      leave to remain on the basis of his relationship with his partner,  Ms
      Yasmeen, whom he married under Islamic law on  4  September  2013  and
      with whom he had cohabited since then.  The  covering  letter  to  the
      application form stated that:


                  "In reality, it is submitted, the denial of  leave  to  Mr
                  Ahmed will not result in Ms Yasmeen having to leave the UK
                  to be with him, but rather in him having to leave  the  UK
                  in order to seek entry clearance as a spouse".


            The letter had also earlier stated:


                  ".....you are respectfully requested to consider  granting
                  leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  an
                  exceptional basis.
                  It is submitted that outside  the  Immigration  Rules  the
                  insurmountable obstacles criteria is  an  incorrect  legal
                  test.
                  It is submitted that the proper test is to assess  whether
                  it is reasonable  to expect  Ms  Yasmeen  to  relocate  to
                  Pakistan".


   2. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were simply that  the
      decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the law and that
      further grounds would follow. In fact, further grounds were not  filed
      but in a skeleton argument it was submitted to the First-tier Tribunal
      judge that the only issue to be decided  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge was whether it was reasonable to expect the  parties  to  go  to
      Pakistan and establish  family  life  there  ([3]  skeleton).  It  was
      submitted that the evidence was that the appellant's  wife  could  not
      relocate to Pakistan because  of  her  family  ties  in  the  UK,  her
      employment, medical treatment, her established life in  the  UK,  that
      she is settled in the UK and it would be unreasonable, unrealistic and
      disproportionate to expect the partner to move and settle in a strange
      country to keep her marriage intact; that she  had  previously  had  a
      broken relationship and had now found a stable relationship; he  would
      be destitute in Pakistan. The First-tier Tribunal judge  set  out  the
      submissions in detail  including  the  submission  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant that if he is required to leave the UK, then his wife, to be
      with him, will essentially be exiled. In reaching his conclusions, the
      judge refers, inter alia, to Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Agyarko
      [2015] EWCA Civ 440. The judge did not accept the submission that  the
      appellant would, on his return to  Pakistan  be  destitute.  He  found
      there was nothing  in  the  evidence  that  would  indicate  that  the
      appellant could not  find  work  on  return  to  Pakistan.  The  judge
      considered the couple's desire for infertility treatment,  his  wife's
      visits to her father's grave, her employment and the medical evidence.
      He accepted there would be significant difficulties in  relocating  to
      Pakistan for both the appellant and his wife ([64])  but  he  was  not
      satisfied there were insurmountable obstacles and he  did  not  accept
      that there would be very significant difficulties in  them  continuing
      their family life together or that there will be very serious hardship
      ([64]). The judge  was  not  satisfied  there  were  very  significant
      obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into  Pakistan  ([67]).  He
      was not satisfied that there was a dependency between the  appellant's
      wife and her family members which would engage Article 8  but  accepts
      that she doesn't want to leave her family members and that her  mother
      would be distressed ([72]). In [75] the judge  finds  the  appellant's
      immigration status is precarious (he has been an illegal entrant since
      his arrival 14 years ago) but accepts that little weight does not mean
      no weight and the judge gave weight to all the facts that he set  out.
      The judge concludes:


                      "79. For the reasons already outlined above I do  not
                      accept  that  it  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  or
                      unreasonable to expect the appellant to  relocate  to
                      Pakistan where he spent his formative years and given
                      my above findings I do not  find  that  it  would  be
                      unreasonable to expect the appellant's wife to return
                      to Pakistan, should that be  her  wish,  to  maintain
                      family life.
                      80.  I am not satisfied that the appellant has  shown
                      that there are compelling circumstances  which  would
                      warrant a grant of leave outside of the rules.
                      81.  I am satisfied that the respondent's decision is
                      itself a lawful one and  that  when  the  factors  in
                      favour of the  appellant  are  balanced  against  the
                      respondent's legitimate aim that the balance falls in
                      favour of the respondent and  that  the  decision  to
                      remove  the  appellant  is  proportionate  to   their
                      legitimate aim of the  maintenance  of  an  effective
                      immigration policy."


   3. Permission to appeal was  sought  and  granted,  in  essence,  on  the
      grounds that since the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Agyarko
      [2017] UKSC 11 had been handed down and this made clear that "although
      the Supreme Court approved the test  of  insurmountable  obstacles  in
      precarious family life cases", it was arguable the judge had failed to
      recognise  that  a  case  could  succeed  even  where  there  were  no
      insurmountable obstacles. The grounds relied upon also submitted  that
      the judge had misdirected himself in taking account only of the wife's
      income (which did not meet the  income  threshold)  and  that  account
      should have  been  taken  of  potential  income  because  support  was
      available from the wife's mother and he had a job offer and thus there
      might be no public interest in his removal (MM (Lebanon)  [2017]  UKSC
      10).


   4. Ms Price, before me, submitted that the judge  in  [67]  had  accepted
      there would be 'significant difficulties' in  relocating  to  Pakistan
      and that falls within the rubric of 'very strong',  'compelling'.  She
      queried whether, in referring to the public  interest  in  immigration
      control, what was actually being said was the constructive removal  of
      a law abiding, employed British Citizen was reasonable;  that  it  was
      not for British Immigration law to dictate who a person should fall in
      love  with.  This  satisfied,  she  submitted,  the   requirement   of
      exceptional circumstances. To amount  to  fair  and  firm  immigration
      control, Ms Price submitted that the SSHD should  take  responsibility
      for her own omissions in enforcing immigration control: the  appellant
      had been an illegal entrant  for  14  years,  had  been  detained  and
      released on bail and not removed; the SSHD had waited, she  submitted,
      until he had established a relationship with a British  Citizen  woman
      and the judge should  have  taken  these  matters  into  account.  She
      submitted that the person being punished was the British  Citizen  who
      fell in love with a person with a precarious immigration history.


   5. "Significant difficulties" falls notably short  of  "very  significant
      obstacles". To submit otherwise is to contort the natural  meaning  of
      the language.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  decision  that  the
      appellant did not fall within the Rules and, in particular,  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) was a decision that was plainly and clearly open to  him
      on the evidence before him. There is no error of law by the judge that
      the appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


   6. Consideration of an appeal under the wider rubric of Article 8 can, of
      course, in some circumstances lead to leave to  remain  being  granted
      even though the requirements of the immigration rules are not met. The
      fact of the wife's citizenship and the removal of the  appellant  does
      not and cannot amount to constructive removal of  a  British  Citizen.
      The extent and nature of the relationship the couple have is a private
      life matter. The prospect of possible future separation  has  been  at
      large since they chose to embark  upon  that  relationship.  That  the
      respondent has not removed the appellant despite his illegal residence
      in the UK is, considered at its very and most generous, a  benefit  to
      him that has enabled a relationship to develop. It does  not  in  this
      case result in less weight or a minimising of the public  interest  in
      his removal. That the appellant has a job offer or there is  financial
      support available in the future are matters that  can  be  taken  into
      account in any future application for entry clearance. The  submission
      that the question in terms of a wider  application  of  Article  8  is
      whether the decision is "reasonable" is incorrect. Article 8  is  not,
      it is well established, a 'make-weight' where a person  falls  outwith
      the immigration rules. It was plainly open to the First-tier  Tribunal
      judge, as was clearly expressed by him, to conclude on  the  basis  of
      all the evidence before him, that the respondent's decision to  refuse
      leave to remain on human rights grounds was not disproportionate.


         7. There is no material error of law in the decision of the First-
            tier Tribunal.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision.








                                    Date 7th November 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
