
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
hu/12144/2015

                                                 hu/13016/2015

                                                 hu/13023/2015

                                                 hu/13018/2015

                                                 hu/13026/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2017                        |  On 11 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

                                     MMS
                                     SN
                                     MF
                                     KF
                                     MHM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Otchie instructed by direct access

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the respondents.  This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondents and a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for  convenience,
    hereafter I will refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  first  and  second
    appellants (who were born on 13  December  1972  and  1  February  1984
    respectively) are the parents of the third, fourth and fifth appellants
    (who were born on 29 December 2006, 23 July 2008 and 15  February  2013
    respectively).

 4. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 23 March 2003 with  a
    visa valid until  25  November  2003.   On  15  July  2005,  the  first
    appellant sought leave to remain on the basis  of  employment  and  was
    granted leave valid from 29 July 2005 until 16 July 2008.

 5. On 9 July 2007, the second and third appellants (his  wife  and  eldest
    daughter) entered the UK as his dependents with leave  valid  until  16
    July 2008.

 6. On 19 July 2008, the first appellant applied for further leave  on  the
    basis of employment but that was refused on 27 August 2008.

 7. On 23 July 2008, the fourth appellant was born in the UK.

 8. On 22 September 2008, the first appellant sought a  reconsideration  of
    the decision refusing him further leave on the basis of employment  but
    that refusal was maintained on 3 November 2008.

 9. On 6 March 2009, the first appellant submitted an application for leave
    outside the Rules and that application was refused on 28 May 2010.

10. On 6 December 2011, the first appellant submitted  an  application  for
    leave under Art 8 with the second, third and fourth appellants  as  his
    dependents.  That application was refused on 23 November 2012.

11. On 15 February 2013, the fifth appellant was born in the UK.

12. On 15 January 2014, the first appellant (together with his  dependents)
    were informed that they were liable to removal.

13. On 11 August 2015, the first appellant (together with  his  dependents)
    was served with notice, inter alia, affording  him  an  opportunity  to
    submit additional grounds why he should be allowed to stay in the UK.

14. On 26 August 2015,  further  grounds  were  submitted  relying  on  the
    appellants' private and family life in the UK.

15. On 12 November 2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
    appellants leave to remain based upon their private and family life  in
    the UK under the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) and outside  the
    Rules under Art 8.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

16. The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge A E Walker.  The focus of the appellants' case was  that
    the first and second  appellants  could  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM if they met the requirements of para EX.1.  That, so far as
    relevant provides that:

         "This paragraph applies if

         (a)  (i) the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who -

                  (aa) is under the age of 18 years ...;

                  (bb) is in the UK;

                  (cc) ... has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
                      seven  years  immediately  preceding  the   date   of
                      application; and

             (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the UK; ...".

17. Likewise, the issue of whether  it  would  be  "reasonable  to  expect"
    either the third or fourth appellants to leave the UK arose in  respect
    of their individual claims under the  Rules  in  para  276ADE(i),  (iv)
    which provides:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

        ...

        (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK for at least 7 years (discounting any periods of employment;
             and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave
             the UK; ...".

18. It was accepted before the judge that the first and  second  appellants
    could not succeed under para 276ADE  on  the  basis  of  twenty  years'
    continuous residence (para 276ADE(1)(iii)) or because  there  would  be
    "very significant obstacles" to their integration in Pakistan on return
    (para 276ADE(1)(vi)).  It was also common ground before the judge  that
    the fifth appellant could not meet any of the requirements of the Rules
    and his claim was solely founded under Art 8 outside the Rules.

19. In her determination, Judge Walker  set  out  at  length  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules at paras 10 - 13.  At para 14  of  her  determination
    she set out s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
    and the requirement to have regard to, in essence, the  best  interests
    of the children.  At para 15, the judge set out the relevant provisions
    in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the
    "NIA Act 2002") in s.117A and s.117B dealing with the  public  interest
    considerations in determining whether an individual's removal would  be
    disproportionate under Art 8.2 of the ECHR.  Then, the  judge  set  out
    the questions to be resolved in determining a case under Art 8 together
    with a number of authorities relevant to the  appeal  including  R  (MA
    (Pakistan) & Others) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  At paras 23 - 43, the
    judge set out in detail the evidence concerning  the  circumstances  of
    all the appellants based upon the background  documents  and  the  oral
    evidence which the judge heard from the first and second appellants and
    the brother of the first appellant.

20. At paras 45 - 54, the judge set out her findings on the principal issue
    argued before her, namely whether it was  "reasonable  to  expect"  the
    third and fourth appellants to leave the UK.  The judge  accepted  that
    it was in the children's best interests to remain  with  their  parents
    and also concluded that in  relation  to  both  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants it would not be reasonable to expect them to  leave  the  UK
    given the integration of their lives in the UK and  the  disruption  to
    their lives if relocated to Pakistan.  As a  result,  the  judge  found
    that the first and second appellants succeeded under  Appendix  FM  and
    the third and fourth appellants  succeeded  under  para  276ADE(1)(iv).
    The judge's reasoning is at paras 45 - 53 as follows:

         "45. It is clear, as was stated at the hearing, that the  essential
             consideration in this case is the effect  of  removal  on  the
             children.  Neither the first nor the second appellant can meet
             the rules in their own right and their  claim  of  an  adverse
             effect on their  rights  to  a  private  and  family  life  is
             essentially  dependent  on  the  effect  of  removal  on   the
             children.  As  adults  without  children  they  have  spent  a
             considerable period for their lives in Pakistan, were  brought
             up there and speak Urdu as their first language.  As such both
             could be expected to  return  to  Pakistan  and  resume  their
             family and  private  lives  with  their  extended  family  and
             friends in Pakistan.  However they are  not  without  children
             and they therefore rely on para EX.1 which allows an exception
             to the rules where it would reasonable to expect the child  to
             leave the UK.

         46.  I found the first and second appellants compelling  witnesses.
             It is clear that the first appellant is proud that he has  not
             ever claimed benefits and that he has not been reliant on  the
             State.  He worked when he was able and it is clear that he  is
             desperate to do as again as is the second  appellant.   I  was
             stuck by  the  strong  desire  in  particular  of  the  second
             appellant to be fully integrated into the society in which her
             children live and that she has done her best to  achieve  this
             within  the  constraints  put  upon  her  by  her   precarious
             immigration status.

         47.  I am satisfied that the third and fourth appellants can  speak
             Urdu but that they prefer to speak English to each  other.   I
             also note that the first appellant said that this was the case
             because the third  and  fourth  appellants  do  not  like  the
             English accent of their parents.   I  consider  that  this  of
             itself is testimony to the extent  of  the  third  and  fourth
             appellants' integration.  I noticed that  during  the  hearing
             the third and fourth appellants' conversed with each other  in
             English.  This seemed to me to be entirely natural  and  their
             normal method of communication between themselves.  I  noticed
             the fifth appellant speaking Urdu to his mother.

         48.  Whilst exposing the children to the concerns of adults such as
             their future in the UK is to be deprecated and which the first
             appellant said, and I believe genuinely himself  believed,  it
             also has to be acknowledged that where the first appellant  is
             so distressed that he has been referred to a  psychologist  by
             his doctor it is unlikely to be possible that  these  concerns
             be shielded from the children.  Whilst the appeal hearing  was
             underway, the third and fourth appellants'  were  given  paper
             and pens to scribble with.  These were passed to me at the end
             of the hearing and I note that the third appellant has written
             of her love for the UK and that she has lots  of  friends  and
             does not want to leave them or leave the UK.   She  writes  of
             her teachers and where she lives and that she  considers  that
             England is her country.  She has a  very  clear  idea  of  her
             nuclear family and  her  parents  and  siblings  an  does  not
             mention wider family members.

         49.  Taking into account the cogent evidence I heard from the first
             and second appellants about the way that they run their family
             lives, the evidence of the school letters and the  letters  in
             support, I am satisfied that it is in the very best  interests
             of the children to  remain  living  together  and  with  their
             parents.  I have taken into account the requirements  of  s.55
             as set out above.

         50.  Whilst I doubt the effectiveness of the threats that the first
             appellants and his brother say that they have  received  I  am
             satisfied that the first appellant considers them to  be  real
             and that he feels himself under threat in Pakistan.  This fear
             will have an adverse effect on the ability of the children  to
             be able to  adapt  to  life  in  Pakistan  because  the  first
             appellant will constantly be on his guard and will thus not be
             able to assist the children into life in Pakistan.

         51.  The third appellant is now  aged  nearly  10  and  the  fourth
             appellant is aged 8.  The first appellant was  therefore  aged
             over 7 at the time  that  the  representations  were  made  on
             26.08.2015 and had remained in  the  UK  for  7  years  having
             entered the UK on 09.07.2007.  If I find that it would not  be
             reasonable to expect her to leave  the  UK  then  her  parents
             would succeed by relying on para EX.1

         52.  In assessing the reasonableness of requiring the  children  to
             leave the UK it is not simply a question of whether they would
             be able to relocate and understand the  language  or  even  of
             being able to remain within the confines of their  own  family
             and its culture.  In this case I am satisfied that  the  third
             and fourth appellants are so integrated into  their  lives  in
             the UK that they would not be able  to  relocate  to  Pakistan
             where  the  culture  they  would  experience   outside   their
             immediate  family  would  be  so  different  from  their   own
             experience in the UK that to disrupt  their  existing  social,
             culture an educational ties would  be  inappropriate.   It  is
             clear that both the  third  and  four  appellants  are  bright
             pupils and doing well in school, a school where they are  very
             clearly liked and have a wide circle  of  friends  and  social
             ties.  I note that the fifth  appellant  speaks  Urdu  to  his
             mother and that is to be expected in such a young child.  This
             is entirely as anticipated within the  guidance  set  down  in
             Azimi-Moayed.

         53.  In summary I find that it is unreasonable for  the  third  and
             fourth appellants to relocate to Pakistan.  Further, both have
             exceeded the 7  year  period  set  down  in  para  276ADE  and
             therefore both of them meet the requirements  of  para  276ADE
             and it follows that the first and second appellants  can  take
             advantage of paragraph EX.1."

21. Although the fifth appellant could not succeed  under  the  Rules,  the
    judge found that he succeeded under Art 8.  In para 53 she said this:

         "The fifth appellant has his family life with the other  appellants
         and could not relocate on his own to Pakistan as such a young child
         and he could not enjoy his family life  anywhere  else  other  than
         with the other appellant in the UK.  In his case to relocate him to
         Pakistan would infringe his rights under article 8 of the ECHR  and
         would not be proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  effective
         immigration control"

22. Finally, the judge found that all the appellants  could  succeed  under
    Art 8 outside the Rules also and at para 54 she said this:

         "Further and in the circumstances I have found above the relocation
         of the appellants to Pakistan would be contrary  to  the  interests
         and welfare of the children.  The removal of  the  appellants  from
         the UK would therefore not be proportionate to the  legitimate  aim
         of effective immigration control and their article 8  rights  would
         be thus contravened."

23. In the result, the judge allowed the first, second, third,  fourth  and
    fifth appellants under Art 8 and also allowed the appeals of the first,
    second, third and fourth appellants (but not the fifth appellant) under
    the Immigration Rules (see para 56 of her determination).

The Secretary of State's Appeal

24. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge
    Walker's decision on  a  number  of  grounds.   Those  grounds  can  be
    summarised as follows.

25. First, the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the  public  interest
    reflected in the cost to  the  public  purse  of  educating  the  three
    children  and  having  regard  to  the  parents'  immigration  history.
    Reliance  is  placed  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in   MA
    (Pakistan).

26. Secondly, the judge failed to take into account s.117B of the  NIA  Act
    2002 in finding that the appellants' removal was disproportionate.

27. Thirdly, the judge failed to consider the best interests of each of the
    children separately.

28. Finally, in finding the first and  second  appellants  to  be  credible
    witnesses, the judge failed to take into account that the  parents  had
    had no leave since 2008 and were overstayers who refused to  leave  the
    UK.  The judge's finding was not adequately reasoned and irrational.

29. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 17 May 2017 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Allen) granted the Secretary
    of State permission to appeal.

The Submissions

30. In his submissions, Mr Diwyncz, who represented the Secretary of  State
    relied upon the grounds.  He acknowledged,  however,  that  he  was  in
    difficulties in submitting that the judge's finding that the first  and
    second appellants were credible was irrational; although  he  contended
    that it lay  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  spectrum  of  rationality.
    Instead, Mr Diwyncz focussed on the judge's reasoning in  reaching  her
    finding that  it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants to relocate to Pakistan.  He submitted that  the  judge  had
    not considered the public interest in reaching that finding as required
    by MA (Pakistan) and had made no reference to s.117B in her  reasoning.
    That, he submitted, was an error of law even though the judge  had  set
    out at length s.117B in  her  determination  and  had  referred  to  MA
    (Pakistan) in her determination.

31. On behalf of the appellants, Mr Otchie submitted that the judge had not
    erred in law.  She was clearly aware of the immigration history of  the
    first and second appellants  which  she  set  out  at  para  3  of  her
    determination.  She had  also  set  out  s.117B  and  at  para  21  had
    explicitly stated that she had reminded  herself  of  the  case  of  MA
    (Pakistan).  Mr Otchie submitted that in reaching her findings at paras
    45 onwards, the judge must be understood to have applied the law and to
    have taken into account the public interest in reaching her findings in
    favour of the appellants.

32. Mr Otchie informed me that, if the decision  were  to  be  remade,  the
    claims could only be stronger because of the further length of time the
    third and fourth appellants have been in the UK and he informed me that
    there  were  supporting  certificates  relating  to   their   schooling
    subsequent to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

33. It was common ground before me that,  as  a  result  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision  in  MA  (Pakistan),  in  assessing  whether  it  was
    "reasonable to expect" a child to leave the UK,  not  only  should  the
    child's circumstances and best interests be  taken  into  account,  but
    also account must be taken of the  public  interest.   In  effect,  the
    competing factors in favour of the child remaining in the  UK  and  the
    public interest must be weighed against one another.

34. In MA (Pakistan), the Court of Appeal endorsed  this  approach  to  the
    provision  in  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  the  equivalent  provision  in
    s.117B(6).  It is equally applicable to the identical wording  in  para
    EX.1 of Appendix FM.  Although expressing some  reservation,  Elias  LJ
    (with whom King LJ and Sir Stephen Richards agreed) accepted  that  the
    Court of Appeal was bound by the earlier decision of that court  in  MM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450 which had held that in  determining
    whether the effect on an individual was "unduly harsh" under  s.117C(5)
    of the NIA Act 2002 in a deportation case, the public interest  had  to
    be factored in when considering whether the impact on any child  of  an
    individual's  deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh."   At   [45]   in
    MA(Pakistan) Elias LJ said:

         "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct  of
         the applicant and any other matters relevant to the public interest
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' concept under Section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         Section 117B(6)."

35. The Court of Appeal noted, however the significance of a  child's  best
    interests and residence in the UK of at least seven  years.   At  [45],
    Elias LJ said:

         "...the only significance of section  117B(6)  is  that  where  the
         seven year rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning
         in favour of leave to remain being granted."

36. At [46], Elias LJ, having referred to  the  Secretary  of  State's  own
    guidance, added this:

         "After [7 years] the child will have put down roots  and  developed
         roots and developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the
         UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the  child  is
         required to leave the UK.  That may be less so where  the  children
         are very young because the focus of their lives will  be  on  their
         families.  But if the disruption becomes more serious as  they  get
         older.  Moreover, in these  cases  there  must  be  a  very  strong
         expectation that the child's best interest will be to remain in the
         UK with his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as
         a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

37. What is said in the present case by the Secretary of State is that  the
    judge determined the reasonableness of expecting the third  and  fourth
    appellants to leave the UK solely on the basis of the impact upon  them
    of doing so.  The judge failed to factor in the public interest.  I  do
    not accept that submission.

38. First, whilst I accept that the judge must have regard  to  the  public
    interest,  whether  under   the   Rules   in   reaching   a   view   on
    "reasonableness" or s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002 outside the Rules and
    must  demonstrate  that  has   been   done   (see   Forman   (ss.117A-C
    consideration) [2015]  UKUT  412  (IAC)),  the  obligation  is  one  of
    substance not form (see Dube (ss.117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)).

39. In this case, the only aspect of the  public  interest  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State concerned the immigration history of the  first  and
    second appellants, namely that they had been overstayers since 2008 and
    the cost to the public purse of the three children remaining in the UK.
     The renewed ground  described  the  parents'  immigration  history  as
    "appalling".  Whether that epithet is appropriate, about which  I  have
    doubts, in relation to the first and second appellants' history (having
    arrived lawfully but overstayed),  the  judge  clearly  set  out  their
    immigration history at para 3 of her  determination.   As  regards  the
    costs to the public purse, it is not clear whether this was  explicitly
    relied upon before the judge.  The Secretary of State's grounds do  not
    positively assert that to be the case and, it  may  well  be,  that  in
    considering whether there were grounds for appeal it was a  point  that
    occurred for the first time to the drafters of  the  grounds.   In  any
    event, it is a self-evident point that arises in relation to  virtually
    every appellant who succeeds in establishing that they should remain in
    the UK.  I can see no basis upon  which  this  experienced  Immigration
    Judge would fail to have regard to that element of the public  interest
    in any consideration of the public interest.

40. The crucial issue here is whether the judge  did  consider  the  public
    interest.  Mr Diwyncz accepted that the judge  had  correctly  directed
    herself as regard the public interest both by reference to  s.117B  and
    MA (Pakistan).  Indeed, her specific self-direction to "remind" herself
    of MA (Pakistan) could only be  a  self-direction  on  the  point  that
    whether it was "reasonable to  expect"  either  the  second  and  third
    appellant to leave the  UK  required  a  consideration  of  the  public
    interest.  That, after all, is what that case is all about.  Whilst the
    judge did not make specific reference to the public interest until  the
    final sentence of para 53 of her determination and then again  in  para
    54, she clearly had in mind  that  the  public  interest  involved  the
    "legitimate aim of effective immigration control".  That,  reading  the
    judge's decision fairly as a whole, must include  a  reference  to  the
    immigration history of the first and second appellants.   Consequently,
    in finding that the first and second appellants met the requirement  in
    para EX.1 and the third and fourth appellants met  the  requirement  in
    para 276ADE(1)(iv), no doubt it would have been better  had  the  judge
    spelt out her reasoning in more detail but, in my  judgment,  she  said
    enough to understand her reasons for allowing the appeals.

41. Mr Diwyncz did not pursue a rationality challenge  in  respect  of  the
    judge's eventual finding.  Providing it is clear that the judge did not
    misdirect herself  in  law  and  did,  in  fact,  consider  the  public
    interest, to require her to do more would be an exercise in form rather
    than substance.  I am satisfied that  she  did  factor  in  the  public
    interest in assessing whether it was reasonable to expect the third and
    fourth appellants to leave the UK and, in the light of the  unequivocal
    findings she made in respect of the children's best interests  and  the
    adverse impact upon them of having to leave  the  UK  where  they  were
    fully integrated and returning to Pakistan, the judge was not satisfied
    that the public interest, including the parents' immigration history as
    overstayers outweighed the interests of the children.

42. In those circumstances, I am unpersuaded that the judge was not legally
    entitled  to  find  that  the  first  and  second  appellants  met  the
    requirements of para EX.1 and that the third and fourth appellants  met
    the requirements of para 276ADE(1)(iv).

43. The grounds  also  contend  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    individual children's best interests separately.  Mr Diwyncz,  although
    he did not resile from the grounds, did not seek to press this argument
    orally before me.  He was right not to do so.  It is clear, again on  a
    fair reading of the judge's determination that she considered the  best
    interests of the third and fourth appellants and reached conclusions in
    regard to them individually.  As regards  the  fifth  appellant,  given
    that his parents and siblings succeeded under the Rules,  it  is  quite
    impossible to see how it would be proportionate to  remove  him  alone.
    In my judgment, this ground is simply not made out.

44. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.
     The judge did not err in  law  in  reaching  her  findings  under  the
    relevant Rules and in allowing the appeals under Art 8.

45. There is one final point which I raised  at  the  hearing.   The  judge
    allowed the appeals of the first, second,  third  and  four  appellants
    under the Immigration Rules.  The appellants' application for leave was
    made on 28 August 2015,  in  response  to  a  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds (RED.0003).  That application, therefore, was made  at  a  time
    when the rights of appeal under s.82 of  the  NIA  Act  2002  had  been
    amended by s.15 of the Immigration Acts 2014 with effect from  6  April
    2015.  As a result, the appellants' appeals were  limited,  so  far  as
    relevant to these cases, to Art 8  of  the  ECHR.   Therefore,  to  the
    extent that the appeals were to be allowed, they could only be  allowed
    under Art 8.  In fact, the  judge  also  allowed  all  the  appellant's
    appeals under Art 8 and, given her sustainable findings that the  first
    four appellants met the requirements of the Rules,  which  had  already
    taken into account the public interests, it is  impossible  to  see  on
    what basis any other decision could  be  made  in  respect  of  Art  8.
    Consequently, any error by the judge in allowing the appeals under  the
    Rules was immaterial to her decision to allow the appeals  of  each  of
    the appellants under Art 8 which, therefore, stands.

    Decision

46. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellants'
    appeals stands.

47. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            8 September 2017

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Walker made a fee award of any  fee  which  had  been  paid.   As  her
decision to allow the appeal  stands,  there  is  no  reason  to  reach  any
different conclusion other than to make  a  fee  award  in  the  appellants'
favour.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            8 September 2017

