
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12165/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 10 February 2021              |On 01 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                 HUSNA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M. Hussain, on behalf of the appellant (Maya
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  21  October  2019,  in   which   the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse her human  rights
         application dated 16 June 2019 was dismissed.


      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 10 February 2021, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not object1d  to  by  the
         parties. A face- to -face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant who was present  in  the  room  with  Ms
         Hussain and she was able to see  and  hear  the  proceedings  being
         conducted. There were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial
         technical problems were encountered during the  hearing  and  I  am
         satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases
         by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Miss Hussain and Ms Pettersen for their clear oral
         submissions.


Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh. The appellant's
         immigration history set out in the papers and expressly considered
         in the decision letter. The appellant first entered the UK on a
         visit visa valid from 23 February 2005 to 23 August 2005 and 17
         January 2006 to 17 July 2006. The appellant last entered on a visit
         visa valid from 29 November 2006 to 29 May 2007. The evidence on
         file was that she had entered the United Kingdom on 11 January
         2007.


      6. Whilst in the UK on 24 May 2007 she submitted an application for
         indefinite leave to remain as the child of a settled relative (her
         brother). The basis for that application was set out in a witness
         statement dated 14/9/07 (as exhibited in the respondent's bundle).
         The appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor to visit
         her brother. Two months after her arrival she was informed that her
         mother had died. The appellant lived with her cousin and not her
         brother at the date of the application as there was insufficient
         room. It was stated that her brother had decided that she should
         apply to stay in the United Kingdom because she had no one to
         return to. While she had family relatives in Bangladesh including
         two sisters it was stated that they were married. It was stated
         that she could not return to live on her own.

      7. This application was refused with an in country right of appeal on
         13 August 2007.

      8. The appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Lambert and in a decision
         promulgated on 8 October 2007 the appellant's appeal was dismissed.
         There is a copy of that decision exhibited in the respondent's
         bundle marked "F".

      9. The judge heard evidence from the appellant, her brother and her
         first cousin. At paragraphs 4.1 - 4.6 the judge set out her reasons
         for dismissing the appeal. The judge considered the circumstances
         in Bangladesh alongside the evidence of her witnesses and on the
         basis that she could not live alone from either a financial or
         practical point of view (4.1). However the judge found that her
         evidence was "progressively less credible. This is because it
         became apparent she was vague to the point of evasive when pressed
         as to key issues." Furthermore the judge identified that there were
         "significant discrepancies" between her evidence and that of her
         brother. The judge set out those discrepancies at paragraph 4.2
         which related to financial support available, who looked after the
         family land and the whereabouts of her uncle.

     10. At paragraph 4.3, the judge concluded that "the cumulative effect
         of the above lead me to conclude that the appellants and her
         brother's evidence that there is no support for her in Bangladesh
         of either a financial or a practical nature is simply not
         credible". The judge went on to find that the appellant had
         accepted that the family land which had supported the family
         financially was still available, it was in her mother's name and
         that there was no suggestion that the house was not still
         physically available for occupation by her. The judge found that it
         was clear that her uncle and two single male cousins lived very
         close by, or in the same house or compound and that there was no
         substantial relationship problem likely to impact on their family
         responsibility for her welfare. The judge also found that she had
         two married sisters who remained within striking distance.

     11. At paragraph 4.5 the judge concluded that she did not accept that
         the appellant would be required to live entirely alone and
         unprotected or would be  without any assistance. The judge found
         that she was an adult and would be able to in time along with her
         male relatives' guidance to learn to manage the land as their own
         evidence had been that her widowed mother had done the same. The
         judge found that neither the long-term nor in the immediate future
         following a return to Bangladesh would there be any serious
         compelling family or other considerations making her exclusion from
         the UK undesirable.

     12. At 4.6, the judge also found that there was no particular
         relationship of dependence between the appellant and her adult
         sibling in the United Kingdom making the decision of the Secretary
         of State disproportionate for the purposes of Article 8.

     13. By 16 October 2007, the appellant was "appeal rights exhausted".

     14. The appellant remained in the United Kingdom.


     15. On 15 March 2011, a letter was sent from the Case Resolution
         Directorate and the appellant responded to this letter on 1 April
         2011 providing a passport and photographs.

     16. The appellant was served with an IS.151A liability notice and an
         IS. 96 letter on 7 July 2011 and was given reporting restrictions.
         The decision letter states that she did not comply with the
         reporting and that no events were attended.


     17. It is asserted that no contact was received from the appellant
         until a letter dated 11 June 2018 was received which contained
         human rights submissions from her legal representative.

     18. The appellant was issued with a RED 0003 notice, inviting
         additional grounds of consideration on 5 June 2019. Response was
         received on 19 June 2019 providing a statement of additional
         grounds.

     19. On 28 June 2019, the respondent considered those human rights
         submissions made on 16 June 2019 but refused them in a decision
         letter of that date.

     20. The appellant's immigration history was set out at page 2. Under
         the heading "family life", the respondent noted that the appellant
         had not provided representations about a partner, parent, or
         dependent children in the United Kingdom, therefore the family life
         rules under Appendix FM had not been considered.

     21. In relation to her private life, it was noted that she was a
         national of Bangladesh who last entered the UK on 11 January 2007
         at the age of 17 and at the date of the application was 29 years
         and 11 months. She therefore lived in the UK for 12 years and five
         months that had not lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
         years. She was over the age of 18 and not between the ages of 18
         and 25 and therefore could not meet the requirements of paragraph
         276ADE (1) (iv) or (v).

     22. As to paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) it was not accepted that there
         would be very significant obstacles to her integration into
         Bangladesh if she were required to leave the UK because she resided
         there up to the age of 17, a period which included her childhood
         and significant portion of her formative years. During the time in
         the UK, she had lived with her brother and his family and that it
         was accepted that she would have retained some knowledge of the
         life, language and culture and would not face significant obstacles
         to reintegrating into life in Bangladesh.

     23. Consideration was given to the claim made that she was residing
         with her brother and his family in the United Kingdom and that she
         had lived with them since her mother passed away and that her
         brother had been financially supporting her and that she had no one
         else to rely upon in Bangladesh. There was a copy death certificate
         relating to her uncle to confirm that he could not support her in
         Bangladesh. The respondent considered that the appellant was an
         adult citizen and that there was insufficient evidence to confirm
         that she would be unable to seek employment or support herself or
         for her family to support her from overseas should they wish to do
         so. In the application in 2007 she stated that she had sisters
         living in Bangladesh however no information been provided relating
         to her sisters in her current submissions.

     24. The respondent went on to consider whether there were "exceptional
         circumstances" which would render refusal a breach of Article 8 of
         the ECHR because it would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences for her or another family member.

     25. The respondent concluded that based on the information provided,
         there were no such "exceptional circumstances" that would warrant a
         grant of leave to remain outside of the immigration rules.

     26. The respondent gave reasons for that decision as follows:


             . the appellant relied upon her claim that she had lived in the
               UK since she was a minor, entering with her mother to visit
               her brother. Her mother had died, and she had been living
               with her brother and family since that time. It was claimed
               that there were no close family members in Bangladesh and
               that she not been there for 12 years.
             . The respondent acknowledged that she may have established a
               family and private life but for it to exist there must be
               dependency on emotional ties beyond the norm for such
               relationships and no evidence had been provided to show ties
               which indicated that there were emotional ties beyond the
               norm.
             . Whilst it was acknowledged that she had been living with her
               brother and his family, including nephews who had written in
               support of the case, it was deemed reasonable that she would
               be to maintain contact with the family overseas via telephone
               contact and online communication methods. Section 55 of the
               2009 Act been considered in relation to the nephews, however
               they are not young children and are residing in the UK with
               their biological parents. Whilst her departure from the UK
               may affect their current routine, there was no evidence
               provided to indicate that their parents could not provide
               sufficient care without her assistance. It would be open for
               the family in the UK to visit the appellant in Bangladesh.
             . in summary it was considered that whilst she had resided in
               the UK since she was 17, she was now an adult citizen
               entitled to work in Bangladesh and could support and
               accommodate herself upon return.
             . in respect of the claim that she would find it difficult to
               return to Bangladesh, it was noted that she only had leave to
               enter as a visitor and subsequent applications were refused
               and she was fully aware when developing any private life or
               ties that she had no expectation that she could remain in the
               UK indefinitely.
             . in respect of the issue of delay in dealing with her claim,
               the Home Office had previously stated that there was no
               outstanding consideration nor had the Secretary of State
               agreed to reconsider the case. In view of this, the appellant
               did not make any further attempt to regularise her status and
               lost contact with the Home Office. Whilst the appellant
               believed the consideration was outstanding since 2011, it was
               noted that she did not request any update until it was
               prompted by contact from returns preparation in 2018.
             . As to her claim that she been depressed following a
               relationship breakdown, no medical evidence been provided to
               indicate such a diagnosis. Even in the event of such formal
               diagnosis, treatment and medication if required would be
               available in Bangladesh.


The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     27. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parker) on the  11
         October 2019.

     28. In a determination promulgated on the 21  October  2019,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds.  The  judge  heard
         evidence from the appellant through an interpreter and  also  heard
         evidence from her brother and her nephew.

     29.  The First-tier Tribunal recorded that the appellant could not meet
         the requirements for a grant of leave to remain under  Appendix  FM
         of the Immigration Rules or on grounds of private  life  (Paragraph
         276ADE) but had advanced the claim on article 8 grounds "outside of
         the rules", which included family life with the appellant's brother
         and nephews, on her long residence in the UK and the delay  on  the
         part of the respondent( see [12]).

     30. The FtTJ set out the decision of Judge Lambert from 2007  where the
         appellant's appeal had been dismissed and considered  the  evidence
         relating to her present circumstances ( at paragraphs 13 - 22).

     31. The judge set out the factual background namely that the  appellant
         entered the United Kingdom as a visitor with leave, but  which  had
         expired on 29 May 2007 and that she had remained in United  Kingdom
         since that date. Her mother had died in Bangladesh while she was in
         the United Kingdom. She was a single young woman with  no  children
         and not in a relationship. He accepted that  she  lived  in  United
         Kingdom for more than 13 years.

     32. When considering the issue of  family  life  with  members  of  her
         extended family (her brother and nephews)  the  judge  reached  the
         conclusion that there was nothing to suggest that  the  appellant's
         relationship with the nephews and nieces went beyond anything  more
         than mere emotional ties; that she had not taken the place of their
         mother and was not in "loco parentis". The  judge  found  that  her
         nephews lived with their mother and the appellant did not currently
         care for them; they were nearly all adults but  the  FtTJ  accepted
         that she had become a significant family member in  the  household.
         Reference was made to the nature of the family life which  included
         picking them up from school, going together to restaurants and  the
         judge noted that they will be upset if she had to return (at [47]).
         The FtTJ did not accept that the appellant had established  "family
         life". However in the alternative he considered family life on  the
         basis of the evidence and also accepted  that  she  had  a  private
         life.

     33. In respect of her private life, the judge  took  into  account  her
         length of residence, that she was not  studying  and  that  on  the
         basis of the medical report she had anxiety poor sleep and low mood
         but that this was not a "severe mental health  problem".   She  did
         not work, and her private life consisted of her family members.

     34. The judge found that she could  not  meet  any  of  the  rules  and
         therefore considered whether  there  were  any  circumstances  that
         would  lead  to  a  grant  of  leave  "outside  the  rules".   When
         considering the issue of proportionality, he addressed the issue of
         delay at paragraphs 54, 61, 62. The judge  considered  the  factual
         background but reached the conclusion that  she  had  not  made  an
         application to the Home Office following the refusal of her  appeal
         in 2007 and that she had replied to the letter from the Home Office
         sent in 20 11 but nothing more. He found that  whilst  delay  could
         reduce the impact  of  the  public  interest,  the  blame  for  the
         appellant remaining in the United Kingdom and unlawfully  had  been
         due to the appellant's failure to make any application.  The  judge
         took into account that the Home Office could have "dealt  with  the
         case better" but that she had not made any formal application since
         2011 and  simply  returning  the  form  with  photographs  was  not
         sufficient to show a "willingness  to  engage  in  the  immigration
         process." The judge found that there was no evidence that  she  had
         been to an MP or that any formal application been made,  there  had
         been no chasing of the Home Office following  the  letter  sent  in
         April 2011. The judge considered that even if there had been  delay
         on the part of the Home Office,  the  appellant  had  not  extended
         family connections by entering into a subsisting relationship  with
         a partner, there were  no  children,  she  continued  to  live  the
         brother's home and that she had not strengthened the family ties to
         any great extent because of the alleged delay  (see  paragraphs  62
         and 63). The judge found that she had been a burden on the State by
         receiving NHS treatment on a regular basis, and that she could  not
         speak English (s117B(2)).

     35. The FtTJ considered the circumstances in Bangladesh  and  concluded
         that there was a family home available to her and in the  light  of
         the lack of credibility  found  both  by  the  previous  judge  and
         himself, the judge found that the appellant had a  married   sister
         available to  help  the  appellant  upon  return.  The  judge  also
         considered that there was no  reason  why  her  brother  could  not
         continue to support her by sending money (at [64] and [66].

     36. After taking into account the relevant factors including her length
         of residence, the issue of delay and  her  relationships  with  her
         extended family, the judge reached the conclusion that  the  public
         interest outweighed her rights under Article 8 and that there  were
         no  "  compelling  circumstances  "  or  any  unjustifiable   harsh
         consequences, for a grant leave on  Article  8  grounds.  The  FtTJ
         therefore dismissed the appeal.



     37. Permission to appeal was issued on the 17 March 2020, permission to
         appeal was granted by FtTJ EM Simpson stating:-

         "Permission to appeal is granted because in the appellant's human
         rights appeal involving private and family life, as asserted, the
         decision arguably disclosed:


         1) an overall inadequacy of consistent consideration and reasoning
            matters at issue, viz fact-finding on family life, with a
            preponderance of contradictory reasoning and findings and
            whether article 8 family life with her brother and his family
            had been established in the course of 12 years in the UK living
            with them to meet the Kugathas test (30, 43 - 49, 62, 69);
         2) failure to give weight to material matters in the closing
            proportionality assessment, including delays on the part of the
            respondent following upon informing her that her case was being
            treated as a legacy case in 2011, but having not further
            responded in the intervening eight years before her HR
            application leading to the decision against which she appealed,
            together therein with an inadequacy of accompanying reasoning on
            that matter of delay:
         3) all grounds are arguable.


The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     38. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 1 April 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face- to -face hearing. A reply  was  provided
         by the respondent to those directions and on 6 August 2020  written
         submissions were received from the appellant.

     39. Further directions were given for a remote hearing  to  take  place
         and that this  could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both  parties  have
         indicated that they were content for the hearing to proceed by this
         method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to  enable  oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties with the  assistance
         of their advocates.

     40. Miss Hussain on behalf of the appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal and the written submissions.

     41. There were written submissions filed on behalf of  the  respondent.
         I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

The grounds and the submissions made:

     42. The grounds of  appeal  dated  30  October  2019  and  the  written
         submissions set out the following:

         1) that the FtTJ failed  to  consider  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
            Immigration Rules dealing with long residence  noting  that  the
            appellant had lived in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years  but
            indicated that  she  had  significant  obstacles  to  living  in
            Bangladesh. In the written  submissions  it  was  asserted  that
            there were  "insurmountable  obstacles",  both  practically  and
            realistically for her to live in Bangladesh. She would be a lone
            female, vulnerable with mental  health  conditions  without  the
            support network of her relatives with whom she  had  lived  with
            for many years.

         2) The grounds cite the decision  in  Bossadi  (paragraph  276  ADE
            suitability and ties), and it is asserted that the judge omitted
            to consider this aspect of the legislation thus the judge  erred
            in  law  by  failing  to  consider  the   relevant   legislation
            applicable to the appellant.

         3) It is further submitted that the judge at [30]  stated  that  he
            was not satisfied that the appellant and her extended family had
            family life in the UK, but the judge omitted to give reasons  as
            to how we came to that finding. At [43] the  judge  contradicted
            his own finding and failed to give reasons why  the  appellant's
            brother and nephew statements were disregarded.  The  judge  was
            either accepting that she had a family life or not  and  if  not
            the  judge  should  have  given  reasons  for  reaching  such  a
            conclusion. In the written submissions  it  was  submitted  that
            there had not been a careful  assessment  under  the  "Kugathas"
            test (in relation to family life).

         4) The grounds state that it was noted at [47]  the  appellant  had
            played an integral role in family life by taking the children to
            and from school. It was submitted that while the judge  assessed
            her private life as having been  formed  while  his  status  was
            unlawful, the Home Office had given indication that her case  is
            being assessed under the long  residence  legacy  case  and  the
            delay was attributed to the failure  of  the  Home  Office.  The
            judge also indicated that she been a drain on public funds,  but
            she never claimed benefits have been provided for by her brother
            and nephew.

         5) In the written submissions a further point was raised which  was
            in line with the decision of R(on the application of MBT) v SSHD
            (restricted leave  ILR  disability  discrimination  [2020]  UKUT
            00414. It was submitted that removing  the  appellant  from  the
            care of her  relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  have  a
            distinct and acute impact upon the health of the appellant.

         6) In the written submissions it was also submitted that the  judge
            failed to give weight in the proportionality assessment  to  the
            issue of delay which was in excess of eight years to finalise  a
            decision. A substantial part of a family and  private  life  was
            accrued  under  the  presumption  that  the  Home  Office  would
            consider her case within the legacy  aspect.  It  was  submitted
            that in 2011 she received a letter  from  the  CRD  for  further
            documents which she complied with.


     43. In her oral submissions Miss Hussain submitted that  the  FtTJ  had
         correctly identified the decision of Kugathas at [44] but erred  in
         law by failing to carefully consider the family life the  appellant
         had in the United Kingdom since she was 17 years  of  age.  It  had
         been argued that she had been cared for by her brother and had been
         supported practically and financially. Whilst the  judge  had  said
         there was nothing more than emotional ties this was not  a  correct
         assessment. The appellant had been part  of  her  brother's  family
         life and had grown up with the children and  had  seen  as  a  very
         close family member. She had had two failed relationships in the UK
         and her brother had stepped in and  supported  her.  She  submitted
         that it was  unclear  why  the  judge  had  said  there  were  only
         emotional ties as it was clear that the  appellant  was  unable  to
         forge personal relationships with other  partners.  In  support  of
         that submission she  referred  to  the  witness  statement  of  the
         appellant's brother (at paragraph 12: Page 6 AB) which  meant  that
         she could not have a meaningful family life in Bangladesh.




     44. She submitted that whilst the respondent argued that she could have
         an alternative family  life  in  Bangladesh  the  judge  failed  to
         understand the gravity of the family life in the UK  and  that  the
         sisters had confirmed that they would not be  able  to  look  after
         her. Furthermore her brother had stated at paragraph  10  that  the
         home was not in his possession.


     45. Ms Hussain then turned to the medical issues and submitted that the
         judge did failed to adequately consider the evidence  and  the  GPs
         letter and the reference to being deported increasing  her  anxiety
         (see GP letter at page 8). In this context the case law  quoted  in
         the written submissions (R (on the  application  of  MBT  v  SSHD))
         applied and that the judge was wrong to say that her medical issues
         were minor.


     46. Ms Hussain submitted that it was not  clear  whether  these  issues
         were  raised  before  the  FtTJ  as  the  appellant  had  different
         representatives and that she was not sure  what  cross  examination
         was carried out as to why her relationships failed  in  the  United
         Kingdom, but her brother had said  that  she  would  have  problems
         maintaining a normal family life on her own. Miss Hussain cited the
         decision in Huang and that people are said  to  be  social  animals
         heavily dependent upon others. In this case she was  accustomed  to
         her brother to provide support.


     47. As to the issue of delay,  she  submitted  that  she  had  received
         notification that her case was being considered  under  the  legacy
         scheme and it was unclear why she did not have that benefit.


     48. As to paragraph 276ADE, she submitted there  was  no  reference  to
         this in the decision of the FtTJ and she had  not  been  in  United
         Kingdom for 20 years  but  there  were  exceptional  circumstances.
         Therefore the rules had not been considered carefully.


     49. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the Secretary of State  relied  upon  the
         written submissions dated 18 May 2020.


     50. Those written submissions make the following points:


         1) The judge did correctly apply the  relevant  Immigration  Rules;
            the appellant had been in United Kingdom for less than 20  years
            at the date of the decision and also at the hearing.  While  she
            continued  to  assert  that  there   were   obstacles   to   her
            reintegration to Bangladesh, that was not found to  be  credible
            by the judge who concluded that she would have a house  to  live
            in and could receive financial support from  a  brother  in  the
            United Kingdom that she also had a sister in Bangladesh.




         2) As to the issue of family life, at paragraph 48, the judge found
            that even if he was wrong about his assessment of whether  there
            was "family life", he considered the case  in  the  alternative.
            Thus there is no error of law or failure to make  a  finding  on
            family life.



         3) Dealing with the issue of the legacy point and  the  delay,  the
            respondent submitted that  the  appellant  was  served  with  an
            enforcement notice in 2011 and failed to  make  any  contact  or
            report. The judge dealt with this at paragraphs 62 and 63 of the
            decision and that the appellant failed to contact the respondent
            between 2011  -2018.  There  were  no  outstanding  applications
            during a seven -year period and even if  the  judge  found  that
            there was, the appellant had failed to take any  chasing  action
            during that period. The  written  submissions  assert  that  the
            appellant was now wrongly seeking to  use  the  delay  point  to
            undermined= the decision of the FtTJ.



         4) It is also submitted that the grounds seek  to  argue  that  the
            delay meant  that  the  appellant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
            lawfully. That was clearly wrong and as a  matter  of  fact  the
            appellant had not had leave to enter or remain since 2007.



         5) Insofar as the grounds assert that the judge was wrong  to  find
            that the appellant was not financially independent and that  she
            had no recourse to public funds, the judge found  that  she  had
            made use of the NHS and this  went  to  whether  she  could  use
            public funds.  The  fact  that  she  claimed  benefits  was  not
            relevant.

     51. In her oral submissions, Ms Pettersen submitted that whilst the
         FtTJ did not expressly set out paragraph 276 ADE, he clearly
         considered whether the appellant will be able to meet Article 8
         outside of the rules. The appellant had been resident in the UK for
         less than 20 years and the FtTJ considered the potential
         circumstances in Bangladesh and thus by definition he considered
         whether it was proportionate for the appellant to leave.


     52. In terms of the submissions made before the tribunal during the
         hearing, she submitted that the judge did take account of the
         medical evidence at paragraphs 49 and 53 of the decision and the
         only medical evidence was that from the GP. Whilst the GP stated
         that the appellant did not want to go to Bangladesh because she had
         no family members there which contrasted with the brother's witness
         statement at paragraph 11 which referred to having family
         relatives, the judge in any event had regard to the medical
         evidence.

     53. Ms Pettersen submitted that the judge did consider family life in
         the alternative and also carried out a comprehensive analysis of
         the issues raised when considering the proportionality balance
         including the issue of delay but that the appellant nor her brother
         had attempted to chase up the respondent or make any further
         application during that period of time. She submitted that the
         decision was one reasonably open to the FtTJ to make on the
         evidence available.

     54. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

Decision on error of law:

     55. Dealing with the first ground advanced on behalf of the appellant,
         Miss Hussain submits that the FtTJ failed to consider whether the
         appellant met the Immigration Rules under Paragraph 276ADE.


     56. I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the FtTJ's decision
         on the basis of that submission. I observe that the FtTJ recorded
         at paragraph [12] the submission made by Counsel at the hearing
         that the basis of the appeal he was relying on was said to be
         "Article 8 outside of the rules" which was later referred to at
         [50]. That would accord with the skeleton argument Counsel had
         produced the hearing where general authorities referencing Article
         8 were set out and other references were made to the applicable
         test "outside the rules".


     57. Furthermore, on the basis of the factual findings of the FtTJ the
         appellant could not meet the rules as the FtTJ concluded at [50].


     58. In terms of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii)-(iv) the appellant entered
         the United Kingdom on 11 June 2007 and therefore had not lived in
         United Kingdom for at least 20 years nor was she aged between 18 -
         25 years. As to paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) the appellant was
         required to show that there would be very significant obstacles to
         her integration into Bangladesh. The FtTJ's factual findings on the
         circumstances were set out in his decision. They can be summarised
         as follows. The appellant had lived in Bangladesh all of her
         childhood and formative years up until the age of 17 when she
         entered as a visitor (at [42]). The appellant had continuing and
         subsisting family ties in Bangladesh which included her sister (at
         [42]) and cousins who could provide assistance and that the family
         home was available for her to return to (at [64]) there is no
         dispute that the appellant retained her language and cultural ties
         of Bangladesh given that she gave her evidence with the aid of a
         Bengali interpreter (at [30]) and the judge found that she would
         retain the financial support from her brother (at [66]).

     59. When considering very significant obstacles the assessment of
         integration is considered relevant and Sales LJ in the decision of
         the Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA
         Civ 2016 held that integration called for a:

         "broad evaluative judgement to be made as to whether the individual
         be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the
         society in that other country is carried on  and  the  capacity  to
         participate in it, so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
         accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
         society and to build up within a reasonable time variety  of  human
         relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  or
         family life."


     60. The factual circumstances in the case of Kamara are different to
         the present appeal; that was a deportation appeal but the reference
         to a "broad evaluative judgement" is the necessary assessment to be
         made on all appeals when considering whether there are "very
         significant obstacles". Whilst the FtTJ did not expressly state
         that there were no very significant obstacles to her integration, I
         accept the submission made by Ms Pettersen that in the light of the
         factual findings made by the FtTJ that they properly dealt with the
         relevant test set out in the authorities.

     61. Whilst it was submitted that the appellant was a lone female with
         no support, that submission fails to take into account the factual
         findings made concerning the circumstances of the appellant.

     62. I now turn to the second ground relied upon by Miss Hussain which
         relates to the FtTJ's assessment of the issue of family life. In
         her submissions, Miss Hussain accepted that the FtTJ did apply the
         correct test set out in the decision of Kugathas and that the issue
         related to whether there were real, committed, and effective
         support between the adult members concerned (I refer to the FtTJ
         decision at [44 - 45]). However, she submits that the FtTJ failed
         to give reasons why the appellant's brother and nephew statements
         were disregarded. She submits that the judge made contradictory
         findings on whether family life had been established and had failed
         to give sufficient reasons.

     63.  I have carefully considered those submissions in the light of the
         decision of the FtTJ and the evidence that was before the tribunal.
         The FtTJ's assessment of the issue of family life is set out at
         paragraphs [43] - [48] and after considering the test set out in
         Kugathas and the evidence provided on behalf of the appellant he
         reached the conclusion at [46] that there was nothing to suggest
         that the appellant's relationship with her nephews and nieces "goes
         beyond anything more than mere emotional ties. She has not taken
         the place of their mother and is not in loco parentis". At [47] the
         FtTJ stated "the nephews/nieces live with their mother and
         currently the appellant does not care for them. They are nearly all
         adults. I accept that she has been here over 14 years she has
         become a significant family member in the household. She has picked
         them up from school and there is a letter from the school which
         confirmed this. They went together to restaurants and they will be
         upset if she had to return." At [48] he concluded on the evidence
         that overall the relationship between the appellant's brother and
         herself and her nephews and nieces did not go beyond "mere
         emotional ties".

     64. Whilst Miss Hussain submitted that the witness statements of the
         nephews/nieces were not considered, the FtTJ expressly recorded at
         [43] that he had read the witness statements of the appellant's
         brother and her nephews, and then went on within the decision to
         consider the nature of the family life identified in those
         statements.

     65. It is relevant to consider the contents of those witness
         statements. The witness statement of the appellant's brother is set
         out at pages 5 - 6 of the bundle. It sets out that after entry to
         the UK that his sister was living with his family and children in
         the UK. Pausing there, I note that the witness statement of the
         appellant in 2007 provided for the hearing before IJ Lambert,
         stated that she did not live with her brother because there was
         insufficient room but that she had lived with other family members.
         Nonetheless the appellant did return to live with her brother on a
         date unspecified. Reference was made at page 7 to the four children
         and that the appellant had accompanied them to school and looked
         after them. At paragraph 8 it was said that she had made sure they
         attended school and paragraph 9 that the children loved the
         appellant and again reference is made to them being taken to school
         and that she was part of the family. No other particularisation is
         of family life was set out in the witness statement. The letters
         provided from the nephews were set out at pages 31 - 34 of the
         bundle. As the judge noted, two of the appellant's nephews were
         adults (aged 21 and 19) and the other two children were 17 and 14
         (at paragraph [26]). It did not appear that any of them relied upon
         assistance from the appellant to care for them given their ages.
         The thrust of those letters is that they lived together in the past
         as a close family and reference is made to the appellant picking
         them up from school and that they would eat out at restaurants and
         that they were attached to her (page 31). The second letter is in
         similar terms at page 33.


     66. The relevant evidence in the appellant's witness statement is set
         out at paragraph 17 where it was recorded that she had a strong
         relationship with her nephews and that she had accompanied them to
         school and made sure that they are fed and looked after at home and
         had been doing so since they were very young. No further evidence
         was given of the nature of family life in light of their ages now
         or any elements of dependency or support other than that set out at
         paragraph 17.



     67. When looking at the decision of the FtTJ, he identified that the
         relevant family members are  adults ( brother and elder two
         nephews)  and two older aged children are 17 and 14 and expressly
         accepted those matters set out in the witness statements that the
         appellant played a part of family life picking them up from school,
         going to restaurants with them and that she had become a
         significant family member. Whilst the FtTJ stated at [48] that
         there was nothing to suggest that the relationships went beyond
         mere emotional ties and that therefore family life was not
         established as a result, the judge did not end his consideration
         there. At [48] the judge went on to consider family life in the
         alternative and on the basis of the evidence summarised above and
         then went on to consider issues of proportionality. Consequently,
         there is no contradiction in the FtTJ's analysis as a judge plainly
         set out that whilst he did not consider there was family life, in
         the alternative he proceeded on the basis that there was family
         life established on the evidence which he had considered which was
         followed by an  assessment of proportionality. As set out, the
         evidence of the nature of the family life was not particularised in
         any great detail nor did it go beyond that set out briefly in the
         witness statements. As the judge noted, two of the nephews were
         adults and the other two nephews were 17 and 14. Whilst the
         appellant had assisted in their care at a younger stage such as
         taking to school and cooking meals, the judge was entitled to find
         on the evidence that they had not taken the place of their mother
         and that there was no evidence for her acting "in loco parentis"
         (at [46]). However, the judge properly accepted that the appellant
         had become a significant family member in the household and that
         they would naturally be upset if she were to leave.


     68. Therefore even if the FtTJ was wrong to conclude that the evidence
         was insufficient to found a family life with members of the
         extended family, I am satisfied at the judge in the alternative
         proceeded on the basis that there was family life. Had he ended his
         consideration of family life on that point, he would have been in
         error but as the respondent's reply sets out, the judge did not
         fall into error because he went on to consider family life based on
         the evidence that was before the tribunal in the alternative. I am
         also satisfied that he considered the nature of the family life in
         accordance with the evidence given the lack of any real
         particularisation beyond that which I have referred to above.

     69. Miss Hussain in her submissions directed the court's attention to
         the witness statement of the appellant's brother in support of her
         submission that the judge failed to take account of her dependency
         on the family in the UK and in particular paragraph 12 of the
         witness statement where reference is made to her suffering from
         "slow learning" and that she was "unable to maintain a normal
         family life of her own". This was not a point raised in the grounds
         nor can I find any evidential support for this in the GPs report or
         in any other evidence. As Miss Hussain accepted she could not say
         what evidence had been put before the FtTJ or what arguments had
         been submitted by the appellant's previous counsel. Whilst Miss
         Hussain sought to draw an analogy between the two failed marriages
         and paragraph 12 of the witness statement, there was no evidential
         basis for that submission before the FtTJ. The only reference to
         the failed marriages is  that set out at [57] stating that the
         appellant had entered into two religious marriages which had not
         ultimately been successful, and it is recorded that the appellant
         indicated that there was some immigration advantage in getting
         married ( although it is right to note also that the appellant's
         brother indicated that it was not to do so). There was nothing
         stated in the evidence concerning the ending of either of the two
         marriages or that the appellant was therefore unable to maintain
         her own family life.


     70. A further point relied upon by Miss Hussain, although not set out
         in the original grounds, related to the FtTJ's consideration of the
         appellant's medical needs. It was submitted both in the written
         submissions and her oral submissions that the medical evidence was
         not properly considered by the FtTJ.

     71. I have considered the evidence that was before the tribunal which
         was in the form of a report from the appellant's GP (set out at
         page 8). As Ms Petterson observed the contents of the report were
         not entirely accurate because the GP recorded the appellant's
         account to him that she had no family in Bangladesh which was
         inconsistent not only with the factual findings of the judge but
         also the evidence of the appellant's brother. The report did set
         out that the appellant had been suffering from anxiety and a low
         mood for some time and that her mental state had become worse
         recently and that she suffered from anxiety and poor sleep. Having
         considered the decision of the FtTJ it cannot be reasonably said
         that the judge failed to give consideration to the medical report
         and he expressly considered its contents at [49] and at [53] noting
         that she suffered from anxiety, poor sleep and a low mood and had
         been taking medication for this. He also took into account that she
         failed to attend the specialist appointment (which had been
         referred to in the GP letter) and that she did not have any
         specialist consultant. The judge concluded that the appellant did
         not have "a severe mental health problem". In the light of the
         contents of the GPs letter that was a finding that was reasonably
         open to the judge to make and even if the reference to it being
         "minor" did not reflect how it would be perceived by the appellant,
         the finding that her mental health condition was not severe was one
         that was open to him. The decision letter also set out, that there
         would be sufficient treatment available in Bangladesh (see page 4
         of the decision letter).


     72. I do not consider that there can be any analogy drawn between the
         case cited in the written submissions of R(MBT) ( as cited)  and
         the facts of this current appeal. The decision concerned the
         operation of the restricted leave policy and the effect upon an
         appellant's mental health having repeated grants of restricted
         leave. That was not the factual basis of the appeal before this
         judge. However, I am satisfied that judge took into account the
         medical evidence when considering the appellant circumstances and
         did so in accordance with the evidence that was provided.

     73. The last point relied upon by Miss Hussain is that the judge failed
         to give weight to a material matter in the proportionality
         assessment and that this related to the "legacy" point relied upon
         before the FtTJ.


     74. The written submissions state that on 15 March 2011 the appellant
         received a letter from the Case Resolution Directorate requesting
         further documents and that the appellant complied by sending
         photographs and evidence of her identity. It is therefore submitted
         that the respondent had given an indication that her case was being
         assessed under the old long residence legacy cases and that there
         was a delay on the part of the Home Office coming to a decision in
         a reasonable time.


     75. No further submissions were made by Miss Hussain by reference to
         the position of the appellant and the legacy policy referred to in
         the grounds save that it is recorded in the decision at [54] that
         counsel had argued that the respondent consented to the appellant
         remaining in the country by not removing her and that "when
         questioned he said that he was not relying on any specific policy
         mainly on the case law and the delay".


     76. The point Miss Hussain made was the broad submission that the FtTJ
         failed to give weight to the delay on the part of the respondent.

     77. The legacy programme was an operational programme launched by UK
         Borders Agency on 25 July 2006 to resolve a large number of
         unresolved asylum claims which led to the setting up of a
         directorate called the "Case Resolution Directorate". By the end of
         2006 there was a backlog of asylum/human right applications with
         500,000 outstanding applications received prior to 5 March 2007 and
         transferred to the CRD.

     78. The legacy programme has been the subject of litigation in a number
         of cases before the Upper Tribunal, the Administrative Court, and
         the Court of Appeal. In  the decision of Jaku,  Ouseley J stated:


         "6. At the heart of much of the litigation over the years have been
         eventually  largely  fruitless  and  in  my  judgment  misconceived
         attempts by claimants to show that there was  a  special  and  more
         favourable policy which should be applied to those in  the   legacy
         Programme, derived from a target or aim as  to  the  date  by  when
         decisions would be made. This  target  then  was  elevated  into  a
         legitimate expectation; missing it  was  said  to  create  unlawful
         delay such as to create an historic injustice, leading to arguments
         that particular forms of leave should  be  granted,  that  policies
         should be treated as frozen, that particular periods  of  residence
         should be given great weight, all deriving  from  a  misreading  of
         policy and especially of alleged policy documents at a level  below
         the EIG."

     79. There was no such thing as a legacy policy as such and as Counsel
         submitted before the FtTJ, he did not seek to identify any such
         specific policy. Insofar as it was submitted that the Home Office
         had consented to the appellant remaining in the UK by not removing
         her, the Secretary of State was entitled to proceed on the basis
         that those unlawfully in the UK will leave of their own account and
         as such the Secretary of State is not obliged to remove any
         individual or issue a removal decision (see decision of the Supreme
         Court in Patel [2013]  UKSC).


     80. Looking at the letter sent to the appellant and against the general
         background, there was no outstanding asylum claim or any human
         rights claim that had been made by the appellant. As the judge
         identified within his decision in several paragraphs, the only
         application that was made by the appellant was one that was made in
         2018 (see [55]). Whilst the letter referred to "your case is in the
         backlog of older applications" there was no dispute that the
         appellant had made no application and other than providing her
         photograph and identification, no additional grounds or submissions
         were provided either at that stage or any further submissions made
         setting out the appellant's claim until April 2018  and later
         additional grounds provided in 2019 which the respondent addressed
         in the decision letter dated 28 June 2019 and thus with little
         delay.

     81. Nonetheless, the FtTJ did address those circumstances within his
         decision. The judge found that there was no evidence that the
         appellant chased up the Home Office between 2011 until making a
         further application in 2018 (at [55]). He considered the issue of
         delay in accordance with the decision of EB (Kosovo) at [61]
         setting out the relevance of delay. At [62] the judge considered
         the effect of the delay upon the appellant and found that the
         appellant had not strengthened her family ties to any great extent
         because of the delay. He found that she had not made an application
         and that the reply to the letter was nothing more than a reply and
         did not rank as an application.

     82. Nonetheless in my judgement he was right to identify at  [67] that
         delay can reduce the impact of the public interest in firm and fair
         immigration control (set out in section 117B(1) of the public
         interest considerations) but that the appellant had remained in the
         UK unlawfully mainly due to the failure to make an application
         following the refusal of her claim by the tribunal in 2007.


     83. The judge did place weight on the failure of the Home Office to
         take steps to her removal as can be seen by his reference at [67]
         that "the Home Office could have dealt with the case better".
         However he considered the issue of delay against the factual
         background and concluded that there had been a previous decision
         which had found the appellant not be credible and which found that
         she could return to Bangladesh. There had been no further
         applications since the reply to the letter sent in 2011 and that
         "simply returning the form with photographs on it is not sufficient
         to show a willingness to engage in immigration process. We have no
         evidence that she has been to an MP or that a formal application
         has been made. There appears to be no chasing of the Home Office
         relating to the letter sent in April 2011. Even if this been a
         delay on the part of the Home Office the appellant has not extended
         family connections by entering into a subsisting relation with a
         partner. There are no children. She continues to live at her
         brother's home."

     84. Thus, the judge concluded that even if the Home Office had delayed,
         the appellant had not strengthened her family ties by establishing
         family life with a partner or by the birth of children and that her
         family life had continued as it had before living with family
         members.


     85. Consequently, the judge did consider the issue of delay as part of
         the proportionality balance. He expressly directed himself to the
         effect of delay set out in the decision of EB (Kosovo) and its
         significance for an Article 8 claim noting that in her case, no
         application or supporting evidence had ever been provided until
         2018. He also recognised that the delay (if it could be attributed
         to the Home Office) would have the effect of reducing the weight
         afforded to the requirements of fair and fair immigration control.
         However, as Carnworth LJ observed in Akaeker v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
         947 at paragraph 25:


         "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on  the  part  of  the
         Secretary of State is capable of being a relevant factor, then  the
         weight to be given to it in the particular case was  a  matter  for
         the tribunal"."


     86. On the facts of the appeal, the judge did not consider that it  was
         a  case  of  a   dysfunctional   system   yielding   unpredictable,
         inconsistent, or unfair outcomes between individuals or classes  of
         individuals but rather that if there had been any delay,  it  could
         only be seen in the context of the  first  type  identified  in  EB
         (Kosovo) and the effect if it has, if any, on  the  development  of
         closer personal and social ties and  the  establishment  of  deeper
         roots. Those matters were properly considered by  the  FtTJ  within
         his decision and he did attach weight to the issue  of  delay  when
         carrying out the proportionality exercise. The weight attributed to
         that factor was a matter entirely for the FtTJ.


     87. In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8, the heart
         of the assessment is whether the decision strikes a fair balance
         between the due weight to be given to the public interest in
         maintaining an effective system of immigration control and the
         impact of the decision on the individual's private or family life.
         In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a court or
         Tribunal should give appropriate weight to Parliament's and the
         Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of the general
         public interest as expressed in the relevant rules and statutes:
         see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and see   R (MM and others)
         (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC
         10, the Supreme Court at [43]. Whilst the decision is not
         particularly well structured, when reading the decision as a whole,
         the FtTJ took into account the relevant factors in the
         proportionality balance, including the length of residence, the
         nature of the family and private life, her medical circumstances,
         the issue of delay and the S117 public interest factors, and
         reached a conclusion that was reasonably open to him to make.


     88. Whilst the decision reached by the FtTJ is not one that the
         appellant agrees with, the question whether the decision contains a
         material error of law is not whether another Judge could have
         reached the opposite conclusion but whether this Judge reached a
         conclusion by appropriately directing himself as to the relevant
         law and assessing the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

     89. The judge had the advantage of considering all the evidence in the
         case including oral evidence from the appellant and her family
         members. As the Supreme Court stated in Henderson v Foxworth
         Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]:

         "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that  the
         appellate court considers that it would have  reached  a  different
         conclusion. What matters is whether the decision  under  appeal  is
         one that no reasonable judge could have reached.

     90. In any given case an evaluative exercise of this kind under Article
         8 may admit of more than one  answer.   If  so,  provided  all  the
         appropriate factors have been  taken  into  account,  the  decision
         cannot be impugned unless it is perverse or irrational, in a  sense
         of falling  outside  the  range  of  permissible  decisions.   Miss
         Hussain did not seek to argue that the decision of the judge or his
         assessment of the evidence was either irrational or perverse.

     91. Consequently, it has not been demonstrated by the grounds as argued
         by the appellant that the decision of the FtTJ involved  making  of
         an error on a point of law.  It follows that the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ shall stand.



Notice of Decision.

     92. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision stands.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated      15 February 2021






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.




