
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12365/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 October 2018                        |On 19 October 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who entered the UK lawfully as  a
    student in 2002. His leave to remain  was  extended  until  31  January
    2009. An application to vary that leave further was however refused  on
    13 February 2009, and his appeal rights in  relation  to  that  refusal
    were then exhausted on 10 December 2009. Thus he became  an  overstayer
    on 31 January 2009.

 2. On 13 May 2010 a grant of discretionary leave  to  remain  was  however
    made, for a short period, in  order  to  allow  him  to  complete,  and
    submit, his PhD thesis, so that he might be awarded  his  degree.  That
    leave expired on 30  June  2010,  and  then  the  Appellant  became  an
    overstayer once again.

 3. On 10 June 2011 the Appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier  1
    (Post Study Work) Migrant, which was granted until 12 August  2013.  He
    then sought to vary that leave claiming that he was entitled to ILR  on
    the basis that he had enjoyed a ten year continuous  period  of  lawful
    residence in the UK. That  application  was  correctly  refused  on  10
    December 2013. Although his appeal was initially allowed on  Article  8
    grounds by the First-tier Tribunal's decision of 19 March 2014 ["FtT"],
    the Upper Tribunal set that decision aside for material error  of  law,
    and remade the decision upon the Appellant's Article 8 appeal so as  to
    dismiss it  on  23  July  2014.  The  Appellant's  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted, and he became an overstayer, from 12 August 2013.

 4. On 24 November 2015 the Appellant made  a  further  application  for  a
    grant  of  ILR,  asserting  once  again  that  he  met  the   requisite
    Immigration Rules, as one with a ten year continuous period  of  lawful
    residence in the UK. Inevitably that application was refused on 26  May
    2016. The file before me does not disclose if this  decision  was  also
    subject to appeal - but if it were, then the appeal was unsuccessful.

 5. On 21 December 2016 the Appellant's  current  solicitors  submitted  an
    application for a grant of leave to remain, on behalf of  himself,  his
    wife and children [A1-], on the basis of the "private  life"  they  had
    established in the UK. The application  was  made  in  the  Appellant's
    name, but the covering letter to that application,  dated  21  December
    2016, explained that it was in substance an  application  made  in  the
    name of his eldest daughter on the basis that she was now a "qualifying
    child" as defined in s117D of the 2002 Act, since she had now  attained
    the age of 7 [G3-]. The application was refused on 2 October 2017.  The
    Appellant's Article 8 appeal against this decision came before the  FtT
    at North Shields on 6 February. The  Respondent  did  not  attend  that
    hearing, but sought no adjournment to enable him to do so. The  Article
    8 appeal was allowed, in a decision promulgated on 20 February 2018.

 6. The Respondent's application for permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    the FtT on 15 March 2018 on all the grounds raised.  In  particular  it
    was considered arguable;

 i) that the Judge erred in allowing the  introduction  of  a  new  matter,
    without the consent of  the  Respondent  (namely  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant's daughter faced a risk  of  FGM  in  the  event  the  family
    relocated to Nigeria), and,

ii) that the Judge erred in failing to take into  account  the  immigration
    history of the Appellant.

 7. There has been  no  application  by  either  party  to  adduce  further
    evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A). The Appellant did  however  submit  a
    Rule 24 response to the grant of permission dated 26 September 2018.

 8. Thus the matter comes before me.




    Application to recuse and adjourn

 9. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms Soltani applied for me  to
    recuse myself, and in consequence adjourn the hearing  of  the  appeal.
    The basis for the application was that it was my decision  of  23  July
    2014 that had set aside the FtT  decision  upon  the  2014  appeal  for
    material error of law, and remade the  decision  upon  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 appeal so as to dismiss it.

10. Ms Soltani accepted that no application had ever been made on behalf of
    the Appellant to either the FtT, or  the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  seek  a
    direction that the appeal should  not  be  listed  before  myself,  (or
    indeed any other judge who had determined any previous appeal  advanced
    by the Appellant). Nonetheless it was argued (without reference to  any
    relevant jurisprudence) that  since  I  had  heard,  and  allowed,  the
    Respondent's 2014 challenge in the Upper Tribunal  to  the  Appellant's
    Article  8  appeal,  it  must  follow   automatically   that   it   was
    inappropriate for me to hear the Respondent's challenge to the decision
    of the FtT upon the current appeal.  It  was  not  suggested  that  any
    "actual bias" existed, but simply that the fact that  I  had  made  the
    2014 decision would raise a perception of bias against the Appellant.

11. As Ms Soltani accepts, there is no rule of law that  prevents  a  judge
    from hearing more than one appeal by the same individual, or even  from
    hearing appeals by more than one member of  the  same  family.  In  any
    event, the hearing in 2014 concerned an error of  law  challenge  to  a
    decision of the FtT upon the Appellant's then Article 8  appeal.  Since
    the Appellant's attempt to  challenge  my  decision  of  23  July  2014
    failed, it followed that my decision upon that  Article  8  appeal  was
    bound to form the starting point for any Judge required to  consider  a
    further Article  8  appeal  thereafter,  whoever  they  might  be.  The
    Appellant could not expect any decision maker to ignore that assessment
    of where the proportionality balance lay, upon the facts as  they  then
    were.

12. Since it is not suggested that there is any real  or  actual  bias,  it
    follows that in order for the application to succeed the Appellant  has
    to demonstrate a sound basis for an  assertion  of  perceived  bias.  A
    tenuous, or frivolous, assertion that such a perception might arise, is
    not sufficient for  that  purpose.  Since  Ms  Soltani  was  unable  to
    articulate any way in which the mere fact that I made the  decision  of
    23 July 2014 would give rise to any perception of bias, I am  satisfied
    that to succeed the application would have to  rely  upon  the  way  in
    which I had expressed myself within that decision. Ms Soltani  appeared
    to accept that point, but the highest she felt  able  to  put  such  an
    argument was the following passage;

         "4.  On 13 May 2010 a short grant of DLR was made to the  Appellant
         to the end of June 2010 to allow him to complete and submit his PHD
         thesis,  and  be  awarded  that  degree  [ApB  p19].  I  am  wholly
         unpersuaded that this grant of DLR was open ended,  or  indefinite,
         or that it allowed him to pursue his studies  indefinitely.  It  is
         quite plain from the terms of the grant, for the  reasons  set  out
         below, that it was not, and that it did not.

         5.   Thus on 30  June  2010  the  Appellant  became  once  more  an
         overstayer, and on any view he retained that status until 12 August
         2011. Indeed it was about twelve months before the  Appellant  even
         applied for a further grant of leave, so that on 10 June  2011  the
         Appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work)
         Migrant. On 12 August 2011 he was granted a period of LTR  in  that
         capacity until 12 August 2013.

         6.   On 28 May 2013 the  Appellant  applied  for  a  grant  of  ILR
         asserting that he had enjoyed  a  ten  year  continuous  period  of
         lawful residence in the UK. That assertion was untrue, as  he  must
         have known, and that application was refused on 10  December  2013.
         At the same time, pursuant to s47 of the 2002 Act, a  decision  was
         made to remove the Appellant to Nigeria.  [emphasis added]"

 1. Thus the application  rested  upon  the  wording  "that  assertion  was
    untrue, as he must have known". No reference was made to  any  relevant
    jurisprudence in support of the application. The principles are however
    relatively  well  know,  and  the  assumption   that   a   judge   must
    automatically recuse themselves from any subsequent  hearing  involving
    an individual whose evidence he has heard on another occasion finds  no
    support in the approach  set  out  in  Locabail  (UK)  Ltd  v  Bayfield
    Properties Ltd [1999] EWCA Civ 3004. The qualification  is  that  in  a
    case concerning the credibility of an individual, a Judge might have to
    recuse himself if he had in  a  previous  case  rejected  the  witness'
    evidence in such outspoken terms as to throw doubt upon his ability  to
    approach such a person's evidence with an open  mind  on  a  subsequent
    occasion [25]. If, however, that is the true nature of the  Appellant's
    application it must fail for at  least  two  reasons;  (i)  I  did  not
    express myself in such terms in 2014, and, (ii) the current hearing  is
    an error of law jurisdictional challenge, that does not require  me  to
    consider the weight to be given to the Appellant's evidence.

 2. In any event, (i) there has been significant passage of time since  the
    2014 hearing, (ii) moreover the need for  an  application  for  such  a
    direction had plainly never occurred to the Appellant or  his  advisers
    prior to the hearing, (iii)  the delay in the disposal of  the  appeal,
    and waste of public resources, that my recusal  would  necessitate  was
    neither  in  the  wider  public  interest,  nor  consistent  with   the
    overriding objective, and, (iv) recusal would also achieve no practical
    purpose since any decision maker would have to take the  2014  decision
    as their starting point in an  evaluation  of  the  current  Article  8
    rights of the family. In the circumstances I rejected the application.

    The jurisdictional challenge

13. The first ground of appeal is that  the  Appellant  introduced  at  the
    hearing a "new matter", namely a risk of FGM to his  daughters,  having
    failed to seek the Respondent's consent to his reliance upon  it.  Thus
    pursuant to s85(6) of the 2002 Act, it  is  argued  that  the  FtT  was
    unable to consider such evidence, and materially erred in law in  doing
    so. The only course open to the FtT in the  circumstances,  Mr  Diwnycz
    argues, given the Respondent had not attended the hearing of the appeal
    was for the hearing to be adjourned for directions.

14. Although Ms Soltani initially sought to argue that the covering  letter
    to the Appellant's application for leave to  remain  dated  21  October
    2016 raised the prospect of a risk of harm  to  his  daughters  in  the
    event the family were removed to Nigeria, it is plain that there is  no
    substance to that argument. There is quite simply no express  reference
    to FGM contained in the text of that letter. When this was pointed out,
    Ms Soltani argued that one sentence from the quotation  from  what  was
    then the current Amnesty International report upon  Nigeria  implicitly
    raised a risk of FGM. The sentence in question reads; "violence against
    children,   including   child   trafficking,   child   labour,   sexual
    exploitation and harmful traditional practices continue to  take  place
    in Nigeria." I reject the suggestion that such  an  oblique  reference,
    that can properly be said to have been buried within a  detailed  seven
    page letter, raises a risk of FGM as  something  the  Appellant  relied
    upon.

15. Ultimately it was accepted by Ms Soltani that the first  occasion  upon
    which the existence of a risk of FGM to the  Appellant's  daughter  was
    raised, was  in  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  dated  Friday  2
    February 2016. This document was served upon the Respondent by  fax  of
    1317hours, although it was not filed with the Tribunal until  Monday  5
    February 2016; ie the day before the FtT hearing.

16. It is common ground that the Respondent has never commented in  writing
    upon the content of the witness statement of 2 February 2016,  and  has
    never given consent to the Appellant's reliance upon anything that may,
    or may not constitute a "new matter". Ms Soltani argued that  this  was
    irrelevant for two reasons;

 i) the assertion that such a  risk  existed  did  not  constitute  a  "new
    matter", but was merely new evidence  relied  upon  in  the  Article  8
    appeal, so that no protection ground of appeal was advanced in reliance
    upon it, and,

ii) the Appellant had not asserted that there was a real risk of FGM to his
    daughter, merely that at best it was a possibility. His case  had  been
    that the significance of the  fact  that  his  daughter  had  not  been
    mutilated, lay in the cultural embarrassment or awkwardness  that  this
    would cause to his father as a result of his father holding  the  local
    office of chief.

17. As to the second reason, Ms Soltani accepted that there was no evidence
    before me from the colleague who had represented the Appellant below to
    explain how his case had been presented to the FtT, and to  provide  an
    evidential basis for this second argument. She accepted  that  she  did
    not know how the appeal had been argued before the FtT.  On  the  other
    hand, the Judge clearly understood the Appellant's case to be that  his
    daughters faced a real risk of serious  harm  in  Nigeria  because  she
    would be likely to be subject to FGM [41]. It is easy to see why, given
    the terms in which his witness  statement  was  drafted;  "My  presence
    along with my wife might be alright to prevent this from happening, but
    I can't be sure of what could happen to ... in either of our  absence".
    The statement then went on to comment upon the Appellant's  perceptions
    of both the physical and psychological injuries that  can  result  from
    FGM. Ms Soltani argued that the Appellant had  never  advanced  in  any
    tenable way that any member of his family required protection from  the
    risk of FGM, because he had never claimed that any member of his family
    was actually at risk of harm, and that his case had been no higher than
    that he did not know what would happen to  his  daughters  in  Nigeria.
    That argument is in my judgement not based upon a fair reading  of  the
    Appellant's witness statement, and it is unsupported by any evidence of
    what the Appellant, or his representative said during the  hearing.  In
    the circumstances I regret that I can find no substance in Ms Soltani's
    argument that the Judge misunderstood the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    case as presented to her.

18. As to the first reason, I note with regret that neither  representative
    brought to the hearing any relevant jurisprudence  that  would  provide
    guidance upon the application of s85(6) of the 2002 Act. The appeal was
    stood down whilst I obtained copies for the representatives  of  Mahmud
    (s85 NIAA 2002 - "new matters" - Iran) [2017] UKUT 488 and Quaidoo (new
    matter: procedure/process) Ghana [2018] UKUT 87, and provided them with
    time for their digestion.

19. In Mahmud a Vice Presidential panel offered the following guidance upon
    what constituted a "new matter" for the purpose of s85;

         "Conclusions on the meaning of a 'new matter' in section 8(6)

         29. A matter is the factual substance of  a  claim.  A  ground  of
             appeal is the legal basis on which  the  facts  in  any  given
             matter could form the basis of a  challenge  to  the  decision
             under appeal. For  example,  medical  evidence  of  a  serious
             health condition could be a matter which constitutes a  ground
             of appeal on human rights grounds based on Article  3  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights which if  breached,  would
             mean that removal would be contrary to section 6 of the  Human
             Rights Act, a ground of appeal in section 84(2)  of  the  2002
             Act. Similarly, evidence of a relationship with a  partner  in
             the United Kingdom could  be  a  matter  which  constitutes  a
             ground of appeal based on Article 8 and for the  same  reasons
             could fall within section 84(2) of the 2002  Act  as  if  made
             out, removal would be contrary  to  section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act.

         30. A 'new matter' is a  matter  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal. In the  absence  of  this
             restriction, section 85(5) of the 2002 Act  could  potentially
             allow the Respondent to  give  the  Tribunal  jurisdiction  to
             consider something which is not a ground of appeal by consent,
             thereby undermining sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act;

         31. Practically, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
             previously been considered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
             context of the decision in section 82(1) or a  statement  made
             by the appellant under section 120. This requires  the  matter
             to be factually distinct from that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant, as opposed to further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing matter. The assessment will always be fact sensitive.
             By way of example, evidence that a couple  had  married  since
             the decision is likely to be new evidence but not a new matter
             where the relationship had previously  been  relied  upon  and
             considered by the Secretary  of  State.  Conversely,  evidence
             that a couple had had a child since the decision is likely  to
             be a new matter as it adds an additional distinct  new  family
             relationship (with consequential requirements to consider  the
             best interests of the child under section 55 of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009)  which  itself  could
             separately raise or establish a ground of appeal under Article
             8 that removal would be contrary to section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act.

         32. In accordance with the construction of section 85(6)(a)  of  a
             'new matter' contended for by Counsel for  the  Appellant,  he
             submitted that on the facts of this case, the  Respondent  had
             considered the matter, (namely whether the Appellant's removal
             from the United Kingdom would be contrary to section 6 of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998 on the grounds that  there  would  be  a
             disproportionate interference with his right  to  respect  for
             private and family life protected by Article 8 of the European
             Convention on Human Rights) so that no further matter  raising
             the same  ground  could  be  a  'new  matter'  within  section
             85(6)(b).  For  the  reasons  set  out  above,   the   primary
             submission fails and therefore so does the submission that  in
             fact, the Respondent had considered the matter. The fact  that
             the Respondent  had,  in  her  decision  dated  19  May  2016,
             considered the Appellant's private  and  family  life  on  the
             basis of information known  to  her  at  that  date,  was  not
             sufficient to show consideration  of  the  matter  now  relied
             upon: the Appellant's relationship with a new partner and  her
             child. Actual consideration in a decision letter  of  the  new
             factual matrix relied upon is required for a  matter  to  fall
             outside section 85(6)(b) and therefore not be a 'new matter'."

20. That guidance was approved and confirmed by the Presidential  panel  in
    Quaidoo.

21. With that guidance in mind it is in my judgement clear that  the  first
    reason advanced by Ms Soltani must fail. It is self  evident,  for  the
    reasons set out above, that the  evidence  concerning  a  risk  of  FGM
    constituted evidence that the  Respondent  had  been  given  no  proper
    opportunity to consider in advance of the  hearing.  It  had  not  been
    raised in a section 120 statement, or in the application for  leave  to
    remain. The evidence (however strong  or  weak)  that  the  Appellant's
    daughters faced a risk of FGM in Nigeria, was capable of constituting a
    claim that their removal to Nigeria would pose a risk of  a  breach  of
    their Article 3 rights. Potentially, it  could  go  even  further,  and
    constitute a claim (however weak) that their parents risked a breach of
    their Article 3 rights in  the  event  they  sought  to  protect  their
    daughters. As such it is abundantly clear that  it  was  evidence  that
    could constitute a ground of appeal of the type mentioned in section 84
    of the 2002 Act, and thus a "new matter" for  the  purpose  of  section
    85(6).

22. I have noted Ms Soltani's argument that this  new  evidence  was  never
    relied upon before the FtT so as to constitute a new ground of  appeal,
    but simply as evidence  that  should  be  considered  as  part  of  the
    proportionality balancing exercise. The argument is  not  supported  by
    any evidence concerning how the appeal was advanced to the FtT, and  it
    is inconsistent with the terms in which the FtT's decision is  written.
    I am not satisfied it  has  any  proper  foundation  in  what  actually
    occurred at the hearing below. More importantly it is an argument  that
    cannot in any event succeed. It is not open to an applicant to say that
    their new evidence can only be considered by the FtT  in  a  particular
    way, and within say the confines of an Article 8 appeal,  if  in  truth
    that evidence raises a real risk of a  breach  of  either  the  Refugee
    Convention, or, Article 3 rights. An applicant cannot simply avoid  the
    consequences of  section  85(5)  by  undertaking  some  form  of  self-
    labelling or ring-fencing exercise in order  to  restrict  the  use  to
    which his evidence can be put by the FtT. Thus  Ms  Soltani's  argument
    falls into the same trap as that advanced and dismissed in Mahmud [32];

         "The fact that the Respondent had, in her  decision  dated  19  May
         2016, considered the Appellant's private and  family  life  on  the
         basis of information known to her at that date, was not  sufficient
         to  show  consideration  of  the  matter  now  relied   upon:   the
         Appellant's relationship with a new partner and her  child.  Actual
         consideration in a decision letter of the new factual matrix relied
         upon is required for a matter to fall outside section 85(6)(b)  and
         therefore not be a 'new matter'."

23. Accordingly the Respondent makes out his first ground. It was incumbent
    upon the FtT to determine whether the new factual matrix  relied  upon,
    of a risk of FGM, constituted  a  "new  matter",  before  going  on  to
    dispose of the appeal. It is common ground that the FtT did not do  so.
    Had it done so, then directing itself appropriately the FtT would  have
    been bound to consider that the new evidence constituted a new  factual
    matrix, that raised a matter that could  constitute  a  new  ground  of
    appeal. In turn the FtT was bound to apply  the  jurisdictional  limits
    imposed by section 85(5) of the 2002 Act. In failing to do so the  FtT,
    as a creature of statute, exceeded its statutory  jurisdiction.  In  my
    judgement that is not an immaterial error of law as Ms Soltani  argued.
    Nor can the error be cured by the  simple  expedient  of  deleting  all
    references to FGM from the decision, and looking to see if what is left
    could be a sustainable decision, as Ms Soltani invited me  to  do.  The
    circumstances in which the FtT was placed by the  separate  actions  of
    the parties left no practical course open to  the  FtT  other  than  to
    adjourn the appeal of its own motion, in order to determine whether the
    Respondent would wish to  consent  to  the  introduction  of  the  "new
    matter", perhaps after further enquiry into  the  new  evidence  relied
    upon.

24. In the circumstances it is perhaps unnecessary for me to  rehearse  the
    other challenges made by the Respondent to the  decision  of  the  FtT.
    However at least the second and final grounds are clearly made out, and
    they too amount to material errors of law requiring the decision to  be
    set aside and remade. It is plain from the decision that  the  FtT  did
    not undertake any analysis of the 2014 decision upon where the  balance
    of proportionality then lay, or, overtly take  that  decision  and  the
    reasoning therein as the starting point, as the FtT was obliged to  do;
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702. Moreover, the FtT  did  not  consider  the
    nature of the risk that was said to be faced by the Appellant, in terms
    of the locality from which it originated, or the size of the tribe from
    which it originated. Nor did  the  FtT  consider  the  ability  of  the
    Appellant and his wife to protect their daughters within  Nigeria  from
    any risk of FGM either through their own opposition to such  practices,
    within  the  context  of  their  educational  achievements,  employment
    opportunities and earning potential, or, through  internal  relocation;
    Omeredo v Austria [2011] ECHR 1538

25. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the only course open to me  is
    to remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Arullendran at the North Shields  Hearing  Centre.  No  interpreter  is
    required. Although the Appellant has not indicated any desire to do so,
    he may upon reflection wish to lodge further evidence  to  clarify  the
    nature of his case, and to bring matters up  to  date.  He  may  do  so
    within 14 days of the promulgation of this decision.

26. The Respondent shall consider whether  to  give  consent  to  the  "new
    matter", and must give his response to the Appellant  and  to  the  FtT
    within 14 days of the promulgation of this decision. If the  Respondent
    wishes to invite the Appellant to interview, to investigate further the
    matter, then the Respondent should do so at the same time.

27. The remitted appeal may be listed at short notice only after 5 November
    2018.

Notice of decision

28. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
