
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12388/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 29 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                              luhanga chinyama
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANC OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Weatherall, Genesis Law Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Zambia, appeals with  permission  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain,  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fowell.  For reasons given  in  his  decision  dated  11
    February 2019, Judge Fowell dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  who  had  refused  the
    appellant's application to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
    mother.

 2. In refusing the application the Entry Clearance  Officer  observed  the
    following:

   i) Money transfers  by  his  mother  to  numerous  individuals  had  been
      submitted, none of whom had been identified in the application.

  ii) The appellant had not lived with his mother since 2011  and  had  been
      living with his aunt.

 iii) No evidence had been provided showing the  appellant  was  related  as
      claimed.

  iv) The application had been made four days prior to the appellant's  18th
      birthday.

   v) Photos that appeared to show the appellant's mother  visiting  him  in
      Zambia as well as supporting documents from  his  school  and  general
      practitioner (the latter stating an active role by his mother  in  the
      appellant's upbringing).

  vi) It had been stated that the appellant's father had had no  input  into
      his life and effectively will relinquish all responsibility but in the
      absence of a birth certificate, the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not
      satisfied this was the case.

 3. These matters led  the  respondent  to  refuse  the  application  under
    paragraph  297(i)(e)  of  the  Rules.   This  provision  sets  out  the
    requirements to be met where someone is  seeking  indefinite  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a child of a  parent  present  and  settled
    here.  Specifically in relation to the issues in  this  case  the  rule
    requires that:

         "(e) One parent is present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom  or
             being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had
             sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; ..."

 4. The judge accepted the appellant was related to his mother Ms Kakoma in
    the light of DNA evidence submitted with the appeal.  She gave evidence
    at the hearing.  Ms Kakoma explained the appellant had lived  with  his
    father after she had left for the United Kingdom but  he  gave  him  up
    when he  re-married  and  so  the  appellant  went  to  live  with  his
    grandmother.  This continued until she was too old  to  manage  and  he
    then went to live with her brother Joseph.  She had made five trips  to
    Zambia since 2011, the most recent being in February 2014.

 5. Mrs Kakoma married in January 2011 but this had  ended  in  2016.   She
    became a British Citizen in 2014.  The appellant  had  not  accompanied
    his mother to the United Kingdom because she was  living  in  a  studio
    flat and wanted him to have a better environment.  The application  for
    the appellant to join his mother was made on 13 March  2018  four  days
    prior to his 18th birthday.  Her evidence is that this was because  she
    had now acquired a house big enough to accommodate him.

 6. The judge directed himself with regard to  the  relevant  rule  and  in
    relation to article 8.   After setting out the evidence, he  noted  the
    submissions and began his conclusions with a survey of the  established
    authorities on family life and  child  dependency  cases  including  TD
    (Yemen) from which he cited the key passages.

 7. At paragraphs [22] to [26] of his  decision,  the  judge  set  out  his
    findings as follows:

         "22. The first point to  address  therefore  is  whether  Luhanga's
             father has abdicated responsibility as claimed.  The  striking
             fact here is that according to his  mother's  statement,  when
             she came to the UK in 2011 she left him in  the  care  of  his
             father.

         23.  No real information is given about why she came to the UK  and
             how much involvement Luhanga's father had in his life at  that
             point.  Piecing things  together,  Mrs  Makoma  [sic]  married
             someone else in January 2011 so she cannot  have  been  living
             with Luhanga's father when she came to the UK.  That  marriage
             was to a British citizen, so presumably that  was  the  reason
             for the move to the UK, but Mrs Makoma [sic] would at the same
             time have wanted to ensure  that  her  son  was  going  to  be
             properly looked after.  She chose his  father  to  look  after
             him, rather than her mother.  The fact  that  the  father  was
             involved at that stage means that for the first  11  years  of
             Luhanga's life he played a part, and for a period was the main
             carer.  There seems no plausible reason why he would not still
             be in contact now, or at least contactable.

         24.  The claim in Mrs Kakoma's statement that he has abdicated  all
             responsibility for  his  upbringing  provides  no  surrounding
             detail about when or why this was.  It suggests some breach or
             argument, some definite decision, but nothing is  put  forward
             as the basis for what would  be  a  drastic  step.   The  only
             further detail provided is that his arrangement ended when  he
             re-married, but that does not  provide  sufficient  cause  for
             such a separation.

         25.  There is no statement from him.   On  Mrs  Kakoma's  evidence,
             his whereabouts are unknown,  so  that  is  not  inconsistent,
             although  that  fact  itself  is   surprising   without   some
             explanation for this estrangement.  Luhanga then went to  live
             with his grandmother.  If so, that suggests some change in the
             relationship with his father.  It may well  be  that  at  that
             stage he remarried, though why  that  would  change  the  care
             arrangements for his son is unclear.  This could all have been
             explained and described.  Luhanga's grandmother  is  shown  in
             some of  the  photographs  but  has  not  given  a  letter  or
             statement of any sort.  There is a letter from his uncle,  but
             that is exceptionally brief.  It gives no  surrounding  detail
             and states that Luhanga has been living with him  since  2011.
             That appears to be at odds with the statement of his sister to
             the effect that in 2011 she  left  Luhanga  with  his  father.
             Lastly, there is no statement at all from Luhanga  himself  to
             clarify these points.  His upbringing is therefore shrouded in
             mystery, and the one statement that  has  been  provided  from
             Zambia,  essentially  a  one-line  letter  from   his   uncle,
             contradicts Mrs Kakoma's statement on this central point.   In
             the circumstances I am unable to accept that  his  father  has
             abdicated responsibility for Luhanga as claimed.

         26.  Clearly his mother is in frequent contact.  Like the mother in
             TD (Yemen), she sends money  regularly  and  retains  a  close
             interest in, and affection for, her son.  That was  enough  to
             show sole responsibility in that case, where the other  parent
             had abdicated responsibility, but here it is  different.   The
             only examples given of decisions made over his life  are  that
             she directs or arranges for regular medical  checks  and  that
             she  chose  his  school.  This  degree   of   involvement   is
             understandable, but is a slender basis for a finding  of  sole
             responsibility,  even  if  accepted  uncritically.   There  is
             however little surrounding detail about Luhanga's day  to  day
             life against which to set this evidence, and this does not add
             greatly to the fact that she  is  involved  in  his  life  and
             concerned for him.  Overall, given this lack of detail and  my
             finding that the father has not abdicated responsibility, I do
             not find that the test of sole responsibility is met."

 8. It follows  from  the  above  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the
    requirements of the  rule  has  been  met  as  to  the  issue  of  sole
    responsibility, the issue of the relationship having  been  settled  by
    the evidence.  He referred  in  [28]  to  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and then further  directed  himself  in
    relation to Article 8 before concluding at [30] as follows:

         "30.  There  is  also  the  best  interests  of  any  child  to  be
             considered, under section 55 of the 2009 Act.  In a case  such
             as this, it is  hard  to  see  that  it  has  any  significant
             application.  Firstly, Luhanga was a few  days  short  of  his
             18th birthday when the application was made, and so his  needs
             as a minor will be relatively few.  Secondly, it  was  thought
             by his mother to be in his best interests to remain in  Zambia
             until that point in time, even though that involved separation
             and having to pay for schooling and  medical  attention.   All
             that has changed apparently is that Mrs Kakoma has  now  moved
             to a bigger property to accommodate him, although  it  is  not
             clear how much  space  he  currently  enjoys.   Lastly  it  is
             generally in a child's interest to have continuity of care and
             a settled environment.  Although he would  be  able  to  enjoy
             better educational prospects in the UK, it is not obviously in
             his best interests as a child to leave his friends and  family
             in Zambia for an unfamiliar environment in Edinburgh, even  if
             it is with his mother.  This factor does not in my view affect
             the balance in any way."

 9. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge had  materially  misdirected
    himself in law and there was a real possibility  that  a  tribunal  may
    consider the appeal differently on  reconsideration.   Further,  it  is
    argued that the judge had materially erred in [23] in his assessment of
    the evidence by speculating.  The judge had failed to apply the correct
    test in [24], the question is not why or how  but  if  the  parent  has
    abdicated  responsibility.   Paragraph  [24]   revealed   an   internal
    inconsistency by reference to an observation earlier  in  the  decision
    where the judge recorded the appellant's  mother's  evidence  that  the
    appellant's father had been involved in the appellant's  life  but  had
    abdicated subsequently.

10. In granting permission  to  appeal  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    considered it was arguable the judge had erred by speculating as to why
    the appellant was not in contact with his father and had failed to give
    sufficient reasons for this finding.

11. The hearing began with my questions for clarification of  the  evidence
    that was before the judge.  The precise date when Ms Kakoma came to the
    UK in 2011 was not known and not in evidence before the tribunal.   She
    had married in the husband that had led to her grant of visa  to  enter
    the UK "at some point" in January 2011. Again the precise date was  not
    in evidence.  There was no evidence from the appellant himself.  He was
    an adult by the time of the hearing on 31 January 2019 having turned 18
    on 17 March 2018.

12. In her submissions, Ms Weatherall argued as to the  first  ground  that
    the judge had erroneously speculated as to why the  appellant's  father
    had not been in contact with  the  appellant  rather  than  reaching  a
    finding on the clear evidence from Ms Kakoma that was before  her.   It
    was not a question of plausibility that he  was  not  but  instead  the
    judge should have explained why he had not accepted her  evidence.   In
    any event there was an explanation which was that the father had "moved
    on".

13. As to the second ground,  Ms  Weatherall  argued  that  the  judge  had
    applied his own test to the evidence  by  asking  why  the  father  had
    abdicated responsibility rather than deciding whether he  had.   Ground
    three related to the inconsistency in the decision  at  paragraphs  [9]
    and [10].  Ms Weatherall accepted  that  the  ground  was  not  clearly
    drafted but argued that there was no evidence to  counter  that  of  Ms
    Kakoma which was that she was in ultimate control of the appellant.

14. Ms Pettersen contended that rather  than  speculating,  the  judge  was
    concerned with the lack of evidence with reference to  paragraphs  [23]
    and [25] (cited above) which included  a  lack  of  information  and  a
    contradiction in the evidence of the uncle and Ms Kakoma.  As to ground
    two, the judge had directed himself in relation to the right test  with
    the references to YD (Yemen).  The passages at  [9]  and  [10]  were  a
    recital of the evidence on which the judge had reached a conclusion.

15. I invited Ms Weatherall to consider in her reply whether the real issue
    in this case was  the  judge's  concern  that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence  for  him  to  be  satisfied   that   Ms   Kakoma   had   sole
    responsibility.  She accepted that might be a fair way  of  putting  it
    had the judge applied the right test  to  the  evidence  of  the  clear
    pattern of what had happened.

16. I reach these conclusions on each of the grounds which  I  consider  in
    their entirety in the light of the overlap.  In my judgment  the  judge
    had unarguably directed himself correctly as to  the  approach  he  was
    required to take.  As I have observed above,  he  quoted  the  relevant
    passages from TD (Yemen).

17. In deciding whether the sponsor  had  sole  responsibility,  the  judge
    raised as a plausibility concern (rather than speculating  as  asserted
    in ground one), the reason  why  the  appellant's  father  was  not  in
    contact.  It was open to the judge to do so if this  was  a  reasonable
    enquiry to draw from the evidence and context.  He explains why in  the
    preceding passage and provides further context in paragraph [25].

18. In the light of the evidence that on  leaving  Zambia  the  appellant's
    father took care of him, I consider the judge was entitled to  question
    the  absence  of  evidence  on  how  it  was  he  had   abdicated   all
    responsibility and severed connections with the  appellant  beyond  the
    assertion that he had simply done so on remarriage.  No evidence of any
    exchange of letters, emails, texts or telephone calls on the matter was
    provided.  The date when the remarriage  occurred  has  also  not  been
    given.  There was a clear inconsistency over events after  the  claimed
    abdication.  Ms Kakoma explains in her statement that her  mother  took
    over from the appellant's father until she was unable to do so  because
    of her age and that the appellant now  lives  with  her  brother.   His
    statement however explains that the appellant has been living with  him
    since 2011, the year Ms Kakoma left for the UK and that he has had  the
    role  of  guardian  on  a  "temporal  basis".   These   aspects   raise
    credibility concerns that the judge was  entitled  to  take  and  I  am
    unable  to  accept  Ms  Weatherall's  submission  that,  absent   other
    evidence, the judge should have accepted Ms Kakoma's evidence.

19. The judge took account of the evidence that pointed to the  appellant's
    mother's role in his life but here too he was entitled  to  observe  in
    [26] the absence of detail surrounding the appellant's daily life.   In
    my judgment, in the light of the absence of evidence  that  could  have
    been provided and the credibility concerns that arose as a result,  the
    judge gave adequate reasons for his finding that the appellant's father
    had not abdicated responsibility and he did  not  simple  speculate  on
    matters unsupported by the evidence.  The task before the judge was  to
    decide whether the rule had been met in particular whether the  sponsor
    had sole responsibility for the appellant.  I consider that  the  judge
    assessed all the material relied on and gave adequate reasons  open  to
    him on the evidence why he considered this requirement of the rule  had
    not been made out.

20. As to the final ground which asserts an  inconsistency  by  the  judge,
    paragraphs [9] and [10] record the evidence and  did  not  include  any
    positive finding.  There is no force in this ground as pleaded.

21. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that the judge  erred  in  law  on  the
    basis of the challenges made.  There is no challenge  to  the  findings
    made  with  reference  to  article  8.   Accordingly,  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 22 August 2019s

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

