
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12544/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 17 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YAQIONG ZHAO
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Bonavero, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. In this case it is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
       who has appealed against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       allowing the appeal on article 8 grounds of Ms Yaqiong Zhao.  As  Ms
       Zhao was the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  it  is  more
       convenient to continue to refer to her as "the appellant" and to the
       Secretary of State as "the respondent".


    2. The appellant entered the UK as long ago as 4 November 2001,  a  few
       weeks before her eighteenth birthday,  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
       student. She successfully extended her leave in  the  same  capacity
       until 17 March 2010, when her last application was rejected  because
       she had not completed the application form  fully.  She  resubmitted
       her application but it was refused without a right of appeal  on  17
       August 2010. Despite this, she was subsequently granted a period  of
       leave as an entrepreneur from 1 June 2012 until  1  June  2015.  Her
       application for an extension of leave in that capacity  was  refused
       and the time limit to apply for administrative review expired on  12
       August 2015.


    3. On 3 August 2015, she submitted an application for settlement on the
       basis of ten years' continuous lawful residence. In her application,
       she explained she had not been outside the UK for more than 60  days
       in any single year. She had resided in the UK for more than 13 years
       and was well integrated. She had opened two  businesses.  She  lived
       with her spouse, Mr Ke Ou, whom she had married on 19 January  2013.
       The appellant had an English qualification and had no convictions.


    4. The application also referred to the 2010 student applications.  The
       covering letter submitted by the  appellant's  solicitors  explained
       that, between the rejection of the application submitted in  January
       and the resubmission of the application  in  April,  the  rules  had
       changed and applicants were required to  submit  a  Confirmation  of
       Acceptance for Studies ("CAS").  However, at the date of posting the
       resubmitted application (which did not include  a  CAS)  which  must
       have been prior to 1 April 2010, the old  rules  still  applied  and
       there was no requirement to submit a CAS. The subsequent refusal  of
       the application for the failure to enclose a CAS was  wrongly  made.
       After the refusal, on  16  August  2010,  the  appellant  instructed
       lawyers to apply for judicial review but they did not follow  up  on
       her instructions. The appellant argued that, given the decision made
       on 16 August was unlawful, her leave had continued until  the  grant
       of leave as an entrepreneur. Alternatively, the  gap  in  continuous
       lawful  residence  should  be  overlooked  due  to  the  exceptional
       circumstances.


    5. Finally, the application acknowledged the  appellant  had  not  been
       able to submit a KOLL test certificate but the reason for  that  was
       the Home Office had retained her passport so she could  not  book  a
       test.


    6. The respondent refused the application on 17 November 2015  and  the
       reasons for refusal can be summarised as follows:

           . There had been a gap in her lawful residence between 17  March
             2010  and  1  June  2012,  so  the  requirement  in  paragraph
             276B(i)(a) to show ten years' continuous lawful residence  was
             not met;

           .  Discretion  to  overlook  the  gap  because  of   exceptional
             circumstances was not  exercised  in  the  appellant's  favour
             because she had not challenged the decision of 16 August  2010
             and she had not submitted another application until 27 January
             2012;

           . The appellant had failed  to  submit  evidence  that  she  had
             passed a KOLL test so as to meet the requirements of paragraph
             276B(iv);

           . The appellant had not shown she had a partner so as to satisfy
             the family life provisions of Appendix FM of the rules;

           . The appellant did not  satisfy  any  of  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 276ADE(1) of the rules on private life grounds  and,
             in particular, she had not shown very significant obstacles to
             her integration into China; and

           . The application did not  raise  exceptional  circumstances  to
             justify a grant of leave outside the rules.


    7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  on  human  rights
       grounds, citing her private life established over 14  years  in  the
       UK. She also argued the decision not to accept the continuity of her
       residence was not in accordance with the respondent's policy.


    8. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese at
       Hatton Cross on 24 February 2017. The respondent was not represented
       at the hearing. In a brief decision, the Judge  made  the  following
       findings:



           . The appellant was credible as to her explanation of the lapse
             in leave between 2010 and 2012;

           . The lapse in her leave was not entirely her fault and she did
             make efforts to contact her legal advisors at the time, who
             failed to respond;

           . The appellant had established private life ties and removing
             her to China would have serious consequences for her;

           . The decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules but
             removing her would not be in accordance with the law;

           . The appellant had established businesses in the UK and had
             adapted herself to life in the UK;

           . The appellant had had no recourse to public funds and was
             seeking to make a valuable contribution to society; and

           . The appellant's private interests outweighed the public
             interest.


    9. The respondent applied for permission to appeal on  the  ground  the
       Judge had erred in his approach to article 8. He had failed to apply
       paragraph 276ADE(1) and failed to identify reasons to justify  leave
       outside the rules. The Judge had failed to give adequate reasons for
       his decision and, in  particular,  he  had  failed  to  explain  his
       finding that the public interest had been assessed by  reference  to
       section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2012.
       Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  all
       grounds.


   10. I heard submissions from the representatives as to whether the First-
       tier Tribunal Judge had made an error of law in his decision.

   11. In brief, Ms Isherwood made  submissions  along  the  lines  of  the
       grounds seeking permission to appeal. The Judge  had  recorded  that
       the appellant mainly argued her appeal on the basis of there  having
       been a breach of  article  8  outside  the  rules  (see  [8]).   The
       appellant had always been in the UK with temporary leave. The  Judge
       had failed to grapple with the point about the rule change in  2010.
       In relying on the fact the appellant had started two businesses as a
       positive  factor,  the  Judge  had  failed  to  recognise  that  the
       appellant's last application as  a  Tier  1  entrepreneur  had  been
       refused. There was a lack of reasoning  as  to  why  the  Judge  had
       allowed the appeal outside the rules.

   12. Mr Bonavero argued the decision does not contain a material error of
       law and should stand. The Judge had not ignored the  rules  but  had
       considered paragraph 276B, which was the paragraph relied on in  the
       application. He had given adequate consideration to the gap  in  the
       appellant's leave and her arguments as to why discretion should have
       been granted (see [14]), particularly as  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter appeared  to  concede  that  the  August  2010  decision  was
       erroneous on that point. It  was  clear  why  the  Judge  found  the
       decision disproportionate. He had noted the application  of  section
       117B (see [15]). It was  implicit  on  what  he  said  that  he  had
       recognised the precariousness of the appellant's leave.

   13. Ms Isherwood  said  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  facts  was
       inadequate.

   14. Having carefully read the decision and considered the arguments  put
       forward by the representatives I have concluded that the decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law such that it
       must be set aside. My reasons are as follows.


   15. It is clear that the appellant's leave has always been precarious in
       the sense of section 117B(5) and, for some months, the appellant has
       had no leave. Consequently, the Judge was required to  show  he  had
       taken into account the requirement  that  little  weight  should  be
       given to the private life established  by  the  appellant  over  the
       years. In  my  judgment,  the  Judge's  decision  does  not  contain
       sufficient reasoning to show the respondent why he nonetheless found
       the decision disproportionate. Of courses, it was  open  to  him  to
       reach that conclusion but he was required to explain how he did so.

   16. As regards the application of section  117B,  the  test  is  one  of
       substance over form, in line with Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT
       00090 (IAC). However, it is not sufficient for the Judge to  say  he
       had  considered  section  117B  but  that,  having  established  her
       businesses and been a "law-abiding citizen", the appellant's private
       interest outweighed the public interest.  In  order  to  reach  that
       point in a legally sustainable way, he had firstly to  show  he  had
       recognised the impact of the appellant failing to  meet  the  rules,
       which were enacted to give effect  to  the  UK's  obligations  under
       article 8, and secondly that he had recognised  the  reduced  weight
       which could be given to the appellant's private life  when  weighing
       it against the public interest in maintaining effective  immigration
       controls.

   17. I decided to remake  the  decision  myself  and  I  preserved  Judge
       Abebrese's findings of fact. Therefore, although the  appellant  was
       in attendance at the hearing, there was no need to call her to  give
       evidence. The only additional matter was the passage of  time  since
       the First-tier Tribunal's decision. She has now resided  in  the  UK
       for over 16 years. She is 34 years of age. I was  told  her  husband
       has limited leave as a student until 2019.

   18. As noted, one of the issues which Judge Abebrese did not tackle with
       any or  sufficient  depth  was  the  question  of  the  gap  in  the
       appellant's leave following the rejection of her renewed application
       in August 2010. With the assistance of the representatives, who were
       in agreement with each other about this point, it  was  possible  to
       arrive at the following conclusions.

   19. The appellant had continuous grants of leave to  enter/remain  as  a
       student from 4 November 2001 until 31 October 2010.  On  29  January
       2010, she submitted an application for further  leave  in  order  to
       continue her  studies  at  the  London  College  of  Accounting  and
       Finance. Her application was rejected on 17 March 2010  for  reasons
       which are not entirely clear but which  are  not  now  important.  I
       proceed on the assumption the defect in the application  would  have
       been pointed out to the appellant and she was  invited  to  resubmit
       her application within a time limit. It is clear she did so.

   20. The reasons for refusal dated 16 August 2010 records that  she  sent
       the application on 1 April 2010 but the appellant disputes  this.  I
       accept the appellant must have posted her application before 1 April
       2010 for two reasons. Firstly, she  made  this  assertion  to  Judge
       Abebrese, who found her credible. His findings on  credibility  have
       not been challenged and I  have  preserved  his  findings  of  fact.
       Secondly, the reasons for refusal letter of 17 November 2015,  while
       continuing to record the date of application as 1 April 2010 in  the
       chronology, stated on page 5/9, in respect of the  decision  not  to
       exercise discretion in the appellant's favour regarding the  gap  in
       her leave, as follows:


         "Furthermore, consideration has been given to your representations.
         You stated that in January 2010 you submitted an application  which
         was rejected  on  17  March  2010  due  to  the  application  being
         incomplete. You then resubmitted an application which was  received
         by the Home Office on 1 April 2010. This application was refused on
         17 August 2010 under the new immigration rules.


         Whilst the Home Office may accept that the  application  should  be
         decided prior to the change of the new immigration rules  in  April
         2010 and therefore the application could have been decided  wrongly
         by the Home Office you never challenged the decision.  Furthermore,
         your next application for further leave was not submitted until  27
         January 2012, a period of 527 days later."

   21. The  second  paragraph  set  out  above  comes  extremely  close  to
       accepting that an error  was  made  in  line  with  the  appellant's
       solicitors' submissions. It can be read as meaning that an error was
       made but there were other  reasons  why  discretion  should  not  be
       exercised in favour of the appellant.


   22. An application is made on the date of  posting  in  accordance  with
       paragraph 34G(i) of the rules. It is more likely than not  that  the
       respondent has erroneously recorded the date of receipt as the  date
       of application. The date of receipt was, I find, 1  April  2010  and
       therefore the application was made (posted) prior to that.

   23.  I  raised  with  the  representatives  the  issue  of  whether  the
       requirement in Appendix A of the rules to submit a CAS did  in  fact
       only come into force on 1 April 2010 given the reference in  section
       B of the reasons for refusal letter, dated  16  August  2010,  to  a
       mandatory requirement to submit a CAS applying to applications  from
       22 February 2010. However, neither representative could  provide  me
       with a copy of the rules as at the end of March 2010 and the archive
       on the respondent's website does not go back beyond 2012.

   24. Ms Isherwood did not argue against the appellant's point that  there
       was no requirement for a CAS when the application was resubmitted. I
       accept there was no such requirement for the following  reason.  The
       appellant's solicitors made the argument to the respondent  and,  as
       seen, the respondent's response was to accept an error may have been
       made in the August 2010 decision. If there had  been  a  requirement
       for a CAS in March 2010 then this would have been stated as a reason
       to reject the appellant's argument.

   25. I now consider the consequences of the mistake.

   26. As a matter of fact, it remains the case that the appellant's  leave
       expired because the respondent refused to extend it. There was a gap
       in the appellant's continuous lawful residence until she was granted
       leave on 1 June 2012. As her student leave did not expire  until  31
       October 2010, the length of the  gap  has  been  overstated  in  the
       refusal of 17 November  2015.  However,  it  exceeded  the  28  days
       allowed for by paragraph 276B(v) by a  considerable  margin.  It  is
       clear why paragraph 276B(i)(a) was not met by the appellant.

   27. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction to exercise discretion  for  itself
       regarding the manner in which the gap was caused, although  this  is
       plainly a relevant matter when giving weight to the fact  the  rules
       were not met and the proportionality of the decision. I simply  note
       that the respondent's reasons for refusing to exercise discretion in
       the appellant's favour given in the paragraph of the refusal  letter
       set out above are unimpressive. The appellant was not given a  right
       to appeal the decision and therefore the  point  taken  against  her
       that she failed to "challenge" the  erroneous  decision  must  be  a
       reference to her failure to bring an action for judicial review.  As
       seen, Judge Abebrese accepted her evidence  that  she  did  instruct
       lawyers to do just that, although they failed to pursue the  matter.
       As seen, the period of the gap was miscalculated.

   28. In my judgment, the respondent's error is highly significant in this
       case when assessing the weight to be given to the public interest in
       the proportionality balancing exercise. Had the error with regard to
       the application of the requirement for a CAS  to  be  submitted  not
       been made in August 2010, it can be assumed the appellant would have
       been granted a further period of leave as  a  student  in  order  to
       complete her studies. Given the stage the  appellant's  studies  had
       reached by then, it is highly likely the grant of leave which should
       have been made would have taken her past 4 November 2011,  at  which
       point  she  would  have  fulfilled  the  requirement  of   paragraph
       276B(i)(a) to show ten years' continuous lawful residence in the  UK
       and she would have been entitled to apply for settlement.

   29. No countervailing factors have been raised against  the  appellant's
       character. I am  not  sure  whether  the  requirements  for  a  KOLL
       qualification were in  the  rules  at  that  point  but,  given  the
       appellant would have had possession of  her  passport  and  she  was
       studying at a high level, there is no reason not to assume she would
       have been able to meet this requirement as well. She plainly  speaks
       English. None of this is unduly speculative. The respondent's error,
       which has to all intents and purposes been accepted, was unfair  and
       has had a severe impact on the appellant's ability to settle in  the
       UK.

   30. The appellant has not argued that she can bring herself  within  any
       of the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the  rules.  I  find
       these rules are not met.

   31. It is common ground the  appellant  has  established  a  significant
       private life in the UK, as  found  by  Judge  Abebrese.  It  is  not
       necessary to set out its elements here. The stark fact  is  she  has
       lived here since she was 17 and she is now 34. She  has  started  up
       two businesses and lives independently with  her  husband.  She  has
       made the UK her home. Her removal would interfere significantly with
       the strong ties she has made and I therefore move  straight  to  the
       question of proportionality.

   32. I start by acknowledging the rules are not met in this case. In  the
       large majority of cases, the correct application of the  rules  will
       be  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  question  of  proportionality.
       Paragraph 276ADE(1) is designed to encompass the main situations  in
       which article 8 might succeed on  private  life  grounds.  Paragraph
       276B has remained in the rules since before the rules  were  redrawn
       in order to reflect the UK's obligations under article  8.  However,
       it is clearly a relevant benchmark when considering whether  lengthy
       lawful residence  would  result  in  removal  being  regarded  as  a
       disproportionate interference with the enjoyment of private life.  I
       have already given reasons why, in the unique circumstances of  this
       case, the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
       controls is weakened by the fact the rules were wrongly  applied  to
       the appellant's application in the summer of 2010 and this error led
       to her losing the possibility of applying for settlement  six  years
       ago.


   33. Similarly, the application of the requirement to give little  weight
       to the appellant's private life in accordance with sections  117B(4)
       and (5) must be adjusted in this case in order  to  recognise  that,
       but for the respondent's error, the appellant  was  likely  to  have
       been able to apply for settlement six years ago.  Put  another  way,
       the precariousness of the appellant's position since August 2010 has
       been caused by the respondent's error and  it  would  be  unfair  to
       leave this out of the assessment.

   34. As explained by Sales LJ in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803, Part 5A of
       the 2002 Act was intended to provide for a  structured  approach  to
       the application of article 8 which would  produce  in  all  cases  a
       final result which was compatible with article 8 (see paragraph 45).
       However, it was common ground in that case that it was  possible  to
       conceive of cases caught by sections 117B(4)  and  (5)  in  which  a
       private or family  life  of  an  especially  strong  kind  had  been
       established such that  it  should  be  accorded  great  weight  (see
       paragraph 46). Where Parliament has declared that  something  is  in
       the public interest, that is definitive as to  that  aspect  of  the
       public interest (see paragraph 49). It might still be outweighed  by
       other relevant considerations (see paragraph 53) but,

         "[i]n order to identify an exceptional case in  which  a  departure
         from that approach would be  justified,  compelling  reasons  would
         have to be shown..." (paragraph 54)

   35. In my judgment, this is one of the rare cases  in  which  compelling
       reasons have been shown to justify a finding that  the  decision  is
       disproportionate.


   36. I therefore allow the appeal on article 8 grounds.

   37. It is a matter for  the  respondent  how  to  give  effect  to  this
       decision. However, I would like  to  point  out  that  it  might  be
       appropriate for the respondent now to revisit the  question  of  the
       exercise  of  discretion  regarding  the  gap  in  the   appellant's
       continuous lawful residence and to consider granting  the  appellant
       settlement. If not, she would have to wait until  November  2021  at
       the earliest before  she  became  eligible  to  apply  again  (under
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)) or June 2022 (under paragraph 276B).


NOTICE OF DECISION

      The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and
    his decision allowing the appeal is set aside.

      The following decision is substituted:

         The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (article 8).

         No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                            Date  10 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom



