
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/12642/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 May 2018                             | On 11 May 2018                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Moran, Solicitor, Alex Moran Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Syria, who applied for entry clearance to
    settle as the spouse of  one  who  had  been  granted  refugee  status,
    relying upon the refugee family reunion provisions of  the  Immigration
    Rules; paragraph 352A. Her application was refused by  the  ECO  on  25
    September 2017 on the basis he was not satisfied that (i) the  marriage
    was subsisting, (ii) the Appellant was the spouse of a refugee and that
    the couple intended to live together as such in the UK, and, (iii)  the
    Appellant had been a member  of  the  pre-flight  family  unit  of  the
    sponsor.

 2. The ECO's decision was not subject to an ECM  review.  The  Appellant's
    appeal came before First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls,  and  it  was
    allowed in a decision promulgated on 20 February 2018.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal from the First tier Tribunal
    on two grounds; first, that the  sponsor  was  habitually  resident  in
    Syria, and did not marry the Appellant until after  he  had  left  that
    country, so the Appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph
    352A; second, that it was not open to the Judge to find that the  proxy
    marriage relied upon was recognised in Syria. Permission to appeal  was
    granted to the Respondent on both grounds by Judge Grant-Hutchinson  on
    16 March 2018.

 4. The Appellant responded to the grant of permission with a detailed Rule
    24  reply  dated  16  April  2018,  which  has  been  most  helpful  in
    identifying the relevant jurisprudence. Thus the  matter  comes  before
    me.

 5. No challenge has been offered in the grounds,  or  before  me,  to  the
    Judge's conclusion that this was a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    of marriage, the parties to whom intend to live together.

 6. Although the ECO did raise within the refusal  decision  the  issue  of
    whether the parties were able to enter into  a  lawful  proxy  marriage
    together, recognised by the Syrian authorities under Syrian law, it  is
    accepted before me that it was open to the Judge on the evidence before
    her to accept  that  they  were,  and,  that  they  had  done  so.  The
    Respondent placed no  evidence  before  the  Judge  to  show  that  the
    documents relied upon were forgeries,  or,  that  Syrian  law  did  not
    permit  that  which  had  occurred.  There  was  simply  no  evidential
    foundation laid before the Judge for the assertion that is made at  the
    conclusion of the grounds that if the Appellant had  become  habitually
    resident in Turkey, he could not enter  into  a  valid  proxy  marriage
    under Syrian law. Nor is any such evidence produced in support  of  the
    grounds.

 7. The ECO did not himself raise any issue over which  was  the  sponsor's
    country of habitual residence at the date of the marriage relied  upon,
    and the Respondent did not raise this as an issue at the hearing of the
    appeal. The Judge was however clearly alert to the need to identify it,
    and did so [15]. Thus she found that the couple were  lawfully  married
    before he left Turkey, his then country of habitual residence, to  seek
    asylum. Before me it is accepted that it was open to the Judge  on  the
    evidence before her to make such a finding, even if she  did  not  make
    any reference to any applicable jurisprudence within her decision.  The
    sponsor had described in his written evidence  filed  for  the  appeal,
    when he had  left  Syria,  and  the  countries  through  which  he  had
    travelled, and in which he had lived,  before  coming  to  the  UK.  He
    described transit through Jordan and Egypt, and  a  lengthy  period  in
    Libya during which he held a legitimate work  permit.  When  it  proved
    impossible to  renew,  and  the  security  situation  deteriorated,  he
    abandoned Libya in favour of Turkey where he sought a  legitimate  work
    permit and sought to settle, inviting the Appellant  to  join  him  for
    marriage. When it proved impossible to gain a legitimate  work  permit,
    after three months, he left Turkey for the UK. None  of  that  evidence
    was challenged. In  the  light  of  the  analysis  of  the  authorities
    undertaken by Lord Slynn in Nessa [1999] UKHL 41, it  would  have  been
    open to the Judge to find that after leaving Syria the sponsor had been
    habitually resident first in Libya, then in Turkey, and latterly in the
    UK - and that he had merely lived in  for  the  purpose  of  transiting
    them, the other countries he had referred to.

 8. It follows that in my judgement  the  grounds  are  misconceived.  They
    disclose no material error of law. There was no error  in  the  Judge's
    conclusion that "family life" existed  between  the  couple,  and  that
    since the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules there
    was no public interest in maintaining the refusal of  entry  clearance.
    In my judgement the Judge did properly consider the competing interests
    and balanced them, giving  adequate  reasons  for  her  conclusions.  I
    therefore dismiss the challenge, and confirm the decision to allow  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 9. An anonymity direction is made.


Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 20 February 2018 did not involve the  making  of
an error of law sufficient to require the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  Article  8  appeal  is
accordingly confirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  of  the  individuals  referred  to  in  this
decision.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 8 May 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
