
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12125/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MIKAEL PRINCE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ogunnubi, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Baldwin  ("the  judge")  promulgated  on  13
    November 2019 allowing an appeal by the respondent Mikael  Prince  ("Mr
    Prince") against a deportation order made by  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 2 July 2019. The broad proposition advanced by the  Secretary  of
    State in support of the appeal is that the judge  erred  by  concluding
    that the effect of Mr Prince's deportation on his three children  would
    be unduly harsh within the meaning of section 117C of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

 2. Mr Prince was born on 1 February 1983 and is a citizen of Cameroon.  He
    entered the United  Kingdom  on  2  July  2004  using  a  false  French
    identification card but claimed asylum  as  a  Liberian  national.  His
    asylum claim was dismissed on 16 July 2004 and an appeal  against  that
    refusal was dismissed on 12 October  2004.  His  appeal  rights  became
    exhausted on  22  February  2005.  He  was  listed  as  an  immigration
    absconder on 10 August 2005. On 24  June  2006  he  married  a  Latvian
    woman. On 18 July 2006 he applied for an  EEA  residence  card  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national. That application was refused on 27 July 2006
    because  he  had  submitted  a  forged  Liberian  passport   with   his
    application. He made a further application  on  13  November  2006  but
    withdrew it on 1 March 2007. Another application made on 10 April  2007
    was refused on 13 May 2007 with no right of appeal. A final application
    made on 6 June 2007 was refused on 14 January  2008  with  a  right  of
    appeal which he  failed  to  exercise.  On  8  May  2009  he  submitted
    representations. On 6 October  2009  his  child  S  was  born.  Further
    representations were submitted on 16 January 2010. On 12 February  2010
    he was charged with deception. On 25 October 2010 he failed  to  attend
    court to answer an indictment and a warrant for his arrest was granted.
    He was apprehended on 5 January 2011  and  on  15  April  2011  he  was
    sentenced to 13 months  imprisonment  at  Lewes  Crown  Court.  On  his
    release from prison he failed to report to  the  Home  Office  and  was
    again listed as an immigration absconder. On 19 November 2014 a  notice
    of intention to deport him was served to his file  as  his  whereabouts
    were unknown. On 14 January 2015 a deportation order was signed against
    him and his human  rights  claims  refused,  with  the  decision  being
    certified under section 94B of the 2002 Act. Both the deportation order
    and the refusal letter were served to file as his whereabouts  remained
    unknown. On 6 April 2016 he was issued with his deportation  order  and
    notice of decision to deport at an alternative  address  which  he  had
    provided. On 8 April 2016 he began reporting to the Home Office. On  14
    August 2017 he submitted representations. On 14 June 2017  the  Supreme
    Court handed down judgment  in  the  case  of  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42. On  26  June
    2018  he  applied  for  leave  to  remain.  On  consideration  of   his
    submissions in light of that judgment  the  Home  Office  withdrew  the
    decision to refuse his human rights claim dated 14 January 2015 and the
    associated section 94B certification. On 2 July 2019 his  human  rights
    claim was refused, providing him with an in-country right of appeal. It
    was an appeal against that decision which was refused by the  judge  on
    13 November 2019.

 3. The point which the judge had to determine was whether the effect of Mr
    Prince's deportation on his children would be unduly  harsh  (paragraph
    399(a) of the Immigration Rules and section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act).
    He set out what he termed "the factual matrix"  for  that  decision  as
    follows. Mr Prince has been in the UK for 15 years. He entered  the  UK
    unlawfully and  has  never  had  leave  to  remain.  He  developed  his
    relationship with his wife while here unlawfully. His  wife  and  three
    children live with him, his wife and one child  having  refugee  status
    until 2022, so that they cannot be expected to return to Cameroon.  His
    wife works part-time as a trainee dental nurse while undertaking a  two
    years diploma. The eldest child has lived in the UK for ten  years  and
    has applied for British nationality. His only conviction was that on 10
    February 2010. He pleaded guilty and served his sentence.  The  offence
    of seeking or obtaining leave to remain by deception had its origin  in
    a carefully thought through  arranged  wedding.  He  is  in  a  stable,
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his three children  and  their
    mother. He has been the main carer for the children for the  last  year
    or so.

 4. The judge concluded as follows at paragraph 30 of his decision:

         "The reality is that if the Appellant is deported they will not  be
         meeting him again for at least two years and their mother will find
         it very difficult to look after all three of them at the same  time
         as pursuing her College studies and the part-time work which is  an
         essential part of her studies, and vice versa. The  best  interests
         of these children will be very badly served by the  deportation  of
         their father and unduly harsh  for  them.  It  will  also  make  it
         impossible for the  parents  to  maintain  a  full  and  meaningful
         relationship, as the mother  cannot  return  to  Cameroon.  If  the
         Appellant had committed an offence which  merited  imprisonment  of
         well over 12 months, or it had involved violence, drugs  or  sexual
         abuse, or he had committed any other offence since  February  2010,
         any one of those factors would have been able to outweigh the harsh
         outcome for his children and partner and would justify Deportation.
         However, the combination of factors present in this  case  and  the
         best interests of  the  children  are,  I  find,  very  compelling.
         Deportation  would,  I  conclude   now   make   deportation   (sic)
         unreasonable and disproportionate and outweigh the great importance
         I am obliged and do attach to effective immigration control and the
         public interest."

 5. It was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  no  factors
    properly capable  of  bringing  the  effects  of  deportation  upon  Mr
    Prince's  children  within  the  "unduly  harsh"  exception  had   been
    identified  by  the  judge  and  that  this  amounted  to  a   material
    misdirection. Furthermore, he  wrongly  approached  the  issue  of  the
    "unduly harsh" exception as a balancing exercise. Reliance  was  placed
    on the authorities in paragraph 6 below. On behalf of Mr Prince it  was
    submitted that the facts were sufficient to entitle the judge  to  find
    that the effect of the deportation on the  children  would  be  "unduly
    harsh".

 6. In MK (section 55 - Tribunal Options)  Sierra  Leone  [2015]  UKUT  223
    (IAC) the Tribunal stated as follows at paragraph 46:

         "'unduly harsh' does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult. Rather, it  poses  a  considerably
         more elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something
         severe, or bleak. It is the antithesis of pleasant or  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

    In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53 Lord Carnwath, giving the judgment of the Supreme  Court,  said
    at paragraph 23:

         "... the  expression  'unduly  harsh'  seems  clearly  intended  to
         introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of  'reasonableness'  under
         section 117B(6), taking account  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.  Further,  the  word  'unduly'
         implies an element of comparison. It assumes there is a 'due' level
         of  harshness,  that  is,  a  level  which  may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant  context.  'Unduly'  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent. What it does not require  in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of the relative levels  of  severity  of  the  parent's
         offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the
         section itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary to
         the view of the court of Appeal in  IT  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR
         240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with  a  requirement  to  show
         'very compelling reasons'. That would be in effect to replicate the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

    In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1213 Holroyde LJ stated at paragraph [34]:

         "It is therefore now clear that a  tribunal  or  court  considering
         section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on the  comparative
         seriousness of the offence or offences  committed  by  the  foreign
         criminal who faces deportation, but rather, on whether the  effects
         of his deportation on a child or partner would go beyond the degree
         of harshness which would necessarily be involved for any  child  or
         partner of a foreign criminal faced with deportation."

    Hickinbottom LJ stated at paragraph 46:

         "When a parent is deported, one can only have  great  sympathy  for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in  circumstances  in
         which they can remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their  other
         parent, they will inevitably be  distressed.  However,  in  section
         117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its  will  that,
         for foreign offenders who are sentenced to one to four years,  only
         where the consequences for the children  are  'unduly  harsh'  will
         deportation  be  constrained.  That  is  entirely  consistent  with
         article 8 of the ECHR. It is important  that  decision-makers  and,
         where their decisions are challenged, tribunals and  courts  honour
         that expression of Parliamentary will."

 7. We are satisfied that the  judge  made  a  material  error  of  law  in
    considering whether the  effect  of  Mr  Prince's  deportation  on  his
    children would be unduly harsh. On no conceivable  view  of  the  facts
    could the effect of his deportation on  his  children  be  said  to  be
    "unduly harsh" as that expression was explained  in  the  above  cases.
    Likewise, the evidence does not support what appears to be the  judge's
    conclusion, although it is not entirely  clear,  that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above  those  set  out  in  paragraph
    399(a) or (b)  of  the  Rules  or  the  very  compelling  circumstances
    necessary for an appeal to succeed where the Exceptions in section 117C
    of the 2002 Act are not made out.

 8. He also made a  further  material  error  of  law  in  carrying  out  a
    balancing exercise involving consideration of the  seriousness  of  the
    offence against the unduly harsh outcome for the children, in breach of
    what Lord Carnwath said at paragraph 23 in KO (Nigeria).

 9. We shall therefore set aside the decision of  the  judge.  Mr  Ogunnubi
    accepted that if we decided to  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  the
    decision could be re-made on the basis of the evidence that was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and that no further hearing  was  required.  In
    those circumstances, and in the light  of  our  conclusions  above,  we
    proceed to re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the  decision  is  re-
    made, dismissing the appeal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Lord Uist, sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.   20/01/2020

