
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/12624/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th June 2017                         | On 20th June 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               MAZHAR HUSSAIN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Law of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 12th July 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born  12th  February  1985.
    In August 2015 he applied for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    His application was based  upon  his  family  and  private  life.   The
    Appellant is married to a British citizen, to whom I shall refer as the
    Sponsor.

 3. The application was refused on  18th  November  2015.   The  Respondent
    considered  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   refusing   the
    application because there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life between the Appellant and Sponsor continuing  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The application was considered with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) in
    relation to the Appellant's private life.  It was  noted  that  he  had
    only lived in the United Kingdom since 19th  June  2012.   He  had  not
    demonstrated that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Pakistan.

 5. The Respondent considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention), not accepting that the  application
    disclosed any exceptional circumstances, and therefore it was concluded
    that it would not be appropriate to grant leave to remain  pursuant  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appeal was heard on 5th July 2016.  After hearing evidence from the
    Appellant and Sponsor, the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    relying upon four grounds, which are summarised below;

         1.   The FtT erred by failing to give reasons  for  dismissing  the
             appeal with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1).  No reasons were
             given in paragraph 20 of the decision.

         2.   With  reference  to  Article  8  the  FtT  made  contradictory
             findings and gave inadequate reasons.  At paragraph 34 the FtT
             finds that temporary separation would not be  disproportionate
             but at paragraph 35 the FtT expresses considerable doubt  that
             the  Sponsor  could  meet   the   minimum   income   threshold
             requirement.  The  FtT  had  failed  to  give  reasons  why  a
             separation to enable the Appellant to make an entry  clearance
             application would be temporary in nature and proportionate.

         3.   With reference to Appendix FM the FtT erred by failing to give
             reasons as to why it was not accepted that  the  couple  would
             have very significant difficulties in continuing their  family
             and private life in Pakistan.  At paragraph 37  the  FtT  gave
             inadequate reasons for not accepting that  the  Sponsor's  ex-
             husband would still have an interest in  causing  trouble  for
             her in Pakistan.

         4.   With reference to Article 8 the FtT accepted that  the  couple
             are in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  that  they
             have family life  in  this  country,  and  the  Appellant  has
             developed a private life.  The FtT  failed  to  satisfactorily
             consider proportionality.  The FtT failed to make findings  in
             relation to the Sponsor's depression after losing a child.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird of the FtT and I set out
    below, in part, the grant of permission;

         3.   It is arguable that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons
             and made no specific findings under paragraph 276ADE(vi) - see
             paragraph 18 of the judgment.

         4.   The Appellant alleges that the judge failed to  give  adequate
             reasons for finding that there would be no breach of Article 8
             ECHR.

         5.   It is arguable that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons
             for findings made in relation to whether or not there would be
             a disproportionate interference to family life.   An  arguable
             error of law has been made.

 9. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  directed  itself
    appropriately.   While  accepting  that  consideration   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) at paragraph 20 is brief, the FtT was  entitled  to  find
    that the Appellant had not proved very  significant  obstacles  to  re-
    integration in Pakistan, and a different conclusion could not have been
    reached.

10. In respect of the temporary separation assessment, reliance was  placed
    upon Chen [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) and the FtT was entitled to  conclude
    that  temporary  separation  would  not  be  disproportionate  and  the
    Appellant could maintain contact with the Sponsor during the  temporary
    separation.   With  reference  to  insurmountable  obstacles   it   was
    submitted that clear reasons for finding  no  insurmountable  obstacles
    are contained between paragraphs 18 and 37.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. Mr Howard relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal.  Grounds 1 and 3 were based on lack of reasoning.
     I was asked to find that no reasons were given in paragraphs 18-20 for
    concluding that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing in Pakistan, and that there would  be  no  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Pakistan.

13. With reference to Ground 2 Mr Howard submitted that the  FtT  had  been
    inconsistent in finding that there would  be  a  temporary  separation,
    doubting whether the financial requirements would be satisfied when  an
    entry clearance application was made.

14. With reference to Ground 4 Mr Howard submitted that the FtT had  failed
    to give satisfactory  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was proportionate.

15. Mrs Aboni relied upon the rule 24 response, contending that the FtT had
    given adequate reasons.  Paragraph 19  should  be  read  together  with
    paragraphs 36 and 37.  The FtT had considered together,  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life, very significant obstacles to the Appellant's
    integration, and Article 8.  The  FtT  had  not  erred  in  considering
    temporary separation for the reasons given in  the  rule  24  response.
    Mrs Aboni submitted that the FtT decision should stand.

16. By way  of  response  Mr  Howard  argued  that  paragraph  37  did  not
    adequately consider insurmountable  obstacles  in  relation  to  family
    life, or very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration.  Mr
    Howard argued that the FtT should have considered the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, before assessing Article 8  outside  the  rules.
    Mr Howard accepted that findings had been made on these issues  at  the
    previous appeal hearing which took place in March 2015, although  there
    was no reference to those findings in the FtT decision.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. The application for leave to remain was made on 13th August  2015.   It
    is relevant  that  there  had  been  a  previous  appeal  made  by  the
    Appellant, raising very much the same issues that  were  considered  by
    the FtT in this  appeal.   The  previous  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge
    Matthews and the decision was promulgated on 10th March 2015.  There is
    a very brief reference to that previous appeal, in the FtT decision  at
    paragraph 2.  In my view the FtT should have  made  reference  to  that
    previous appeal, and applied  the  principles  set  out  in  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702, explaining that the previous appeal should  be  the
    starting point, but that facts happening since that appeal must  always
    be taken into account.  If an Appellant relies on facts  that  are  not
    materially different from those considered at the previous appeal,  the
    FtT dealing with the second appeal, should regard the issues as settled
    by the first decision.  The previous decision is  not  binding  on  the
    subsequent FtT, but the subsequent FtT is not hearing an appeal against
    the previous decision.

19. In this appeal, the FtT should have made  those  principles  clear  and
    erred in not doing so.  I do not however find the error to be material,
    and I do not find that the FtT decision contains material  errors  such
    that it should be set aside.  I will deal with the grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal was granted in the order that they are set out  in
    the application.

Ground 1

20. There is a finding in paragraph 20 that the FtT is not  satisfied  that
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   Appellant's
    integration into Pakistan, which is where he lived  until  he  was  27.
    This is a consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

21. If paragraph 20 is read in isolation there are insufficient reasons, as
    all that is stated is that the Appellant lived in Pakistan until he was
    27.  However paragraph 20 should not be read in isolation, and while  I
    accept  that  the  FtT  decision  could  have   been   set   out   more
    appropriately, the correct approach is to read the decision as a  whole
    and consider it in the round.

22. With reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) it  is  also  appropriate  to
    consider the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon  [2017]
    UKUT 00013 (IAC) in which at paragraph 3  of  the  head  note,  it  was
    confirmed that mere  hardship,  mere  difficulty,  mere  hurdles,  mere
    upheaval and mere inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to
    satisfy the test of very significant obstacles in paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.

23. It is also appropriate when considering the FtT findings on this issue,
    to note the findings made by the previous Tribunal as a starting point.
     There was specific consideration of paragraph 276ADE at  paragraph  27
    of the  previous  decision.   The  previous  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    Appellant had failed  to  demonstrate  a  lack  of  ties  to  Pakistan,
    commenting that  this  was  not  surprising  given  that  he  had  only
    relatively recently arrived in the United Kingdom.  He  had  family  in
    Pakistan, and relatives settled in his home town, where  he  had  spent
    the majority of his life.  The  Appellant  had  the  required  language
    skills to return to his previous life in Pakistan.

24. The FtT should have made  reference  to  those  findings.   However  at
    paragraphs 36 and 37 the FtT did  make  findings  relative  to  whether
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  re-
    integrating in Pakistan.  The FtT found at paragraph 36  that  although
    there may be a reduced  standard  of  living,  accommodation  would  be
    available  with  the  Appellant's  parents  and  there  would   be   no
    destitution.  At paragraph 37 it  was  found  that  the  Sponsor's  ex-
    husband would not have an interest in causing further trouble.  If that
    was not the case there would be adequate protection  from  the  police,
    and it would not be unreasonable or impracticable to  live  in  another
    part of Pakistan.  Although paragraph 37 makes  specific  reference  to
    insurmountable obstacles, I find that the conclusions are  relevant  in
    considering  whether  the  Appellant  has   proved   very   significant
    difficulties.

25. I find that the FtT was entitled to conclude that the Appellant had not
    discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in  relation  to  very  significant
    obstacles, and overall adequate reasons have been given to support this
    conclusion.

Ground 2

26. With reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, the starting
    point for the FtT should have been the previous appeal, in  which  this
    issue was considered at paragraphs 28-35, the previous Tribunal finding
    the Respondent's decision to be proportionate.

27. The FtT did not err in law when considering the Chikwamba principle  at
    paragraphs  32-35.   The  FtT  also,  appropriately,   considered   the
    principles in Chen.  The FtT did not err in  law  at  paragraph  35  in
    finding that it was not appropriate to attempt to pre-judge the outcome
    of an entry clearance application.  It is  somewhat  difficult  to  see
    what relevant further evidence on this point,  was  placed  before  the
    FtT, when  compared  with  the  evidence  placed  before  the  previous
    Tribunal.  The FtT does in fact go on, at  paragraph  36,  to  consider
    what would happen if the Appellant was unsuccessful in making an  entry
    clearance application.  The FtT makes the point  that  while  not  pre-
    judging the application, this is not a case where  an  application  for
    entry clearance is bound to succeed.  I find no material error  of  law
    on this point.





Ground 3

28. It is correct that at paragraph 18 the FtT does not give reasons why it
    is not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  would  have  very
    significant difficulties in continuing their family and private life in
    Pakistan.  As previously stated, the decision must be read as a  whole.
    At paragraph 19 the FtT makes it clear, that  insurmountable  obstacles
    will be considered with  issues  of  proportionality  under  Article  8
    generally.  In my view,  it  would  be  more  appropriate  to  consider
    insurmountable obstacles first, and then if necessary go on to consider
    proportionality, but  I  do  not  find  the  approach  of  the  FtT  is
    materially wrong in law.  Paragraphs 36  and  37  contain  the  reasons
    given by  the  FtT  for  finding  that  there  are  not  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in  Pakistan.   These  include  the
    finding that accommodation would be available, the couple would not  be
    destitute, they would not be at risk, in  the  alternative  they  could
    reasonably relocate to another part of Pakistan, and financial  support
    would be available if necessary.

29. Again, this issue was considered by the previous Tribunal at paragraphs
    20-21, in which it was found that  no  family  members,  including  the
    Sponsor's ex-husband, would have an adverse interest in the couple, and
    at paragraphs 22-24 in which it was concluded that there  would  be  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the couple relocating to  Pakistan.   These
    findings should have been the starting point for the FtT.   I  find  no
    material error of law in the FtT conclusion that the Appellant has  not
    proved  that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to   family   life
    continuing in Pakistan.

Ground 4

30. I find that this ground amounts to a disagreement rather than an  error
    of  law.   It  is  contended  that   proportionality   has   not   been
    satisfactorily addressed.  Again, this  issue  was  considered  by  the
    previous Tribunal, who found that the decision was  proportionate,  and
    this should have been the starting point.

31. With reference to the Sponsor's depression after losing a child, I note
    that there was no medical evidence in relation to this before the  FtT.
    There has been a further bundle prepared  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    which there is medical evidence, but the only evidence in  relation  to
    depression is a handwritten note from Dudley and Walsall NHS dated  4th
    August 2016 which makes a reference to the Sponsor visiting her  GP  to
    discuss obtaining an antidepressant.  Depression was not  mentioned  in
    the witness statements of the Appellant or Sponsor  which  were  before
    the FtT, and appears  only  to  have  arisen  as  a  result  of  cross-
    examination.  I do not find that this was put forward by the  Appellant
    as a material issue, and in any event, there was no medical evidence to
    confirm  details  of  any  depression.   The  FtT  did  not   therefore
    materially err in law in failing to specifically refer to the Sponsor's
    depression.

32. For the reasons given above, I conclude that no material error  of  law
    is disclosed within the FtT decision such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.





Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law such that the decision must be set aside.   I  do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal, and no anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date         8th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date         8th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


