
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal Numbers: HU/12966/2018
                                                           and HU/12971/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 11 April 2019                      |On 18 April 2019                       |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                               kulwinder Singh
                                     and
                                Surinder Kaur
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Nicholson of Counsel instructed by JJ Law
                  Chambers, solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are husband and wife,  born  respectively  in  1964  and
    1967. They have a child born in 1998 who is a  second  year  university
    student and has limited leave to remain expiring on 13 May  2019.  They
    are all citizens of India. On 16 November 2006 they entered with  leave
    as visitors, expiring on 17 April 2017. They overstayed and upon  being
    encountered by the authorities on 30 March  2009  the  husband  made  a
    subsidiary protection claim with the  wife  as  his  dependant.  On  15
    December 2009 the Respondent (the SSHD) refused the  protection  claims
    and  certified  them  as  clearly  unfounded.  The  Appellants   sought
    permission to bring proceedings for Judicial Review which  was  refused
    on 4 April 2010. Two years later, on 6 April  2012  they  submitted  an
    application for further leave outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of their private and family life. On 2 May 2013 the SSHD  refused
    the applications with no in-country right of appeal. On 2 December 2016
    the Appellants made a further application  for  leave  based  on  their
    family life with their child which is the decision under appeal.

The SSHD's decision

 2. On 5 June 2018 the  SSHD  refused  the  Appellants  further  leave  for
    reasons given in a letter of the same date. The  part  of  the  reasons
    letter  dealing  with  whether  the   Appellants   met   the   relevant
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and  in  particular,  Section  R-
    LTRPT of Appendix FM are far from clear:  see  for  instance  the  part
    dealing with  Section  EX  of  Appendix  FM.  The  SSHD  concluded  the
    Appellants did not meet the relevant requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules or any of the time critical requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    of the Rules. The SSHD noted there was evidence that  the  majority  of
    their wider families lived in India and that they were in contact  with
    them. Consequently, there were no very significant obstacles  to  their
    re-integration on return to India where they had lived until they  came
    to  the  United  Kingdom.  Additionally,  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances warranting the grant of  leave  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. At the date of the Appellants' applications their  child  was  a
    minor and an adult by the date of the SSHD's decision.

 3. At the very end of the reasons letter the SSHD cited paragraph  R-LTRPT
    1.1(d)(ii) without stating what it provides or giving  any  explanation
    how it might be applicable to the decision. Similarly in  the  sentence
    the SSHD cited paragraph 276CE which  provides  that  leave  is  to  be
    refused if the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) are not  met.  There
    was no attempt to link the  reference  to  R-LTRPT  1.1(d)(ii)  to  any
    earlier part of the letter, in particular the part asserting  that  the
    provisions of Section EX were not applicable to the Appellants.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. On 13 June 2018 the Appellants lodged notices of  appeal.  The  grounds
    are entirely generic and formulaic. By  a  decision  promulgated  on  6
    February 2019 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  NJ  Osborne  dismissed
    both appeals on all grounds. On 12 March 2019 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Garro granted permission to appeal  because  the  Judge  had
    arguably erred in deciding not to apply the provisions of Section EX of
    Appendix FM. The Appellants' child at the date  of  their  applications
    had been a minor but by the date of the hearing was an adult  and  that
    it was arguable the Judge had erred in taking the relevant date for the
    application of Section EX as the date of the hearing and not  the  date
    of the applications for further leave.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 5. At the start of the hearing  I  requested  the  advocates  to  take  me
    through the relevant parts of Appendix FM to enable  me  to  understand
    how it came about that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  focused
    on Section EX and the date at which it was considered to be  applicable
    since my understanding was that Section EX merely served to exclude the
    need for an applicant for further leave  to  meet  certain  eligibility
    requirements if, first,  the  Section  was  engaged  and,  second,  its
    requirements satisfied.

 6. In the course of doing this, it became apparent that Section EX was not
    relevant to the Appellants' circumstances  because  the  provisions  of
    paragraph R-LTRPT 1.1(d)(ii) stated the  Appellants  had  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT 2.2 - 2.4 which apply only when  the
    applicant has

         ... sole parental  responsibility  for  the  child  all  the  child
         normally lives with the applicant and not their other  parent  (who
         is a British Citizen or settled in the UK), and the applicant  must
         not be eligible to apply for leave to remain  as  a  partner  under
         this Appendix; or ...

    and paragraphs ELTRPT.3.1 and 3.2.

 7. Paragraph E-LTRPT 2.3  is  the  provision  of  immediate  concern.  The
    relevant part is recited in the preceding paragraph. I enquired whether
    the Appellants could meet the requirements of this paragraph because if
    they could not, then Section EX could not be engaged.

 8. On my motion I adjourned the hearing for a short period  to  enable  Mr
    Nicholson for the Appellants to consider  the  position,  marshall  his
    thoughts, take instructions and, if appropriate, discuss possible  ways
    forward with Mr Kotas for the SSHD.

 9. After some 20 minutes, the hearing resumed. I was informed the  parties
    agreed the lack of a response under Procedure Rule 24 from the SSHD had
    not helped. The original SSHD decision had not adequately set  out  the
    SSHD's approach to the applicability or otherwise of Section EX so that
    the Appellants had not been able to understand the basis for the SSHD's
    adverse decision. Further and following on, the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained a material error of law in its approach to  the
    engagement of Section EX.

Conclusion

9.   My concern is whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains
    a material error of law and in the light of the above and the  parties'
    agreement, I am satisfied that it  failed  adequately  to  address  the
    relevance and applicability of Section EX and so  contains  a  material
    error of law such  that  it  should  be  set  aside  with  no  findings
    preserved.

10.  Given the erroneous basis upon which the First-tier Tribunal  proceeded
    and that in effect the whole appeal needs to be heard  afresh  and  the
    Appellants who hopefully now have a clear idea of the case they have to
    answer may wish to submit further evidence, I find  it  appropriate  to
    remit the appeal for hearing afresh before a  different  Judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

11.  At the close of the hearing, I suggested the SSHD may wish to  consider
    the preparation of a supplemental reasons for refusal letter to address
    at greater length the Appellants' claim  based  on  their  private  and
    family life protected by Article 8 of the European  Convention  outside
    the Immigration Rules. I gave leave to the Appellants to file and serve
    any further evidence not less than two weeks before the next hearing.

Anonymity

12.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal, I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 15.  iv.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal














