
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12673/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2018                 |On 17 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                 SOBIA NIAZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Manley, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born on 26  September
       1985.  She entered the UK on 3 November 2010 as a Tier 4 student  and
       made a further in time application in the  same  capacity  which  was
       granted until 30 June 2013. On 22 April 2013 she applied for leave to
       remain as the spouse of a settled person which was rejected on 10 May
       2013. She applied  again  as  a  spouse  on  6  June  2013  and  this
       application was granted until 11 March 2016. She then  applied  on  7
       March 2016 as a spouse and her application was refused on the grounds
       of financial eligibility.

    2. The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal under Section 82(2)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 and alleged that the Respondent's  decision  breached
       her human rights.  That appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       MM Thomas who in a decision and reasons promulgated on  6  June  2017
       dismissed her appeal on human rights grounds.

    3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal against that  decision  and
       permission was granted on renewal to the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Deputy
       Upper Tribunal Judge Coker. She considered that it was arguable  that
       the Judge failed to properly consider the  Appellant's  circumstances
       as they were evidenced at the date of the hearing and failed to place
       adequate weight on her positive immigration  history  and  compliance
       with the Immigration Rules.

    4. The appeal therefore comes before the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
       determine whether there was a material error of law in  the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal such that it must be set aside.

The Grounds

    5. Ground 1 asserts that the Judge misdirects herself as to  the  burden
       of proof in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR.

    6. Ground 2 asserts that there was no dispute that the allegedly missing
       evidence, namely the bank statements and  letter  from  the  employer
       required by Appendix FM-SE, were before the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
       the date of the hearing. The  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  is  alleged,
       materially erred in failing to recognise that this was a human rights
       appeal and whilst the Rules were  a  starting  point,  the  statutory
       provisions, namely s.85 (4) and (5) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) do not place  any  limitations  on
       the evidence that the First-tier Tribunal could consider.  The  Judge
       failed to recognise that there was  no  public  interest  in  removal
       where the requirements of the Rules were  met  at  the  date  of  the
       hearing.

    7. Ground 3 asserts that given there was no dispute about the fact  that
       the evidence showed that the income threshold was met at the date  of
       the hearing the Judge erred in failing to consider Chikwamaba (FC)  v
       SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. The Judge had failed to consider whether it  was
       proportionate to remove the Appellant given the fact that  the  Rules
       were met at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  including  the  evidential
       requirements.

    8. Ground 4 asserts that as the Supreme Court made clear in MM (Lebanon)
       & Ors, R (on the applications of) v SSHD and another [2017] UKSC  10,
       there is a difference between the evidential  requirements  (Appendix
       FM-SE) and the substantive requirements (Appendix FM). Where,  as  in
       this case,  the  substantive  requirements  were  met,  even  if  two
       documents were not submitted with the application that could not be a
       reason to dismiss the appeal.

    9. Ground 5 asserts that given the documents were provided in respect of
       the employment as listed at [34] of the determination, the First-tier
       Tribunal erred in failing to appreciate that the requirement to  have
       evidence of employment in the form of a letter from the employer  did
       not mean that the evidence had to be limited to one  letter  and  the
       First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  consider  the  P60,  employment
       contract  and  other  evidence  together  in  order  to  see  if  the
       requirement of Appendix FM-SE was met.

The hearing

   10. I heard submissions from both representatives which I summarise here.
       Mr Manley submitted that at the date of the hearing  it  was  not  in
       dispute that all the documentation was provided.  There was no actual
       dispute that the Appellant met the financial requirements at the date
       of the hearing. With regard to the misdirection  in  respect  of  the
       burden of proof the Judge misdirected herself both at [11] and  [59].
       The Judge placed the burden of proving both the existence  of  family
       life  under  Article   8   (1)   and   proving   the   decision   was
       disproportionate on the Appellant.

   11. With regard to Grounds 2 and 3, the Judge gave little or no weight to
       the fact that at the date of the hearing the Rules were satisfied. At
       [55] the Judge stated that she attached little  weight  to  the  fact
       that the specified evidence requirements had been met at the date  of
       the hearing. Having decided that she met the Rules she found that she
       had to go back to make an application that was bound to succeed.

   12. With regard  to  Ground  4,  the  Judge  further  failed  to  make  a
       distinction between the substantive and evidential requirements.

   13. Regarding Ground 5, the only dispute was whether bank statements were
       submitted with the application. The documents were available  at  the
       date of the hearing. Not only was the error material but the decision
       should be re-made without further evidence and the appeal  should  be
       allowed. As from the date of  the  last  spousal  visa  she  now  had
       completed  five  years  and  in  allowing  appeal  there  should   be
       indefinite leave as opposed to a period of 30 months.

   14. Mr Howells submitted in respect of Ground 1 that [11] was a  standard
       paragraph and  although  the  Judge  might  have  set  out  a  fuller
       exposition of the burden of proof it was not  a  material  error.  He
       accepted that there was an error at [59] which placed the  burden  on
       the Appellant  to  prove  that  the  decision  was  disproportionate.
       However, it  was  clear  from  [57]  that  a  proper  proportionality
       exercise was carried out.

   15. With regard to Ground 2, the Respondent had a discretion to waive the
       requirement of specified documents. It was clear that  the  decisions
       taken under Appendix  FM  related  to  evidence  submitted  with  the
       application and certainly before the decision. It was not in  dispute
       that the Appellant did not provide the specified  evidence  with  the
       application. The Judge found that evidence had now  been  adduced  at
       [55] but little weight was to be attached and it was open to  her  to
       make that finding.

   16. Ground 3 was parasitic on Ground 2 and, in any  event,  she  did  not
       address herself to entry clearance.  With regard to Ground 4, it  was
       not in dispute that specified evidence had not been provided  at  the
       date of application. With regard to Ground 5, there was a requirement
       for  a  letter  from  the  employer  confirming   certain   specified
       information.  In summary, there were no material  errors  of  law  in
       this determination.

   17. Mr Manley replied that it was clear that in order to  make  a  lawful
       decision the Judge had to set  the  scales  correctly  and  what  was
       apparent was that the Chikwamba principles had not been  applied  and
       that had to be fatal to the proportionality assessment. He maintained
       that the appeal had to be allowed on all grounds.

   18. Mr Howells agreed that if I were to find a material error of law  the
       decision in the  appeal  could  be  remade  without  hearing  further
       evidence.

Discussion

   19. The Judge firstly considered whether the specified evidence  required
       by Appendix FM-SE was produced by the  Appellant  to  the  Respondent
       with her application. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  at
       paragraph 36 of the decision that the  specified  financial  evidence
       was not provided at the time of the application.  The  Appellant  had
       contended that she had produced the specified bank statements and the
       Judge found against her on this.  She then found that there  were  no
       insurmountable obstacles to the couple continuing their  family  life
       in Pakistan and further determined that the requirements of paragraph
       276ADE 1 (vi) were not met.

   20. The Judge then considered the appeal outside the Rules. The Appellant
       argued that she had now provided all the specified evidence and  that
       her husband, as a British Citizen, should not be forced to leave  the
       UK.  As the Respondent had accepted that  there  was  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship the only issue was whether  the  Respondent's
       decision was proportionate.

   21. The core paragraph of reasoning is at [55]:

           "I accept that the  Appellant  has  now  adduced  the  specified
           evidence to confirm her financial status  at  the  time  of  the
           application. Nevertheless, the application was  refused  because
           the Appellant failed to engage with the immigration  authorities
           by not providing the requested information and as such has acted
           in a way that undermined the system of  immigration  control.  I
           therefore when undertaking the proportionality  exercise  attach
           little  weight  to  the  fact  that   the   specified   evidence
           requirements have now been met as the  failure  to  provide  the
           information was the fault of the Appellant."

   22. The Judge then addressed the s117 B factors, found that the Appellant
       had always known her  status  was  precarious  and  stated  that  the
       circumstances were not so compelling that the Appellant's  Article  8
       claim would outweigh the public interest in removal.

   23. I find that there is a material error of law  for  the  reasons  both
       identified in the grounds and the grant of permission.   Whilst  this
       is  an  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,  the  relevance  of   the
       Immigration Rules is, as recently found by the Court of Appeal in the
       case of TZ (Pakistan) v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1109,  that  if  an
       Appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules his removal
       is not proportionate. It was not in dispute that at the date  of  the
       hearing  the  Appellant  met  both  the  substantive  and  evidential
       requirements of the Rules (Appendix FM and  FM-SE).  The  reason  the
       Judge gave for not according any weight to this was that it  was  the
       Appellant's fault that  documentation  was  not  submitted  with  the
       application and this undermined the system  of  immigration  control.
       The Judge failed to give weight to the fact that if the  requirements
       of the Rule are met at the date of the hearing there can be little or
       no public interest in removal.

   24. Further, as the Appellant argues at Ground 4, the Supreme Court  made
       it clear in MM (Lebanon) at [76] that the rules as to the quality  of
       evidence necessary to  satisfy  the  income  test  was  a  matter  of
       practicality rather than principle and the Tribunal could draw on its
       own expertise:

           "76.   As Lord Reed explains (Agyarko, para 47),  this  approach
                is consistent with the margin of appreciation  permitted  by
                the Strasbourg court on an "intensely political" issue, such
                as immigration control. However,  this  important  principle
                should not be taken too far. Not  everything  in  the  rules
                need be treated as high  policy  or  peculiarly  within  the
                province of the  Secretary  of  State,  nor  as  necessarily
                entitled to the same weight. The tribunal is entitled to see
                a difference in  principle  between  the  underlying  public
                interest considerations, as set by the  Secretary  of  State
                with the approval of Parliament, and the working out of that
                policy through the detailed machinery of the rules  and  its
                application  to  individual  cases.  The  former   naturally
                include  issues  such  as  the  seriousness  of  levels   of
                offending sufficient to require deportation  in  the  public
                interest (Hesham Ali, para 46). Similar considerations would
                apply  to  rules  reflecting  the   Secretary   of   State's
                assessment of levels of income required to avoid a burden on
                public resources,  informed  as  it  is  by  the  specialist
                expertise of the Migration Advisory Committee.  By  contrast
                rules as to the quality of  evidence  necessary  to  satisfy
                that test  in  a  particular  case  are,  as  the  committee
                acknowledged, matters of practicality rather than principle;
                and as such matters on which the tribunal may  more  readily
                draw on its own experience and expertise."

   25. I find that the Tribunal erred in placing significant weight  on  the
       Appellant's failure to satisfy the  evidential  requirements  of  the
       Rules  at  the  date  of  the  application  and  failing  to   accord
       significant weight to the fact that the Appellant satisfied the Rules
       at the date of the hearing. In the light  of  her  finding  that  the
       Appellant did satisfy the Rules at the date of the hearing I  further
       find that the Judge erred in  failing  to  consider  whether  it  was
       proportionate  to  require  her  to   seek   entry   clearance.   The
       misdirection at paragraph 57 in relation to the burden  of  proof  is
       also an error of law which in the context of the decision as a  whole
       must also be regarded as material.

The Re-making of the decision

   26.  It is accepted that  the  Appellant  enjoys  family  life  with  her
       husband having been granted a spouse visa from  6  June  2013  to  11
       March 2016. There is no issue in this case  that  Article  8  (1)  is
       engaged.

   27. In addressing the questions in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  the  proposed
       interference is of sufficient gravity  to  engage  the  operation  of
       Article 8, the  interference  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
       necessary  in  a  democratic  society.  The  remaining  question   is
       therefore whether the interference is proportionate to the legitimate
       public end sought to be achieved.

   28. It was not in dispute that the Appellant met the requirements of  the
       Rules at the date of the hearing. Her  partner  had  demonstrated  an
       income of �32,000 by reference to  the  specified  evidence  required
       under Appendix FM-SE. The significance of the meeting  the  Rules  is
       that removal is not proportionate as explained by the Court of Appeal
       in TZ.

   29. Further, in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 10 Lord Reed said at [51] that if  an
       applicant, even if residing  in  the  UK  unlawfully,  was  otherwise
       certain to be granted leave to enter, at least if an application were
       made from outside the UK, then there might be no public  interest  in
       his or her removal and that point was illustrated by  Chikwamba.   In
       Hayat (nature of Chikwamba  principle)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  00444
       (IAC) the Tribunal confirmed that  the  Chikwamba  principle  is  not
       confined to cases where children are involved  or  where  the  person
       with whom the appellant is seeking to remain has  settled  status  in
       the United Kingdom.

   30. It is clear that had the Appellant applied at the date of the hearing
       she would have been  granted  leave  to  enter.  The  Respondent  has
       advanced no good reason why she should return to seek entry clearance
       in circumstances where she has  been  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship since 2013 and she has a good immigration history.

   31. I am required to take the factors in section 117 B of  the  2002  Act
       into consideration. Sections 117A and 117B are found in  part  5A  of
       the 2002 Act and apply in all cases where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
       required to determine whether a decision made under  the  Immigration
       Acts breaches a person's rights under Article 8.

       Section 117A is as follows:

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required
                to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                Acts-

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                    family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
                tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                    117B, and

                (b)    in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
                the question of whether an interference with a person's
                right to respect for private and family life is justified
                under Article 8(2).

   32. The considerations referred to in section 117A(2)(a), which are said
       by that provision to be applicable in all cases where the public
       interest question is under consideration, are as follows:

           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
                the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life
                established by a person at a time when the person's
                immigration status is precarious.

   33. The little weight provisions do not apply to her relationship as it
       was established when she was here on a spousal visa. Her status was
       precarious and hence little weight can be attached to her private
       life but that is not the real issue in this appeal. The Appellant
       speaks English and is financially independent. However, she can
       obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to remain from either
       s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of fluency in English, or the
       strength of financial resources as these are neutral factors
       (Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803).

   34. The maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest but
       it is not in the public interest to remove the Appellant who has
       enjoyed family life with her husband since 2013 on the basis of a
       grant of spousal leave and who, at the date of the hearing, met the
       requirements of the Rules. There are no countervailing public
       interest considerations. The fact that she did not meet the
       evidential requirements of the Rules at the date of the application
       cannot be a sufficiently weighty factor on the public interest side
       of the scales to render removal proportionate.

Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
and I set it aside.

The appeal allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 26 September 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

