
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12499/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                Olushola [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Ojo, C W Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 3rd October
    2017 to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of his family life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi dismissed the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 15th November 2018.  Permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal was granted on renewal to the Upper Tribunal by
    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 7th March 2019.

 2. The background to this appeal is that, following several visits to  the
    UK, the Appellant was granted entry clearance as a visitor and  entered
    the UK on 27th January 2010.  This  application  for  leave  to  remain
    under Tier 1 was granted until 21st September  2013.   His  application
    for an EEA residence  card  was  refused  on  19th  March  2014  and  a
    subsequent application for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  human
    rights was refused on 17th September 2015.  A further  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of human rights was refused on 28th  April
    2016.  A further application was made on 25th January 2017 on the basis
    of the Appellant's claimed relationship with [HA], a  British  citizen,
    and their British citizen  child  born  on  9th  September  2016.   The
    refusal of that application on 3rd October 2017 is the subject of  this
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.  The Appellant appeals against  that  decision  on  two
    grounds as articulated in the application for permission to appeal  and
    developed by Mr Ojo at the hearing.

 3. It is contended in the first ground that the Immigration Judge erred in
    her conclusion at paragraph 36 that, if the Appellant is  removed  from
    the UK the extent to which he will be able to  play  any  role  in  the
    child's life will be "further diminished".  She went on to find that he
    is unlikely to be able to have any physical contact with her but  could
    continue to have Skype and telephone contact with her.  It is contended
    that the judge did not give any reason for  this  conclusion  and  that
    this conclusion infected the entire decision rendering it unsustainable
    in law.

 4. It is contended in the second Ground of Appeal that the judge erred  in
    her assessment of  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    daughter. At paragraph 16 of the decision the judge confirmed that  the
    Appellant and his partner took  turns  to  look  after  their  daughter
    during the hearing of the appeal, it is contended  that  this  confirms
    that the Appellant has a subsisting relationship with his  daughter  to
    the extent of being comfortable with him  outside  the  court.   It  is
    contended that it is in the best interests of the child  to  be  looked
    after by the two parents irrespective of their  relationship  and  that
    the judge failed to give adequate weight to this matter  which  renders
    the decision unsustainable.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on
    the basis that it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  assessing
    reasonableness in the context of the Appellant's daughter in accordance
    with the decision in JG (s.117B(6): "reasonable to  leave"  UK)  Turkey
    [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC).

 6. It makes sense to take the grounds in reverse  order.   In  considering
    the judge's approach to the Article 8 issue I  firstly  note  that  the
    judge, having heard  oral  evidence  and  considering  the  documentary
    evidence before her as to the relationship between  the  Appellant  and
    the mother of the child, identified the  issues  to  be  determined  at
    paragraph 31 where she said; "the Appellant claims to  have  a  genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship  with  [HA]  and   a   genuine   parental
    relationship with their child.  There is no  dispute  that  he  is  the
    father of the child as there is DNA evidence of paternity.  The  issues
    are whether the relationship with his wife or the child is subsisting".
     The judge concluded at paragraph 35 that the Appellant and Ms [A]  are
    not in a genuine and subsisting relationship.   That  finding  has  not
    been challenged.

 7. The judge went on to consider the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    daughter from paragraph 36.  In considering  whether  the  relationship
    with his daughter is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship the
    judge made the  following  relevant  findings.   "As  the  evidence  of
    neither the appellant nor Ms [A] was reliable, it is difficult to  know
    what role he plays in her day-to-day life" [36].  "I did not inform the
    impression that he plays a significant role in her life" [36].   "I  am
    concerned only with whether the Appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with the child" [38].  "I was invited  to  find  that  the
    Appellant is involved in taking the child to nursery and  that  he  has
    contributed to the nursery fees, but when he  was  asked  more  probing
    questions it was clear that he was not in fact involved as directly  as
    he wished to portray" [39].  "Ms [A] is the child's primary  carer  and
    there is no evidence to suggest that she does not undertake  that  role
    entirely" [39].  "The difficulty I have is that having found  both  the
    Appellant and his partner to  lack  credibility  I  cannot  assess  the
    extent of his role in  the  child's  life.   There  is  no  independent
    assessment of his role.  Any finding I made would be speculative" [40].



 8. The judge went on to find "I remind myself that the burden of proof  is
    on the Appellant and if he is unable to present sufficient evidence for
    me to make a finding, I cannot make a finding.  That is the position in
    relation to his claim that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with his child" [41].  "The extent of that family life [with his child]
    that his involvement in her life  are  not  established"  [45]  and  at
    paragraph 46 where the judge said "the only safe findings I can make in
    this case are that the Appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with Ms [A], that she is the child's primary carer and the
    extent of his involvement in the child's life is unclear".

 9. In granting permission Judge McWilliam identified a potential error  in
    the assessment of whether it was reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK (JG). However that assessment in EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Rules and Section 117B(6) only comes into play where the  Appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child.

10. It is abundantly  clear,  putting  all  of  the  findings  together  as
    highlighted above, that the judge found  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    discharge the burden upon him to establish that he has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his child.

11. Mr Ojo pointed to the observations at  paragraph  16  of  the  decision
    where the judge referred to the fact that the Appellant and the child's
    mother took turns to  look  after  the  child  outside  the  courtroom.
    However, it is clear that the judge did not consider that  this  was  a
    factor in her assessment of the relationship between the Appellant  and
    the child.  The arrangements for looking after the child on the day  at
    the hearing could not amount to evidence of such weight as to undermine
    the judge's clear findings that the Appellant had  not  discharged  the
    burden upon him.

12. In my view the judge's findings as  to  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the child were open  to  her  on  the  evidence  and  are
    sufficiently reasoned and clear.

13. Ground 1 relates to the  judge's  assertion  about  the  potential  for
    ongoing contact between the Appellant and the child  at  paragraph  36.
    However these conclusions are not relevant in circumstances  where  the
    judge had found  it  not  established  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship between the Appellant and the child.

14. Any criticisms as regards the judge's assessment as to whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK in accordance  with  the
    guidance in KO and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 and JG do not establish
    any material error either in light of the  judge's  findings  that  the
    Appellant had not established that there is a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the Appellant and the child.   The  judge
    had no need to look at whether it is reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the UK in these circumstances.

15. I do accept that the judge's assertion at  paragraph  38  that  as  the
    child is not leaving the UK EX.1 does  not  apply  directly  is  not  a
    correct interpretation of JG and KO.  However  the  judge  acknowledged
    that this does not directly apply because she was concerned  only  with
    whether the Appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    the child.  Ultimately this case is determined  by  reference  to  that
    part of EX.1 and Section 117B(6).

16. The Appellant has not established that there is any material  error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 25th April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeal has been dismissed therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25th April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
