
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12683/2015
     PA/07093/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th July 2017                      |On 10th August 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who seeks  to  appeal  against  a
    decision to make a deportation  order  dated  19th  November  2015  and
    against a decision to refuse a protection and human rights claim  dated
    6th July 2016.

2.   The appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walters  on  3rd
    February 2017 and was dismissed.

3.   Challenge was made, however, to the decision and permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was given, particularly in the light of  the  way
    in which the evidence of Ms Harper  was  considered  and  the  approach
    taken to the appellant's mental health generally.

4.   Mr Jorro in his submissions sought to challenge the correctness of  the
    decision essentially on four grounds, namely:-

    (1)  On the findings made as to the Somali language proficiency of  the
         appellant.


    (2)   On the findings made as to financial  support  available  to  the
         appellant.


    (3)  On the lack of consideration of the expert  evidence  of  Ms  Mary
         Harper.


    (4)  On the lack of consideration as to the appellant's mental health.


5.   Mr Jorro expanded on those matters in the course of his submissions.

6.   As  to  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  at  paragraph  48  of  the
    determination the appellant "speaks a considerable amount  of  Somali";
    he argues that in the light of the evidence  that  was  presented  that
    such was not a reasonable conclusion to arrive at.  For my part I  find
    that the Judge was perfectly entitled to come to that conclusion in the
    light of the evidence that was presented.

7.   In terms of financial  support  the  issue  was  of  remittances.   The
    appellant was part of a very large family, having three  brothers,  two
    of  whom  were  employed,  and  four  sisters,  two  of  whom  were  in
    employment.  The appellant's mother, who is on  benefits,  nevertheless
    was funded for a holiday to Dubai on three occasions.  Mr Jorro submits
    that it is not logical for the Judge to move from that  scenario  to  a
    finding that remittance would be available to the appellant.

8.   Once again, I do not uphold that challenge.  It seems to  me  that  the
    Judge approached the matter in a logical and reasonable manner.

9.   The more significant challenge relates to the way in which  the  expert
    evidence of Mary Harper in her report of 27th January  2017  was  dealt
    with.  She sets out her experiences in some detail in  the  report  and
    concludes that the appellant would face great difficulties were  he  to
    be returned to Mogadishu, both in terms of accommodation,  finance  and
    employment.  She notes the absence of family or  clan  associations  to
    assist him.  Comment was also made as  to  the  mental  health  of  the
    appellant and the danger that that would place him in  and  the  social
    reaction with  others.   She  emphasised  that  there  was  a  lack  of
    tolerance of mental difficulties and that  thereby  the  appellant  may
    well suffer humiliation or indeed ill-treatment.   There  was  evidence
    from Dr Nauroze that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from  mental  and
    behavioural disorders.

10.  It is submitted that in considering the safety of return, scant  regard
    had been paid to the expert report of Ms Harper and that the Judge  had
    unduly minimised the mental difficulties that the  appellant  had.   It
    was not simply that he was  a  drinker  of  alcohol  and  a  smoker  of
    cannabis but that he had serious mental issues arising from that abuse.
     The diagnosis of Dr Nauroze, in his report of  20th  April  2016,  was
    that the  appellant  was  most  likely  to  be  suffering  from  severe
    depression with psychotic symptoms.

11.  Mr Jorro submits that, in the light of that evidence,  there  had  been
    an inadequate consideration of the risk on return,  particularly  given
    the importance attached to that matter by the Tribunal in  the  leading
    case of MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442
    (IAC).

12.  Mr Jorro highlights the head note of  that  case,  in  particular  head
    note (ix), and the assessment that should  be  conducted  which  should
    take into account the mental health of an individual.

13.  I do not dwell at any great length upon those  submissions  because  Mr
    Duffy, at the conclusion of hearing,  conceded that the  assessment  by
    the Judge of the evidence of Ms Harper  and  the  consideration  as  to
    mental health were inadequate in all the circumstances  in  determining
    the safety of return.

14.  Such matters were not only relevant to the issue of asylum but also  to
    human rights as  to  whether  or  not  there  were  any  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant returning to  Somalia.   Those  factors,  as
    highlighted,  may  indeed  be  capable  of  amounting  to   significant
    obstacles to reintegration  and  the  matter  had  not  been  expressly
    considered by the Judge in that context.

15.  In those circumstances I was invited to set aside the decision  and  to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  rehearing  on  all  issues.
    This I do.

16.  Mr Jorro, however, raised one matter which will  need  to  be  resolved
    prior to the next substantive hearing of the appeal and that relates to
    the jurisdictional and legal basis upon which it has  come  before  the
    Tribunal by way of appeal. A deportation order has  been  made  on  the
    basis that the appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal  and  the  automatic
    deportation under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

17.  It has been noted, however, under the interpretation  Section,  Section
    38(1)(b), such does  not  include  a  reference  to  a  person  who  is
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months only by
    virtue  of  being  sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences  amounting  in
    aggregate to  twelve months.  Although it is entirely apparent from the
    history of the appellant that the he is a persistent criminal, only one
    of the sentences imposed after 2007 amounted  to  twelve  months.  That
    having been said, the sentence of twelve months'  imprisonment  imposed
    on 7th May 2015 is said to have arisen by the activation of a number of
    consecutive sentences, none of which amounting in themselves to  twelve
    months.  Thus he submits that for the purposes of the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007 (Commencement No. 3 and Transitional Provisions)  Order  2008  the
    appellant is not a foreign criminal as so defined so as to justify  the
    imposition of a deportation order.

18.  He  accepts  that  there  are  of  course  other  avenues  by  which  a
    deportation order can be  issued,  particularly  for  someone  who  has
    committed a particularly serious  crime  or  indeed  for  a  persistent
    offender.  He submits that that matter needs to be considered prior  to
    the next hearing as,  clearly,  whether  or  not  the  appellant  is  a
    persistent criminal is a matter very relevant to the proportionality of
    removal and the lawfulness of the decision under challenge.

19.   Mr  Duffy  undertook  to  refer  the  matter  to  the  respondent  for
    consideration as to whether the decision as to  deportation  under  the
    Act of 2007 is to be maintained or amended or withdrawn.

20.  In that connection I note that the decision to refuse a protection  and
    human rights claim of 6th July 2016 is predicated on the basis that the
    appellant is someone subject to deportation.  No mention is made of the
    appellant being a foreign criminal under that decision but it was noted
    particularly in paragraph 39 of the decision that the offence  met  the
    threshold of "serious".  It seems to me that it is important to clarify
    the basis of the deportation order that is made and whether  indeed  it
    was made under the correct Statutory provision or consideration.

21.  In all the circumstances therefore the appeal of the  appellant  before
    the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

22.  In accordance with the Senior President's  Practice  Direction  and  in
    the light of a significant requirement of fact-finding and  credibility
    assessment, the matter is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing. The legal basis for the deportation order of  course  should
    of course be clarified as a preliminary issue in those  proceedings  if
    not before.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision of the  First-tier  is
set aside, the appeal to be reheard by the First -tier tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                 [pic]                 Date 4 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
