
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12718/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decision made on the papers          |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|13th May 2019                        |On 15th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               PATHRANAGE [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION TO REMIT APPEAL

      1. By a decision promulgated on 9  July  2018,  I  (sitting  with  Mrs
         Justice Moulder) found an error of law in  the  decision  of  Judge
         Metzer promulgated  on  6  March  2018,  allowing  the  Appellant's
         appeal.  We therefore set aside that decision and  gave  directions
         for a resumed hearing to re-make the decision.  Our  error  of  law
         decision is annexed hereto at Appendix A for ease of reference.

      2. Since then, this appeal has come back before me  on  no  less  than
         three occasions, on 24 September 2018, 16 January 2019 and 21 March
         2019.  My decisions on  those  occasions,  adjourning  the  resumed
         hearing are at Appendix B for ease of reference.

      3. In short summary, the re-hearing of this appeal has  been  rendered
         more complicated by two matters.  First, the Appellant has  already
         been deported to Sri Lanka following a certification under  section
         94B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   He  remains  in
         that country.  Although  he  was  initially  content  to  give  his
         evidence by Skype (as he had  done  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal),
         efforts to take evidence in that  way  failed  at  the  hearing  in
         January 2019.  That led  to  the  making  of  a  direction  to  the
         Respondent to arrange for the Appellant  to  give  evidence  via  a
         video-link from Sri Lanka.  The Respondent has put arrangements  in
         place (see case management decision dated 21 March 2019).

      4. The second issue concerns the position of the Appellant's wife  and
         child who remain in the UK but without leave to remain here.  Their
         lack of status was one of the factors leading to the finding of  an
         error of law in Judge Metzer's decision.  The Appellant's wife is a
         failed asylum seeker.  However, she had made further submissions on
         5 September 2018.  The Respondent had stayed consideration of those
         submissions pending the outcome of the Appellant's appeal.   By  my
         directions given on 16 January 2019, I requested the Respondent  to
         make a decision on those by 16 April 2019.  Although the Respondent
         contended that I could not compel the making of a decision in  that
         regard (which I accept) and although the Respondent has  failed  to
         comply with the direction made on 21 March 2019 to file a  copy  of
         any decision made, the Tribunal has been informed by letter dated 9
         May 2019, that a decision was made and served  on  the  Appellant's
         wife  on  24  April  2019.   Although  that  decision  refused  the
         Appellant's wife's protection claim, it gave her a further right of
         appeal.   That  appeal   has   been   lodged   (appeal   reference:
         PA/04216/2019).

      5. In light of the above developments and  as  canvassed  in  my  case
         management decision dated 21  March  2019  (at  [5]),  it  is  more
         appropriate for the Appellant's appeal to be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal for re-hearing and for that to  be  linked  with  his
         wife's appeal for  that  purpose.   As  the  Appellant's  solicitor
         submits in his letter dated 9 May  2019,  there  is  a  significant
         degree of evidential and legal overlap between the two cases.

      6. For those reasons,  this  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for the re-making of the decision  in  this  appeal.   The
         appeal  is  to  be  linked  to  that  of   the   Appellant's   wife
         (PA/04216/2019) and both are to be heard together at  Taylor  House
         to allow the Appellant to give evidence from Sri Lanka  by  way  of
         video-link.

    DECISION

    I direct that this appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
    making of the decision following the setting aside of the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated on  6  March  2018.   This
    appeal should be  linked  with  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant's  wife
    (PA/04216/2019) and both shall be heard at Taylor House  to  allow  the
    Appellant to give evidence by way of video-link from Sri Lanka.

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 13 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

                      APPENDIX A: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12718/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 19 June 2018              |                                     |
|                                     |......9 July                         |
|                                     |2018.....................            |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MOULDER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               PATHRANAGE [R]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by Lawland
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  For ease of reference, we refer below to  the  parties
         as they were in the First-tier Tribunal albeit that  the  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department is technically  the  Appellant  in
         this particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against a  decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated  on  6  March  2018
         ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
         Respondent's decision dated 21 July 2015 refusing  the  Appellant's
         human rights claim in the context  of  a  decision  to  deport  the
         Appellant to Sri Lanka.  The Appellant was in fact deported to  Sri
         Lanka on 6 May 2016 albeit his wife and child remain in the UK.

      2. Although mention is made in the Decision of the  Appellant's  claim
         to fear return to Sri Lanka, that is only by way of a recitation of
         the Appellant's evidence, the Appellant did not ask  the  Judge  to
         make any findings on that evidence and did  not  pursue  a  further
         claim for protection.  The appeal and the challenge  thereto  focus
         only on the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

      3. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  The  Appellant  came  to
         the UK in 1994 and claimed asylum following  arrival.   His  asylum
         claim was refused but on 9 November 1999 he was granted exceptional
         leave to remain until 9 November 2003.

      4. On 20 September 2002, the Appellant was arrested  on  suspicion  of
         helping prostitution and on 30 April 2003, he  was  prosecuted  for
         living off the earnings of prostitution.  He pleaded guilty to that
         charge and on 3 June 2003, he was sentenced  to  a  period  of  two
         years' imprisonment.  The details of the offence are set out  fully
         at [2] of the Decision and we need say no more about that  save  to
         note that it was a very serious offence as the Judge recognised  at
         [15] of the Decision.

      5. On 20  August  2003,  the  Appellant  was  served  with  notice  of
         intention to deport him which he appealed.  He also applied  on  14
         November 2003 for indefinite leave to remain, his exceptional leave
         having expired.  His appeal against the decision to deport him  was
         dismissed in a determination promulgated on  13  March  2006.   The
         Appellant has had no leave to remain in the UK since at the  latest
         that date.

      6. The Appellant met his wife in the UK and they began living together
         in 2006.  They married on 20 December 2011.  Their son was born  on
         5 February 2013.  The Appellant's wife and child are also nationals
         of Sri Lanka.  His child was born in the UK but is  not  a  British
         citizen.   The  Appellant's  wife  is  currently  challenging   the
         Respondent's refusal to grant her and her son leave  to  remain  on
         human rights  and/or  protection  grounds.   It  appears  from  the
         Respondent's decision letter that her asylum claim was  refused  in
         2011 and she unsuccessfully appealed that decision. It appears that
         she made (or intended to make) further submissions in  this  regard
         in December 2017.

      7. On 22 September 2013, the  Appellant  was  arrested  and  detained.
         Following  the  making  of  the  decision  now  under  appeal   and
         certification  of  the  human  rights  claim  under   section   94B
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"),  the
         Appellant was deported to Sri Lanka.

      8. The Judge allowed the appeal, finding that  there  were  compelling
         circumstances which outweighed the public interest.

      9. Permission to  appeal  that  decision  was  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Lambert on 4 April 2018 in the following  terms  (so
         far as relevant):-

             "... [2] The  grounds  contend  cumulative  failures  to  have
             proper regard to matters relevant to the  public  interest  in
             deportation and to S117C, particularly in  the  light  of  the
             very  serious  offence  for  which  the  Appellant  had   been
             convicted.  The very limited content of the findings  made  by
             the judge at paragraphs 15-17 may amount to lack  of  adequate
             evidence based reasoning and renders the grounds arguable."

    Grounds of appeal

     10.  The  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  are  that  the  judge  has
         misapplied the "unduly harsh" test. The Respondent submits that the
         Judge has failed to take account  of  certain  factors  namely  the
         status of the Appellant's wife and child, has failed to have proper
         regard to section 117C of the 2002 Act which  is  a  complete  code
         ("Section  117C")  and   failed   to   identify   any   exceptional
         circumstances in the Appellant's family life which  might  outweigh
         the very compelling public interest in  deportation.  Further,  the
         Respondent submits that the Judge has ignored  case  law  (NE  -  A
         (Nigeria) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 239  -  "N  E-A  (Nigeria")  which
         states that the best interests of  the  child  cannot  always  take
         precedence over the  wider  public  interest  and  that  the  Judge
         incorrectly  attributed  significant  weight  to  the   Appellant's
         rehabilitation (Danso v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2015] EWCA 596).

     11. In oral submissions the Secretary of State  pointed  out  that  the
         Appellant did not meet Exception 2 in section 117 C (5) as  neither
         the Appellant's partner nor the Appellant's child were a qualifying
         partner or qualifying child respectively within the meaning of that
         section and accordingly the question for this court is whether  the
         Judge fell into error in concluding that there were very compelling
         circumstances over and above those  described  in  Exception  2  to
         outweigh the public interest which  requires  deportation.  Section
         117C itself does not provide for an exception for  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above  the  exceptions  in  relation  to  an
         offender sentenced to less than four years (as here). However,  the
         exception of "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
         exceptions" in subparagraph (6) is to be read into  section  117  C
         (3) following the decision in NA (Pakistan) and others v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 in  particular
         at [24] to [28].  No objection was taken on behalf of the Appellant
         to this modification of the grounds and we approach the  appeal  on
         this basis.

     12. The matter comes before us to decide whether the Decision  contains
         a material error of law.  Both parties accepted that, if  we  found
         there to be an error of law in the Decision, given the basis of the
         challenge, the appeal could remain in this Tribunal for re-hearing.
          We agreed with the representatives that if  we  found  a  material
         error of law, we would give directions for further evidence.

    Decision and Reasons

     13. The findings which led the Judge to his conclusions are to be found
         at [15] to [17] of the Decision as follows:

             "[15]     In reaching my decision, I need  to  recognise  that
             there is a very strong public interest  in  deportation  given
             that the Appellant was convicted of a very serious offence.  I
             also take into account Section 117B and C of the 2002  Act  as
             amended  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  which  again   makes
             reference to the public interest and immigration control and I
             recognise that the case  involves  deportation  of  a  foreign
             criminal who has been convicted on his  own  plea  of  a  very
             serious offence and  received  a  custodial  sentence  of  two
             years' imprisonment.  As I indicated above, the test for "very
             high compelling circumstances" is a high one: see  Hesham  Ali
             [2016] UKSC 60 at Paragraph 50.

             [16]      However, as Mr Bose accepted, the Respondent  failed
             to enforce immigration control which could have occurred  much
             earlier.   The  Appellant  was  convicted  in  2003  and   the
             Deportation order was  only  some  twelve  years  later.   The
             Appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  1994  and
             although the offence  itself  was,  as  I  have  indicated,  a
             serious one, he has kept out of trouble ever since,  a  period
             now  of  over  fourteen  years.   I  accept  his  remorse  and
             rehabilitation and do not consider that  he  can  properly  be
             described as a risk to the  public  now.   I  also  take  into
             account the impact of the Appellant's deportation on his  wife
             and child in the United Kingdom reflected in the psychological
             report  and  that  removal  would  be  contrary  to  the  best
             interests of the Appellant's  son  under  Section  55  of  the
             Borders Act albeit that the wife and child do not have settled
             status in the United Kingdom.  I  am  entitled  to  take  into
             account the issue of delay which  appears  to  be  solely  the
             Respondent's responsibility: see EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41; I
             need  to  take  into  account  all  the  relevant  factors  in
             balancing the strength of the public interest in  the  removal
             of the Appellant against the  impact  on  private  and  family
             life: see Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 at Paragraph 57.

             [17]      I accept, as here,  that  in  cases  concerned  with
             precarious family life, it is necessary for there to be a very
             strong or compelling claim required  to  outweigh  the  public
             interest in immigration  control.   Having  given  the  matter
             careful consideration recognising the high threshold  test  or
             "very compelling circumstances" and taking  into  account  the
             test under Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules and  Section
             117 of the 2002 Act as amended,  given  the  very  substantial
             delay  in  the  Respondent  failing  to  enforce   immigration
             control; the length of  residence  of  the  Appellant  in  the
             United Kingdom of well over twenty years; the length  of  time
             since the offending behaviour complained about  and  the  fact
             that although it was a serious matter it is the  only  offence
             and the effect that that conviction had upon the Appellant and
             the impact upon his wife and child who was born in the  United
             Kingdom and his best interests, I find that the Appellant  has
             satisfied me that there are very compelling circumstances over
             and above those described in Paragraphs 399 and 399A such that
             the public  interest  in  deportation  is  outweighed  in  the
             present case."

    Failure to have proper regard to section 117C of the 2002 Act

     14. It was submitted that the Judge has not  taken  proper  account  of
         Section 117C.  The assessment to be carried out  is  not  a  simple
         balancing between the  factors  forming  part  of  the  Appellant's
         private and family life (and interference therewith) and the public
         interest, but, having  regard  to  Section  117,  consideration  of
         whether there are "very compelling  circumstances"  which  outweigh
         the public interest which requires deportation.

     15. The Judge has regard at [15] of the Decision to the Supreme Court's
         judgment in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2016] UKSC 60.  However,  the  judge  has  failed  to  acknowledge
         subsequent case law in particular NE-A (Nigeria):

             "[14]     ... The focus in Hesham Ali, as is conceded, was  on
             the Rules. ... integral to Lord Reed's reasoning was that  the
             rules "are not law ... but a statement  of  the  Secretary  of
             State's administrative practice". ... Part 5A of the 2002 Act,
             by contrast, is primary legislation directed to tribunals  and
             governing their  decision-making  in  relation  to  Article  8
             claims in the context of appeals under the  Immigration  Acts.
             ... sections 117 A - 117 D, taken together,  are  intended  to
             provide for  a  structured  approach  to  the  application  of
             Article 8 which produces in all cases a final result which  is
             compatible with  Article  8.  In  particular,  if  in  working
             through the structured approach one gets to section 117 C (6),
             the proper application of  that  provision  produces  a  final
             result compatible with Article 8 in  all  cases  to  which  it
             applies. The provision  contains  more  than  a  statement  of
             policy  to  which  regard  must   be   had   as   a   relevant
             consideration.  Parliament's  assessment  that   "the   public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2" is one to which the tribunal is bound by  law  to  give
             effect.

             [15]      ... Of course,  the  provision  to  that  effect  in
             section 117 C (6) must not be applied as if it contained  some
             abstract  statutory  formula.  The  context  is  that  of  the
             balancing exercise under Article 8, and the  "very  compelling
             circumstances"  required  are  circumstances   sufficient   to
             outweigh the strong public interest in the deportation of  the
             foreign criminals concerned. Provided that a tribunal has that
             context in mind,  however  a  finding  that  "very  compelling
             circumstances" do not exist in the case to which section 117 C
             (6) applies will  produce  a  final  result,  compatible  with
             Article 8, that  the  public  interest  requires  deportation.
             There  is  no  room  for  any  additional   element   in   the
             proportionality balancing exercise under Article 8." [Emphasis
             added]

     16. It was submitted for the Respondent  that  the  Judge  appeared  to
         minimise the Appellant's crime and failed to consider it as part of
         his overall assessment. In our view, the Judge clearly  had  regard
         to the nature of the offence and described it as very  serious.  He
         also  had  regard  to  the  stated  public  interest  generally  in
         deporting those who commit offences (paragraph [15]).

     17. However, it was further submitted for the Respondent that the Judge
         had  failed  to  identify  any  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
         Appellant's family life and failed to recognise that the children's
         best interests cannot always take precedence.

     18. Having regard to what is said by the Judge at [16] and [17] of  the
         Decision, it appears to us that there are three factors  which  lay
         behind  the  Judge's  conclusion.   First,  the   impact   of   the
         Appellant's deportation on his family  life  and  particularly  the
         effect on his wife and child.  Second, the  Respondent's  delay  in
         taking deportation action and the lack of any  reoffending  in  the
         meanwhile.  Third, the Appellant's length of residence in the UK.

     19. Although there is limited evidence about what the interests of  the
         Appellant's child require and  little  reasoning  provided  by  the
         Judge, the psychological report of  Dr  Halari  does  provide  some
         support for a finding that the best interests  of  the  Appellant's
         child are to remain in the UK.  However, it is well  recognised  in
         case law that a child's best interests can be outweighed  by  other
         factors, particularly in deportation cases.

     20. The Appellant is unable to meet Exception 2 because  his  wife  and
         child are not a "qualifying" partner and child for the purposes  of
         the statute.  His wife is not settled or a  British  citizen.   His
         child is not a British citizen and has not been living  in  the  UK
         for seven years.  However, whilst  the  Judge  notes  the  lack  of
         status of the Appellant's wife and child at [14] of  the  Decision,
         there is no reflection of the fact that they are  entirely  without
         status in the Judge's reasoning on this aspect.  He notes  at  [16]
         of the Decision that they do not  have  settled  status.   However,
         they have no basis of stay at all.   At present, they are in the UK
         unlawfully.  At the date of the  hearing,  the  Appellant's  wife's
         appeal on protection and human rights grounds  had  been  dismissed
         and she had yet to make any further submissions (she said that  she
         intended to do so in December 2017).

     21. As to delay, the Respondent  did  not  "delay"  in  the  taking  of
         deportation action against the Appellant.  He  gave  the  Appellant
         notice of his intention to deport the Appellant in 2003 at the time
         of   the   offence.    The   Appellant   appealed   that   decision
         unsuccessfully.  True it is that the Respondent did not  thereafter
         seek to physically remove the Appellant for reasons which  are  not
         entirely clear.  It is also right to note that the Respondent  made
         a further deportation order in 2015 under the automatic deportation
         provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007 (not in existence at the time
         of the first deportation decision).  However, this case is  not  in
         the same category as cases like EB (Kosovo)  where  the  Respondent
         delayed unreasonably in making a decision  on  an  application  for
         leave to remain.   Nor  is  it  a  case  where  the  Appellant  has
         strengthened (qualifying) family or private life ties  in  reliance
         on the Respondent's failure to physically remove him in the period.



     22. The Judge appears to attribute responsibility to the Respondent for
         failing to physically remove the Appellant without any  recognition
         that the Appellant is someone who is subject to deportation and has
         been since 2003.  As a person with no basis of stay and indeed with
         a positive decision against him in  relation  to  deportation,  the
         Appellant should have left the UK. The  Judge  does  not  recognise
         this lack of status or requirement to leave when placing weight  on
         the Appellant's length of residence.  The Appellant's  presence  in
         the UK has been unlawful now for at least twelve years.   That  too
         is a factor which the Judge has failed to take into account.

     23. Accordingly, in our view in relying on  these  factors,  the  Judge
         fell into error in concluding  that  there  were  "very  compelling
         circumstances" which  outweighed  the  strong  public  interest  in
         deportation.

     24. For those reasons, we are satisfied that the Decision  discloses  a
         material error of law and we  set  aside  the  Decision.   We  give
         directions below for  the  re-making  of  the  decision.   We  have
         provided an extended period for the filing and service  of  further
         evidence, mindful of the  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  currently
         living in Sri Lanka and therefore more time may be needed to obtain
         instructions and evidence from him.

    DECISION

    We are satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law. We
    set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer  promulgated
    on 6 March 2018.  We make the following directions for the re-making of
    the decision:




    DIRECTIONS

      1. Within 42 days from the date when this decision is promulgated, the
         Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the  Respondent
         any further evidence  on  which  he  relies.   In  particular,  the
         Tribunal  would  be  assisted  by  updated  evidence  as   to   the
         Appellant's wife's position including but not limited to a copy  of
         any appeal  decision  in  relation  to  her  (and  the  Appellant's
         child's) status, a copy of any further submissions made by them  or
         on their behalf and any  decision  in  response  to  those  further
         submissions.

      2. If the Appellant wishes to give further evidence he must  file  and
         serve a written witness statement within  the  time  limit  at  [1]
         above.

      3. Within 60 days from the date when this decision is promulgated, the
         Respondent shall indicate to the Tribunal and the Appellant whether
         he wishes to cross-examine the Appellant.

      4. The appeal will be listed for a case management review on the first
         available date after 60 days from the date when  this  decision  is
         sent to consider in particular whether oral  evidence  is  required
         from the Appellant and, if so, what arrangements need to be put  in
         place to enable him to give  that  evidence.    Time  estimate  one
         hour.

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 5 July 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

              APPENDIX B: ADJOURNMENT/CASE MANAGEMENT DECISIONS

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12718/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 24 September 2018          |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               PATHRANAGE [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gaston, Counsel instructed by Lawland
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         CASE MANAGEMENT DIRECTIONS

      1. The hearing of this appeal shall be listed on the  first  available
         date after 17 December 2018 with a time estimate  of  �  day.   The
         hearing is to start at 10am due to the time difference between  the
         UK and Sri Lanka.  The hearing is to be listed in conjunction  with
         the clerk to Mr Richard Singer of Counsel, Goldsmith Chambers to Mr
         Singer's convenience. A Sinhalese interpreter is to be  booked  for
         the hearing.

      2. Any further evidence on which either party wishes to  rely  at  the
         hearing is to be filed with the Tribunal and served  on  the  other
         party by no later than 4pm on Monday 3 December 2018.

      3. If the Appellant wishes to give oral evidence and/or the Respondent
         wishes to cross-examine the Appellant (who currently resides in Sri
         Lanka), the parties are to notify the Tribunal by no later than  28
         days before the date fixed for the hearing with confirmation of the
         arrangements made in order  to  receive  such  evidence.   If  such
         evidence is to be given,  the  parties  are  to  make  arrangements
         directly with the Tribunal as to the facilities required  and  such
         facilities as are necessary will be provided by and at the  expense
         of the parties.



REASONS

      1. The CMR for this appeal hearing was listed with  the  intention  of
         considering whether  oral  evidence  would  be  required  from  the
         Appellant depending on the nature of any evidence contained in  any
         further witness statement to be filed and served in accordance with
         the directions made in my earlier decision promulgated  on  9  July
         2018.  That decision also envisaged that the Respondent would  have
         the prior opportunity to  consider  whether  he  wished  to  cross-
         examine the Appellant.

      2. As it was, the Appellant's further witness statement and additional
         evidence was not filed until 21 September and not received  by  the
         Respondent until the CMR hearing.  The Respondent did not therefore
         have the opportunity to consider how to respond to the evidence  or
         whether oral evidence  would  be  required.   Both  parties  agreed
         though that such evidence could be given by Skype (as it was before
         the First-tier Tribunal) particularly since the Presenting  Officer
         thought it unlikely that video-link arrangements were yet available
         from Sri Lanka. I  have  made  plain  in  the  directions  that  if
         evidence is to be given via Skype, arrangements must be made by the
         parties with the Tribunal  in  advance  of  the  hearing  and  such
         facilities as are required must be provided by the parties at their
         expense.  I have also given a direction that this  appeal  must  be
         listed at 10am to account for the time difference  between  the  UK
         and Sri Lanka.  I have also  agreed  that  the  hearing  should  be
         relisted  to  the  convenience  of  Mr  R  Singer  of  Counsel  who
         represented the Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
         potential need for the Appellant to give oral evidence remotely  is
         good reason why there should be continuity of representation due to
         the enhanced difficulties of  taking  and  receiving  evidence  via
         electronic means.

      3. A further reason for the delay in the submission of the Appellant's
         evidence is that his  wife  has  made  further  submissions  (on  6
         September 2018 and notwithstanding what I was told at the error  of
         law hearing that such submissions  were  made  in  December  2017).
         Those remain outstanding  and  whilst  it  is  the  case  that  the
         Appellant's appeal hearing does not need to await  the  outcome  of
         those submissions, nonetheless some of the evidence  on  which  the
         Appellant relies (in particular the two letters from a  Sri  Lankan
         Attorney in relation to risk to the  Appellant's  wife  on  return)
         will need to be considered in the context of this appeal as well as
         those further submissions.  I have therefore given a longer  period
         for the submission of further evidence as the Respondent  may  wish
         to make further enquiries about those letters  or  the  content  of
         those letters.

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 24 September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12718/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 16 January 2019         |                                     |
|                                     |...17 January 2019...............    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               PATHRANAGE [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel instructed by Lawland
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                     ADJOURNMENT DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. This appeal came before me for re-hearing  following  the  decision
         which I made when sitting with Mrs Justice Moulder and  promulgated
         on 9 July 2018 finding an error of law in the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal promulgated on 6 March 2018 and setting  that  aside.
         The hearing also follows  case  management  directions  made  at  a
         hearing on 24 September 2018 to canvas with the  parties  the  need
         for special  arrangements  to  be  made  to  hear  the  Appellant's
         evidence (if he wished to give oral evidence and/or the  Respondent
         wished to cross-examine him) as  the  Appellant  is  in  Sri  Lanka
         following  a   certification   under   section   94B   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      2. Under cover of a letter dated 17  December  2018,  the  Appellant's
         solicitors filed further evidence.  By a letter dated  27  November
         2018, the Respondent  also  made  written  submissions.   In  those
         submissions, he indicated  that  he  wished  to  cross-examine  the
         Appellant and that  the  Appellant's  solicitors  were  content  to
         arrange a video-link by Skype as had been done  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  The Respondent  also  notified  the  Tribunal  that  the
         Appellant's wife,  [RH],  had  made  further  submissions  dated  5
         September 2018 but that a decision had been taken not  to  consider
         those until the Appellant's appeal was determined  as  the  further
         submissions noted  that  her  position  depended  on  that  of  the
         Appellant.

      3. The first difficulty which arose at the start of the hearing before
         me today was that of establishing contact with the Appellant.   The
         Appellant's solicitors were advised by the Tribunal  on  Friday  11
         January 2019 how to contact the bridging company to arrange a video-
         link with the Tribunal but had not followed up on that advice.   It
         was proposed that the Appellant should give his evidence, viewed on
         a laptop screen  by  me,  both  parties'  representatives  and  the
         interpreter booked by the Tribunal at the Appellant's  request.   I
         was prepared  to  make  necessary  practical  adjustments  to  take
         evidence in that way although there were  clearly  some  logistical
         problems  which  arose  with  that  proposal.    However,   as   it
         transpired, Mr Singer was unable to contact the Appellant via Skype
         either using his own log-in details or  those  of  the  Appellant's
         wife and it was not therefore possible for the  Appellant  to  give
         evidence in that way at all.

      4. The second difficulty arose due to the uncertainty in  relation  to
         the  Appellant's  wife's  current  position.   As  I  observed   in
         exchanges with Mr Tarlow, rather than the Appellant's  wife's  case
         turning on the Appellant's, the position is in fact  the  opposite.
         Although Mr Singer accepted that the Appellant's  case  now  cannot
         amount to a protection claim as he is outside the UK (and therefore
         no issue of requiring the Respondent's consent can arise), his case
         that he should be allowed to return to the UK (and  that  his  wife
         and child should be allowed to remain here) turns  largely  on  the
         risk which she asserts that she faces on return to Sri Lanka.   Her
         appeal has been dismissed (I assume on credibility grounds although
         I have none of the documents relating to her case  in  evidence  in
         this case).  Her further submissions in this regard turn mainly  on
         two letters from a person said to be a lawyer in Sri  Lanka  (which
         the Respondent disputes) attesting to an arrest  warrant  in  place
         against her (which I do not have) and a few further documents about
         what is said to have happened to the Appellant at the hands of  the
         authorities following his return in 2016 due  to  interest  in  his
         wife.  In dealing with the Appellant's case, it will  be  necessary
         to deal with what that evidence shows (as Mr  Singer  acknowledged)
         which will entail me making findings as a primary decision maker on
         matters raised in the Appellant's wife's submissions.  Whilst  that
         would not have been a reason to adjourn in itself, the position  is
         unsatisfactory (as Mr Tarlow acknowledged).  Since I considered  it
         necessary in the interests of justice to adjourn in any  event  due
         to  the  difficulties  with  taking  the  Appellant's  evidence,  I
         directed (without dissent from Mr Tarlow) that a decision should be
         taken on the outstanding submissions within a three month period so
         that the Respondent's views about the further evidence in  relation
         to risk in the Appellant's wife's case can be taken into account.

      5. Although Mr Singer did not formally apply to  adjourn  because  his
         clients are privately-paying and the Appellant's  wife  would  have
         wished to proceed, the Appellant wishes to give oral  evidence  and
         the Respondent wishes  to  cross-examine  him.   As  such,  in  the
         interests of justice, I decided of my own motion that, in  fairness
         to the Appellant, there was no option but to adjourn to  allow  him
         to give live evidence as he wishes  to  do.   I  recognise  that  a
         further adjournment in this case  is  not  ideal,  but  this  is  a
         Section 94B case and it is necessary to ensure that  the  Appellant
         be given a fair hearing of his out of country appeal:  AJ  (s  94B:
         Kiarie and Byndloss questions) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT  00115  (IAC)).
         If the practical obstacles to the Appellant  giving  live  evidence
         cannot  be  resolved  by  the  time  of  the  CMR,  I   will   give
         consideration to further conduct of the appeal in  accordance  with
         any submissions the Appellant wishes to make based on that case.

      6. I have given directions leading to a further CMR on 12  March  2019
         to  ensure  that,  if  possible,  the  outstanding  evidential  and
         practical problems are overcome by the time the appeal is re-listed
         after 29 April 2019

    DIRECTIONS

    1.     By 4pm on 13 February 2019, the Respondent is to file  with  the
         Tribunal and serve on the Appellant written  proposals  as  to  the
         practicalities of providing a video-link  or  other  facilities  to
         enable the Appellant to give live evidence from Sri Lanka.

    2.     By 4pm on 27 February 2019, the Appellant's  solicitors  are  to
         file with the Tribunal and serve on the  Respondent  their  written
         response to those proposals.

    3.     The appeal is listed for a case management hearing before me  on
         Tuesday 12 March 2019 (time estimate 1 hour)

    4.     By no later than 16 April 2019,  the  Respondent  shall  make  a
         decision on the further submissions of [RH]  (HO  number  H1221748)
         dated 5 September 2018.

    5.     By 4pm on 18 April 2019,  the  Respondent  shall  serve  on  the
         Appellant's solicitors (who are the same as acting  for  [RH])  and
         file with the Tribunal a copy of the decision letter in relation to
         [RH]'s further submissions.

    6.     By 4pm on 18 April 2019, the Appellant's solicitors are to  file
         with the Tribunal and serve on the Respondent a  bundle  containing
         the following documents relating to [RH]:

         a. The Respondent's decision providing  reasons  for  refusing  her
         initial asylum claim in 2011;

         b. The appeal decision in her case (appeal reference AA/02033/2011)
         and refusals of permission to appeal;

         c. A full copy of the further submissions made with enclosures.

    7.     Any further evidence on which either party wishes to rely at the
         hearing is to be filed with the Tribunal and served  on  the  other
         party by no later than 4pm on 18 April 2019.

    8.     The hearing of this appeal is to be  listed  before  me  on  the
         first available date after 29 April 2019 (time estimate � day).

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 16 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12718/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On Tuesday 12 March 2019             |                                     |
|                                     |...25 March 2019.....................|

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               PATHRANAGE [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Jayakody of Lawland solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

           CASE MANAGEMENT REVIEW DECISION AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS

      1. This appeal came before me last on 16 January 2019  for  re-hearing
         when I was obliged to adjourn it because it  was  not  possible  to
         receive evidence from the Appellant who remains in Sri  Lanka.   My
         adjournment decision on that occasion  promulgated  on  17  January
         2019 is annexed hereto for  ease  of  reference.   I  gave  various
         directions for the onward procedural  steps  and  directed  a  case
         management review on 12 March 2019.

      2. The Respondent failed to comply with the first of my directions  to
         provide written proposals  as  to  the  practicalities  of  hearing
         evidence via video-link from Sri Lanka.  Accordingly, the Appellant
         was unable to respond in that regard.  However, at the hearing,  Mr
         Kandola was  able  to  inform  the  Tribunal  and  the  Appellant's
         representative of the progress made in this regard.  I was informed
         that a period of ten weeks is required to  set  up  the  video-link
         facilities in Sri Lanka and steps are already in  train.   Ideally,
         the hearing in the UK should take place at Taylor House  (to  avoid
         the need to move the  equipment  from  there).   That  can  now  be
         agreed.  The video-link in Sri Lanka will be set up at the  British
         High  Commission  in  Colombo.   The  equipment  has  already  been
         delivered there. Mr Jayakody confirmed that the Appellant  is  able
         to attend there as he lives just outside Colombo.

      3. I have therefore given a direction below  for  the  hearing  to  be
         listed at Taylor House after 29  April  2019.   The  date  will  be
         agreed by the Tribunal's listing team in  conjunction  with  Taylor
         House and the representatives on both sides. The hearing is  to  be
         listed to fit in with  their  convenience  and  also  that  of  the
         British High Commission. A Sinhalese interpreter will  be  required
         for the hearing.   It was agreed that two days should be set  aside
         as it will only be possible to hear evidence from the Appellant  in
         the morning in order to accommodate time  differences  between  Sri
         Lanka and the UK. It was agreed that it would be sensible to  avoid
         a hearing on a Friday.

      4. In relation to direction [4]  of  my  decision  promulgated  on  17
         January 2019, Mr Kandola informed me that the casework team dealing
         with the Appellant's wife's further submissions are  aware  of  the
         direction.  Whilst he submitted (and I accept) that I cannot compel
         the caseworker to make a decision in that case, he  indicated  that
         the caseworker appears willing to comply with the direction.

      5. A discussion took place about the possible  implications  for  this
         appeal in  the  event  that  the  Respondent  refuses  the  further
         submissions but gives the  Appellant's  wife  a  further  right  of
         appeal.  If that were the position, the parties agreed that it  may
         be more appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
         to be linked for hearing  with  that  appeal.   I  do  not  make  a
         decision in this regard at present.  That must await the outcome of
         the consideration of the Appellant's  wife's  further  submissions.
         Directions [4] and [5] of my previous decision remain in force.

      6. Likewise, directions [6] and [7] remain in force in relation to the
         filing  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  of  a  bundle  containing
         documents relating to the Appellant's wife's case and the filing of
         any further evidence on which either party relies.




    DIRECTIONS

      1. Directions [4] to [7] as set out in my decision  dated  16  January
         2019 continue in force.

      2. The hearing of the appeal is to be listed at Taylor  House  on  the
         first available date after 29 April 2019 which date is to be agreed
         between the listing teams to the convenience of the parties and the
         British High Commission in Colombo from where the Appellant  is  to
         give evidence via video-link.  Time estimate for the hearing is two
         days.   The hearing is to be listed to start promptly  at  10am.  A
         Sinhalese interpreter will be required for the hearing.

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 21 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
