
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12219/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                            |On 20 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         Olatunde Benjamin Ikusedun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, legal representative with Tamsons
                    Legal Services Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against  the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal refusing him leave to remain on private  and
       family life grounds on 22 April 2016.

    2. Permission was given by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley.   The  main
       reason is given at point five of her grant of permission  where  she
       said:

  "However, it is arguable that the consideration of the appeal outside  of
  the Immigration Rules should have balanced the fact  that  if  the  Rules
  were considered at the date of hearing, and thus if a new application had
  been made at that time, the applicant did satisfy those Rules as  he  was
  24 years and 6 months at the date of hearing, and he had entered  the  UK
  when he was 12 years and 2 months according to the findings of the First-
  tier Tribunal at paragraph 20.  It is also arguable that the findings  at
  paragraph 21, and 27 to 32 err for want of reasoning."

    3. There are many aspects of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  that
       puzzle us.  As is perfectly plain from the Reasons for Refusal dated
       22 April 2016  the  Secretary  of  State  was  deciding  a  decision
       application made on 11 December 2015.  The decision  correctly  told
       the appellant that he had a right of appeal against the decision  to
       refuse the application on human  rights  grounds  and  although  the
       appellant's grounds are in a narrative form it  is  plain  that  the
       decision  is  challenged  on  human  rights  grounds.    Since   the
       amendments to the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       introduced by the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from  20  October
       2014 it has not been possible to appeal a decision under the  Rules.
       The only decisions that can be appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
       are protection claims of various kinds and human rights claims.  The
       permissible grounds of appeal are identified in statute and the only
       relevant ground of appeal here is that permitted by Section 84(1)(c)
       of the 2002 Act namely:

  "That removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would be  unlawful
  under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1988 (public authority not to act
  contrary to the Human Rights Convention)."

    4. We are  therefore  surprised  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       purported to decide if the appellant satisfied the  requirements  of
       the Rules and then to dismiss the appeal under the Rules.  There was
       no appeal under the Rules and no power to entertain such  an  appeal
       and consequently no power to dismiss such an appeal.   The  part  of
       the decision that says otherwise is wrong and is at the  very  least
       otiose.

    5. The judge also dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds  but  we
       have to say we find it astonishing that a  judge  could  decide,  as
       this judge did, that "the consequences of the appellant's removal is
       not so grave as to engage Article 8" even though the judge had found
       that by the time she decided the case the appellant had  spent  over
       half of his life in the United Kingdom having arrived  when  he  was
       aged 12 years and some months.

    6. There is a much about this decision that is less than satisfactory.

    7. However the judge  was  right  to  consider  the  Immigration  Rules
       because a person's ability to satisfy the  Rules  often  illuminates
       (it does not determine) a human rights claim.

    8. The judge, appropriately, albeit for inappropriate reasons, set  out
       the terms of paragraph 276ADE(1) of HC 395.  The paragraph sets  out
       conditions  that  an  applicant  must  satisfy  at   the   date   of
       application. It is accepted that the appellant  does  not  fall  for
       refusal on  suitability  grounds  and  that  he  had  made  a  valid
       application for leave to remain on private life grounds and  it  was
       never suggested that he had lived continuously in the United Kingdom
       for more than twenty years.  Plainly he was over the age of  18  and
       so paragraphs 276ADE(1)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) are not applicable.
        The following provisions might have been relevant, subject  to  the
       requirements that  the  conditions  must  be  met  at  the  date  of
       application not the date of decision:

  "(v)   is aged 18 years or above and under 25  years  and  has  spent  at
  least half of his life living continuously in  the  UK  (discounting  any
  period of imprisonment); or

  (vi)   subject to subparagraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has  lived
  continuously in the UK for less than twenty years (discounting any period
  of imprisonment) but there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
  applicant's integration into the country to which he would have to go  if
  required to leave the UK."

    9. Subparagraph (2) concerns returns to a "third country"  and  is  not
       relevant here.

   10. The judge then found, correctly, that the appellant did not  satisfy
       the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) because he had not  lived
       in the United Kingdom for at least half of his life at the time that
       his application was made.

   11. She then considered subparagraph (vi) but found  the  appellant  did
       not satisfy the requirements  of  that  Rule  because  she  was  not
       satisfied that "there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
       appellant's integration" into Nigeria.  She  gave  her  reasons  for
       this conclusion at paragraph 21 of her decision  and  reasons  where
       she said:
  "Second, I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  would  be  very  significant
  obstacles to the appellant's integration into Nigeria.  This  is  because
  on the evidence before me:
  (a)    The appellant was born in Nigeria and there is no evidence  before
         me that he would be refused entry to Nigeria.
  (b)    The evidence before me is that  the  appellant  lived  in  Nigeria
         until he was 12 years old.
  (c)    I am not satisfied that the appellant would be unable to speak the
         local language that he previously spoke in Nigeria on his return.
  (d)    I am not satisfied that there is no-one known  to  the  family  in
         Nigeria  that  would  be  able  to  assist   the   appellant   with
         accommodation and reintegration into Nigeria."

   12. The points at (a) and (b) are unremarkable.  The finding at (c)  was
       open to the judge although we  do  not  accept  that  there  are  no
       significant obstacles to integration just because the applicant  has
       some memory of the language he spoke half a lifetime before.

   13. The finding that there was "no-one known to the  family  in  Nigeria
       that would be able to assist the appellant" appears to  be  entirely
       speculative.  We agree with the contention in the grounds that  this
       finding, clear as it is, is wholly unreasoned.  Further the  finding
       becomes harder to understand when we  consider  the  evidence.   The
       appellant's case, disclosed  through  his  solicitors  and  his  own
       witness statement and in the witness statement of his sister and  in
       the witness statement of his mother, is that he has never  left  the
       United Kingdom since he arrived aged 12 and a half years.  There  is
       nothing that gives any reason to suspect that  there  is  anyone  in
       Nigeria who would be at all interested in  providing  assistance  to
       this appellant in the event of his return.

   14. The appellant's mother in her statement explained that when she left
       Nigeria in 2003 she left her two  children  with  a  friend  as  her
       parents had died and she was on her own.  Understandably she  wanted
       her children to join her in the United Kingdom as soon as that could
       be arranged which is what happened.  She said at paragraph 19 of her
       statement that the appellant does not know Nigeria and:

  "we do not have any family members in  Nigeria.   My  husband's  extended
  family are all in the United States and since his death have  decided  to
  have nothing to do with us.  It is as if I caused his death".

   15. The only part of  the  decision  that  makes  any  findings  on  the
       appellant's case concerning the evidence accepts his claim  to  have
       lived in the United Kingdom since 2004.  Clearly this  decision  was
       based not on the appellant's own account or his mother's account but
       on the independent evidence but our point  is  that  the  judge  has
       given no reason whatsoever to doubt the version of events put before
       her by the appellant except some unexplained belief that there  must
       be somebody in Nigeria willing to help.

   16. That said  it  seems  the  only  reasons  advanced  to  support  the
       contention that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his
       integration in Nigeria is that he had no experience of living  there
       and no contacts there.  He is an apparently healthy young  man.   We
       do not in any way suggest it would be an easy or seamless transition
       but we see  nothing  that  could  be  described  properly  as  "very
       significant obstacles" to his integration. This is important. Unless
       it the case that all single healthy  young  Nigerian  men  who  have
       lived for about half of their lives in the United Kingdom face "very
       significant obstacles" in the way of integration we do not  see  how
       it can be said that this  appellant  faces  such  obstacles  and  we
       reject any suggestion that all young men in these circumstances face
       such obstacles. To do otherwise would be to reduce  the  meaning  of
       "very significant obstacles" to "not having lived  in  the  country"
       and would be plainly wrong.

   17. It follows therefore that although the First-tier  Tribunal  gave  a
       weak explanation, the conclusion that the appellant did not  satisfy
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules for admission was open  to
       her.  The evidence relied on, taken at its highest, does not support
       a conclusion that there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
       appellant's integration and the appellant cannot  be  said  to  have
       satisfied the requirements of the Rules when he made his application
       because he was not old enough to have lived in  the  United  Kingdom
       for the period of half of his life.

   18. There can be no criticism of the judge's conclusion that  the  Rules
       were not met.

   19. For all that, on the judge's findings, if the application  has  been
       made when she heard the case, the appellant would have satisfied the
       requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).  This  is  the  reason  that
       Judge Lindsley gave permission to  appeal  but  the  point  was  not
       developed before us.

   20. It is trite law that human rights appeals are to  be  determined  on
       the facts before the judge which may quite different from the  facts
       when the application was made.

   21. However the Tribunal's approach to human rights appeals is  governed
       by statute, particularly part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
       Asylum Act 2002. The rules are only relevant to the extent that they
       help discern public policy. They do not overrule statute law. A rule
       concerning  the  requirements  to  be  met  by  person   making   an
       application is not likely  to  inform  the  requirements  of  public
       policy when the  decision  consequent  on  the  application  is  the
       subject of an appeal and  an  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  is
       unlikely to be decided  properly  solely  by  consideration  of  the
       rules. Here the judge should  not  have  been  concerned  about  the
       effect of section 117B of the 2002 Act. We set it out below:

  117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

  (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
  interest.

  (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-

    (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

  (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-

    (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

  (4)    Little weight should be given to-

    (a)  a private life, or

    (b)   a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that   is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.

  (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

  (6)    In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    a qualifying child, and

    (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.

   22. The Appellant was born on 14  July  1992  (not  1972  as  is  stated
       wrongly in paragraph 1 of the Decision and Reasons). He has lived in
       the United Kingdom since 2004. His status has never been better than
       precarious. Clearly statute requires little weight to  be  given  to
       his private life and there  is  a  public  interest  in  maintaining
       immigration control. His case under section 117B is hopeless.

   23. Notwithstanding  the  clear  words  of  statute  the  Respondent  is
       entitled to take a more generous approach. Section 117B applies to a
       "court or tribunal" determining an  article  8  point.  Clearly  her
       policy reflected in the rules is more  generous  that  the  statute.
       Section 117B does not have the saving provisions for young long-term
       residents that are identified  in  paragraph  276ADE  but  the  more
       generous requirements of the rules do not help the Appellant because
       he had not lived in the United Kingdom for long  enough  to  satisfy
       the rules when he made his application. The knotty point to which we
       must  return  is  the  extent  to  which  a  rule  dealing  with  an
       application  illuminates  the  proper  consideration   not   of   an
       application but of an appeal

   24. If the judge had decided that because an application made  when  she
       considered the decision would succeed there was no  public  interest
       in removing the appellant because  it  cannot  be  right  to  remove
       someone who was entitled to remain under the Rules,  we  would  have
       had a great deal of sympathy for the judge's  position  although  we
       recognise the difficulties that would have followed, not  the  least
       being that an earlier application under the Rules had been  refused.
       Here the judge had made different findings of fact from  those  made
       by the Secretary of State in an earlier application.  The judge  did
       not take this route and it does not appear to  have  been  suggested
       before her that that is what she should have done.

   25. From the point of view of this appellant he  was  a  young  man  who
       wants to settle in the United Kingdom  and  whose  only  detrimental
       behaviour as far as we are aware is to  have  been  brought  to  the
       United Kingdom as a child (clearly something for which he cannot  be
       blamed) to discover that he would have satisfied the requirements of
       the Rules if he had made an application  on another occasion but did
       not make an application at the right time and so now cannot remain.

   26. Be that as it may this appears to be the logical consequence of  the
       Rules and appeal process.

   27. Setting aside the absurdity of the judge's finding that removal does
       not engage Article 8 we find no proper  basis  for  criticising  her
       decision that removal is  proportionate.   The  appellant  does  not
       satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  He did  once  but  does  not
       now.  The judge is right to record that she is required  by  statute
       not to attach much weight  to  private  life  established  when  the
       appellant was either without leave or when his leave was  precarious
       and although there are  positive  factors  in  the  sense  that  the
       appellant  is  established  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  therefore
       integrated and speaks English and we accept would be able to earn  a
       living if he was permitted to work, there is nothing unlawful in the
       conclusion that he should not be allowed to remain on  private  life
       grounds.

   28. We have considered further the finding that he should not be allowed
       to remain on family life grounds because  his  family  life  is  not
       engaged.  The relationships relied on are the relationships  between
       adults and the appellant is past the first flush of youth.  He is  a
       man in his 20s.  There is nothing wrong in the conclusion  that  his
       removal is proportionate once the fact that he could have  succeeded
       in an application if he had made it  at  the  right  time  is  swept
       aside.

   29. We must now sit back and ask ourselves if it can be swept aside.  We
       must deal with the facts as they presented themselves  to  us.   The
       fact is that the judge made an erroneous finding about the operation
       of Article 8.  If we  set  aside  the  decision  we  would  have  to
       consider things as they are now and as things are now we would  have
       to conclude as did the judge that removal is proportionate.   He  is
       only able to rely on the "private  life"  end  of  the  private  and
       family life spectrum and that can be given little weight.  If he had
       established  a  right  to  remain  little  weight  would  have  been
       sufficient to have tipped the balance in his favour because there is
       no public interest in removing someone who was  entitled  to  remain
       but that is just not what happened.

   30. It follows that although we find the decision unsatisfactory we have
       to find no material error on the part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge and we dismiss the appeal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 11 April 2018                 |
|Judge                                |                                     |

