

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: HU/12198/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                            |On 25 January 2018            |



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                             jamoy anthony young
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer, sheffield
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adophy
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Ferguson that was issued on 8 August 2017.

 2. Judge Ferguson decided that  the  public  interest  in  protecting  the
    economic wellbeing of  the  UK  meant  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance was proportionate in all  the  circumstances,  and  that  the
    decision was not unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. The grounds of appeal  focus  on  two  issues.   First,  whether  Judge
    Ferguson's findings are contradictory in that it is unclear whether  he
    found the appellant met the financial requirements of  appendix  FM  to
    the immigration rules.   Second, whether  Judge  Ferguson  took  proper
    account of the best interests of the appellant's British citizen  child
    when assessing proportionality.

 4. After hearing from Mr Adophy and Ms Aboni, I have reached the following
    conclusions.

 5. There is no contradiction in Judge Ferguson's  findings  about  whether
    the appellant met the financial requirements.  It was accepted  by  the
    appellant that the minimum income requirement had not been met  at  the
    date of decision.  In terms of meeting the immigration rules, that  was
    the relevant  date.   Judge  Ferguson  did  not  disturb  that  factual
    concession.

 6. I add that both representatives accepted that there is a  typographical
    error in paragraph 11 of Judge  Ferguson's  decision.   The  concession
    related  only  to  the  appellant  not  meeting  the   minimum   income
    requirement at the date of decision and not at  the  date  of  hearing.
    The typographical error is not material to the outcome.

 7. Judge Ferguson proceeded to consider  whether  the  appellant  met  the
    minimum income requirement at  the  date  of  hearing  that  being  the
    relevant date in relation to article 8 ECHR.  Judge Ferguson  began  by
    considering the reliability of the third-party support  that  had  been
    proposed.  He decided the evidence was insufficient to  establish  that
    the proposed support was not reliable and gave reasons at paragraph 14.
     The appellant is not content with  those  reasons  but  the  arguments
    against them are mere disagreement and do not identify a legal error.

 8. Judge Ferguson then considered the evidence as to whether  the  minimum
    income requirement was met at the date of hearing.   He  accepted  that
    the sponsor's income had increased since the date of decision  and  was
    now in excess of the financial requirement.  Therefore, at the date  of
    hearing, Judge Ferguson was satisfied that the appellant would meet the
    relevant threshold.

 9. At this juncture, Judge Ferguson moved to assess the proportionality of
    the refusal decision.  He concluded that the failure of  the  appellant
    to meet the immigration rules and the fact a fresh application could be
    made outweighed the interference in the family life  that  would  ensue
    from having to go through the application process afresh.  In  reaching
    this conclusion, Judge  Ferguson  had  due  regard  to  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. I find it cannot be said that this assessment is legally flawed because
    Judge Ferguson clearly had in mind he  was  dealing  with  a  situation
    where the appellant and sponsor were living apart and the question  was
    whether maintaining that separation did not respect the right to family
    life.  That is a different situation to when an  appeal  is  against  a
    decision that will cause family life to  be  disrupted  by  separation,
    even temporary separation.  The guidance in Chikwamba are  not  engaged
    in the same way as when an appellant is in the UK because the issue  is
    that of prolonging separation and not causing separation.

11. The second issue is  whether  Judge  Ferguson  failed  to  take  proper
    account of the best interests of the appellant's British citizen  child
    when assessing proportionality.  Mr Adophy focused his  submissions  on
    whether Judge Ferguson had proper regard to the best interests  of  the
    appellant's child.  Mr  Adophy  pointed  out  Judge  Ferguson  had  not
    referred to the son wanting the appellant to join him in the UK or  the
    medical condition of the son.   Nor  was  there  consideration  of  the
    prolonged separation that would ensure from  the  appellant  having  to
    make a fresh entry clearance application.

12. Having considered all the arguments, I find there was no need for Judge
    Ferguson to spell out the issues in any greater  detail  than  he  did.
    There was  no  evidence  the  wellbeing  of  the  appellant's  son  was
    compromised in any way by the absence of the appellant.  Judge Ferguson
    assessed that it was open to the appellant to make a fresh  application
    in which he was likely to meet the immigration  rules  and  thereby  be
    granted entry within a relatively short period.  It had  been  open  to
    him to make such an application rather than pursue and  appeal.   There
    was no need for Judge Ferguson to make other findings.

13. Having reflected on all the submissions made and on the  leading  cases
    of Hesham Ali, MM (Lebanon) and Agyarko, I am  satisfied  the  relevant
    legal provisions were properly applied and the decision is not infected
    with an error of law.

Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons of Judge Ferguson and  I
uphold his decision.

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                                       Date

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

