
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: HU/12903/2019
                                                               HU/12905/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Tuesday 10 August 2021                     |On Friday 24 August 2021      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                             MR B M SAIFUZZAMAN
                               MS AFSANA ISLAM
                                                                  Appellants
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Reynolds, Counsel instructed by Lexwin solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    J S Burns promulgated on 17 February 2021 ("the Decision"). By the
    Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the
    Respondent's decision dated 29 January 2019, refusing their human
    rights claim founded on Article 8 ECHR based on the Appellants' length
    of residence in the UK and their family and private lives.  The
    Respondent's decision was supplemented by a decision dated 5 March 2020
    dealing specifically with the First Appellant's long residence claim.

 2. The Appellants are both citizens of Bangladesh.  The First Appellant
    came to the UK on 15 April 2009 with leave which was extended to 4
    October 2016.  The Second Appellant came to the UK with leave as the
    First Appellant's partner on 20 April 2012.  She has since sought to
    remain as his dependent.  The couple have a child born in the UK in
    April 2017.

 3. The Appellants applied for a residence card under the European Economic
    Area Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") on 4 October 2016.  That
    application was refused on 21 February 2017.   On 25 November 2016, the
    Appellants applied to remain based on their family and private lives.
    That application was rejected as void on 2 May 2018 (probably based on
    the intervening refusal of a later application).  On 16 March 2017, the
    Appellants sought to remain outside the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")
    on compassionate grounds.  That application was refused on 14 November
    2017.  The Appellants were given a right of appeal.  They exercised
    that right of appeal, but their appeals were dismissed on 21 August
    2018 and onward applications for permission to appeal were also
    rejected.  The Appellants were appeal rights exhausted on 16 January
    2019.

 4. Judge Burns found as fact that the Appellants had not completed ten
    years' lawful residence in the UK.  They could not therefore meet
    paragraph 276B of the Rules ("Paragraph 276B").  The Judge went on to
    consider their case under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules but
    rejected it on the basis that there would not be very significant
    obstacles to the Appellants' integration in Bangladesh.  He considered
    the claims also outside the Rules but concluded that the Respondent's
    decision to refuse the claim was not disproportionate and therefore not
    in breach of section 6 Human Rights Act 1998.  He therefore dismissed
    the appeals.

 5. The Appellants appeal on two grounds as follows:

    Ground (1): The Judge has reached an irrational conclusion in relation
    to Article 8 ECHR and/or has failed properly to consider material
    factors.  The focus of this ground is that the Judge has failed to take
    into account that the Second Appellant "is a skilled worker whose role
    as a health and care worker falls within the shortage occupation list".



    Ground (2): The Judge has reached an irrational conclusion under
    Paragraph 276B.  It is asserted that the Judge failed properly to apply
    the Home Office Long Residence guidance version 16.0 regarding time
    spent in the UK under the EEA Regulations.

 6. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on
    1 April 2021 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  I am not satisfied that there is any merit in this
         application.  The Judge's assessment of the Paragraph 276B argument
         was not flawed.  There was a break in the Appellant's leave from 4
         October 2016 onwards and their EEA application was not an
         application to extend leave.  Consequently, subsequent applications
         could not benefit from Section 3C leave.  There was no procedural
         unfairness as the Judge accepted that Paragraph 276B had been
         considered by the Respondent and that it was not a new matter.  In
         terms of the proportionality of the decisions, the Judge made
         findings which were open to him and his reasoning is adequate.  He
         considered the best interests of the Appellants' child as a primary
         consideration.  The fact that the second Appellant may be a senior
         care worker was but one consideration, and there were many others
         in favour of the decision.

         4.   Permission to appeal is refused."

 7. On renewal of the application for permission to appeal to this
    Tribunal, permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 17
    May 2021 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  The grounds of appeal contend, in summary, as follows.  It
         is argued that firstly that the First-tier Tribunal erred in making
         an irrational decision that the removal of the appellants was
         proportionate when the second appellant has been a skilled health
         and care worker, as defined within the shortage occupation list,
         working in the UK since 2012 at a time when the UK is trying to
         attract such people as migrants from abroad.  It is argued that the
         First-tier Tribunal errs at paragraph 55 of the decision in failing
         to consider the impact of the second appellant's contributions to
         society in the UK through the lens of public interest, applying
         what is said by McCloskey J in Forman (ss 117A-C considerations)
         [2015] UKUT 412, as a factor which ought to have been taken into
         account as it properly bears on the public interest question.

         4.   Secondly, it is argued, that the conclusions regarding
         paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules at paragraphs 30 and 42 of
         the decision are irrational in finding that the EEA application did
         not provide the appellants with a lawful basis to remain as this
         fails to properly apply the guidance in Home Office Long Residence
         Version 16.

         5.   The first ground is arguable.  The second ground does not
         appear to be arguable due to the findings at paragraph 39 of the
         decision but both grounds may be argued."

 8. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
    an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

 9. The hearing was conducted on a face-to-face basis.  There was some
    confusion at the outset as it appeared that the Appellants' bundle held
    by this Tribunal was not the most up-to-date one.  The bundle which Mr
    Reynolds had ran to significantly more pages and included witness
    statements dated it seems on the day of the hearing (which was finally
    agreed to have been on 15 February 2021 and not 15 December 2021 as
    stated in the Decision).  The Tribunal arranged to have copied the
    relevant documents from the Appellants' updated bundle to which the
    parties wished to refer.  However, due to the confusion caused, I have
    referred to documents hereafter by summary of content rather than page
    number.

DISCUSSION

Ground (2) - Paragraph 276B

10. I begin with the second ground.  Although Mr Reynolds did not formally
    concede this ground, he relied only on what was said in the pleaded
    grounds.  I concur with Judge Lindsley's view of this ground as not
    even arguable for the following reasons.

11. The Appellants rely on what is said in the Home Office Long Residence
    Version 16.0 guidance ("the Guidance") concerning "[t]ime spent in the
    UK with a right to reside under EEA regulations".  Although the
    Appellants made an application for a residence card under the EEA
    Regulations in 2016 which was subsequently refused a few months later,
    there appears to be no factual basis for a claim that they had any
    right to reside under the EEA Regulations.  Mr Reynolds frankly
    admitted that he had not asked the Appellants about the basis of that
    application.

12. It appears from [35] of the Decision based on the First Appellant's
    evidence before Judge Burns that the reason for the application was "to
    cover the position until such time that he was able to make a further
    application for a work visa, at which point the EEA application would
    be withdrawn".  As Judge Burns there remarked "the EEA application was
    not submitted for the proper purpose of obtaining a residence card to
    which the Appellants had any entitlement ...but simply for an ulterior
    purpose."

13. The First Appellant's very frank admission fundamentally undermines the
    Appellants' second ground.  It is not suggested (nor could it be) that
    either Appellant was an EEA national or the family member of an EEA
    national.  The grounds state that the application made by the
    Appellants was under regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations ("Regulation
    8") (therefore as extended family members) and not regulation 7.

14. Whilst the Guidance instructs caseworkers to consider exercising
    discretion in respect of EEA nationals or their family members in
    relation to the treatment of a period of residence under EU law as
    lawful leave, that does not apply to those who had no lawful basis to
    stay in the UK under the EEA Regulations.  As the Appellants' grounds
    appear to accept at [15], Regulation 8 does not confer a right to
    reside. and it is therefore difficult to understand how the application
    under the EEA Regulations or any entitlement to stay under EU law is
    said to benefit the Appellants.  In any event, based on the First
    Appellant's admission in evidence, the Appellants did not have any
    basis to claim to stay in the UK as extended family members either.

15. If and insofar as the grounds seek to suggest that an application under
    the EEA Regulations extends leave on a statutory basis under section 3C
    Immigration Act 1971, that is without any conceivable merit.  Section
    3C is expressly limited to an application to vary leave made whilst a
    person has extant leave to remain.  An application under the EEA
    Regulations is not such an application.  An EEA national or family
    member relying on an EU law right to remain is (or was at the time of
    the Appellants' application) expressly exempt from the requirement of
    leave to remain under the Immigration Act 1971.

16. Judge Burns dealt with the Appellants' case in relation to the period
    of lawful residence at [12] to [42] of the Decision.  His reasoning and
    conclusion are unimpeachable.  His conclusion that the Appellants had
    no leave to remain after 4 October 2016 is plainly correct. There is no
    error of law disclosed by the grounds.



Ground (1) - Article 8 ECHR

17. The Appellants assert that the Judge "has erred in his assessment of
    the public interest and/or proportionality in the Appellants' removal
    from the United Kingdom".  The foundation for that assertion is that
    the Second Appellant is a health and care worker whose role falls
    within the shortage occupation list.  The relevant Secretary of State
    (for Health) is seeking to attract migrants from abroad to fill the
    gaps in that sector.  It is said that the Second Appellant "has worked
    for the same employer since 2012" and that she "works on the front line
    and provides care services in the midst of a deadly and unforgiving
    disease" (presumably intending to refer to Covid-19).  As the drafter
    of the grounds must be aware and as I will come to, that latter
    assertion is factually inaccurate since the Second Appellant has not
    had permission to work and therefore has not worked as a care worker
    since 2016.

18. The grounds assert that the Judge "has failed to properly and/or
    rationally consider the impact of the public interest on the
    Appellants' removal in light of the fact she works as a care worker at
    a time of global and labour shortage".  Reliance is placed on the
    guidance given by this Tribunal in Forman (ss117A-C considerations)
    [2015] UKUT 412 ("Forman") as follows:

         "(i) The public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted
         by the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8
         ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state or is self-
         sufficient or is likely to remain so indefinitely.  The
         significance of these factors is that where they are not present
         the public interest is fortified.

         (ii) The list of considerations contained in section 117B and
         section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         (the '2002 Act') is not exhaustive.  A court or tribunal is
         entitled to take into account additional considerations, provided
         that they are relevant in the sense that they properly bear on the
         public interest question.

         (iii)    In cases where the provisions of sections 117B-117C of the
         2002 Act arise, the decision of the Tribunal must demonstrate that
         they have been given full effect."

19. The Appellant submits that the Judge failed to consider the impact of
    the Second Appellant's contribution and societal benefit through the
    lens of the public interest and whether that contribution "diluted the
    public interest in their removal from the United Kingdom as a family".

20. I turn next to the evidence which was before the Judge about the Second
    Appellant's work.  In her witness statement dated 10 February 2021 she
    sets out at [11] to [16] her background.  She worked as a carer for
    Hopscotch Homecare ("Hopscotch") from 2012.  She became a "qualified
    carer and a healthcare assistant". She later became a "senior care
    worker".  Hopscotch is described as a "specialist and multi-lingual
    care provider".  In the 2015-16 tax year, the Second Appellant was
    earning over �21,000 per annum. Documents in the bundle attest to the
    Second Appellant's qualifications, employment history and salary.  I
    accept that the Second Appellant is said to have been a valued employee
    for Hopscotch and, although it is not in evidence, I accept Mr
    Reynolds' submission that they would welcome her back were she
    permitted to work in the UK.

21. The Second Appellant goes on to say that she had recently become aware
    that the UK Government was seeking to recruit those with her
    qualifications from abroad. She says that those coming from overseas
    would not have her qualifications and experience gained whilst in the
    UK. She also makes reference to the role as being one contained in the
    shortage occupation list.  I was taken to that list in the bundle which
    confirms that to be the case and indicates that the salary which the
    Second Appellant was earning is commensurate with that in the list.

22. The Second Appellant asserts in her statement that "it would be
    contrary to the public interest and contrary to the economic interest
    and effective immigration control as the job I would be able to
    undertake would [in] any event have to be replaced by hiring a migrant
    worker with possibly no previous UK qualification or work experience."

23. I observe that, whilst the Second Appellant's assertion about the
    economic interest might be understandable, it is difficult to see why
    effective immigration control is benefitted by permitting someone in
    her position (as an overstayer) to remain in the UK merely because she
    happens to have skills which are in short supply here.

24. That brings me on to the way in which the Judge approached this part of
    the Appellants' case.  As Mr Lindsay correctly submits, the Decision
    has to be read as a whole.

25. The Judge considered the Appellants' case on this aspect as part of his
    balancing assessment within the Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  He
    was obviously right to consider it at this juncture.  Although Mr
    Reynolds referred to this aspect as always having formed part of the
    Appellants' application, that application was to remain based on their
    family and private lives.  It was not suggested that the Second
    Appellant had made an application to remain to work as a healthcare
    worker within the Rules.  As I understand the position, she could not
    have done so because she had no right to remain in the UK and would
    have had to return to her home country to obtain entry clearance if she
    wished to come to the UK as, for example, a Tier 2 migrant (assuming of
    course that Hopscotch was in a position to sponsor such an
    application).

26. The way in which the Appellants' case was put to Judge Burns appears at
    [50] of the Decision as follows:

         "I have taken into account the following submissions made by Mr
         Biggs in this regard which he put in the following way: "The first
         appellant has been in the UK for over 10-years, at all times with
         leave or while seeking to regularise his stay.  He would have
         accrued around 9 years 9 months' lawful continuous residence had it
         not been for the 'legal technicality' that his 4 October 2016
         application did not extend his leave to remain.  As argued above,
         this 'technicality' was arguably unlawful and leads to an
         historical injustice.  This very substantially reduces the public
         interest in the appellants' removal.  Further, that the appellant
         made the 4 October 2016 application mistakenly thinking that it
         would trigger an extension of leave under s.3C of the Immigration
         Act 1971 may significantly undermine the public interest in the
         decision appealed in this case.  The second appellant is an
         experienced health care worker, a role which is particularly
         valuable to the UK currently.  Although the evidence in the bundles
         is limited, it may also be that the second appellant would be
         eligible for a grant of entry clearance in the light of the
         forgoing if required to leave the UK.  The appellants child's best
         interests lie in remaining in the UK, all else being equal.  She
         [sic] is relatively young but attends pre-school in the UK, and has
         medical needs resulting in regular monitoring, medical treatment
         and supervision."

27. That then is the case which the Judge had to consider when balancing
    interference with the Appellants' private and family lives against the
    public interest.   In relation to the first part of the case regarding
    the length of the Appellants' residence in the UK, contrary to what is
    asserted on the Appellants' behalf, the First Appellant had not been
    here lawfully for "9 years 9 months".  The First Appellant entered in
    April 2009 (there is a typographical error in the immigration history
    at [12] of the Decision).  Judge Burns determined that the Appellants
    did not have lawful residence after October 2016.  That is a period of
    less than eight years.  I have explained already why Judge Burns made
    no error in reaching that finding.

28. No complaint is made about the Decision in relation to the position of
    the Appellants' child.  I can therefore ignore the final two sentences
    of the case as set out at [50] of the Decision.

29. The Appellants' case therefore was that the Second Appellant plays (or
    more accurately played) a role which was particularly valuable at the
    time to the UK and might be eligible for entry clearance to come back
    to the UK to perform that role if she were back in her home country.
    That begs the very obvious question which I put to Mr Reynolds why the
    Second Appellant should not do just that.   He was unable to offer any
    satisfactory response.

30. The availability of that option was also the focus of Mr Lindsay's
    submissions.  As he submitted and I accept, the height of the
    Appellants' case was that the Second Appellant might be able to return
    to the UK with appropriate entry clearance as a healthcare worker.
    Even if her qualifications and experience gained in the UK might mark
    her out from other applicants for that role, there is no reason given
    why she could not take that course.

31. I am of course concerned here with how the Judge approached this issue.
     He dealt with the balancing assessment at [51] to [57] taking account
    of the extent of the Appellants' private and family lives as determined
    in their previous appeal making allowances for changes from that time
    (see [49] of the Decision).  As I have already noted, he also took into
    account the way in which the Appellants put their case as set out at
    [50] of the Decision.

32. The Judge had regard as he was bound to do to Section 117B Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117B").  That included
    specifically the need to maintain effective immigration control in
    favour of the public interest ([51]).  The Judge found the Appellants'
    English language ability and financial self-sufficiency to be neutral
    factors ([52]).  That is clearly the correct approach.  The Judge gave
    little weight to the couple's private and family life applying Section
    117B ([53]).  It is not disputed that this was the correct approach.
    The Judge also found that the Appellants could continue their private
    and family lives in Bangladesh ([54]).  That is not disputed.

33. At [55] of the Decision, the Judge said this about the Second
    Appellant's employment:

         "I accept that the Second Appellant is a care worker and that she
         may be playing a helpful role as such in the current circumstances.
          I am sure the same would apply in Bangladesh.  I take her skills
         and care role in the UK into account but do not regard it as a
         determining consideration."

34. The guidance given in the case of Forman on which the Appellants rely
    merely entitles a Judge to take into account additional factors which
    might favour the public interest.  It does not mandate a Judge to take
    them into account still less instruct a Judge to give any particular
    weight to any such factors.  The Judge followed that guidance by taking
    the potential public interest into account but discounting that as not
    determinative.  In the end, the Appellants' challenge is really one as
    to the weight which was given to that factor.  That was a matter for
    the Judge carrying out the assessment.

35. As Mr Lindsay submitted and I accept, although there is only one public
    interest, the issue is which part of that public interest is relevant
    in this case.  As I have already observed, whilst it might be argued as
    it was that allowing someone who performs a role which is of value to
    the UK to remain is in the interest of the UK, it is equally the case
    that there is a public interest in not permitting those without a
    lawful basis of stay to remain and also in ensuring that those who seek
    to come to and remain in the UK do so in accordance with the Rules
    which apply.  That brings me back to the point made earlier that there
    is no reason provided by the Appellants why they could not return to
    Bangladesh so that the Second Appellant could apply if she so wished
    and if she was able to satisfy the Rules to return in the capacity of a
    healthcare worker.

36. The Judge was entitled to find as he did that the value which the
    Second Appellant could bring to the UK in her role as a healthcare
    worker was not a determinative factor.   Having weighed interference
    against the public interest, particularly that relevant to this case of
    maintaining effective immigration control, the Judge was entitled to
    reach the conclusion he did that interference did not outweigh that
    public interest.  There is no error of law disclosed by the Appellants'
    first ground.

CONCLUSION

37. As Mr Lindsay pointed out, the Appellants' grounds make allegations
    that the Judge has reached perverse conclusions.  That is a high
    threshold.  It is clearly not met in this case.  The Judge was correct
    in his analysis in relation to the Appellants' length of residence.  He
    was entitled to reach the conclusion he did about the public interest
    having regard to the overall public interest and the factors which he
    was bound by Section 117B to consider.

38. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law
    in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision with the result that
    the Appellants' appeals remain dismissed.



DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge J S Burns promulgated on 17
February 2021 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I
therefore uphold the Decision.



Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  18 August 2021



