
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12085/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2017                       |On 12 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Kwadwo Opoku Agyemang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Garrod, Counsel, instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The appellant is the Entry Clearance  Officer,  who  appeals  with  the
    permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Fox who, in a decision promulgated  on  11  May
    2017, allowed the appeal of Mr Agyemang against the decision  dated  18
    August 2015 to refuse his application for entry clearance  to  join  Ms
    Afia Dansoa Aboagye, a British citizen, in the  UK  as  a  spouse.   Mr
    Agyemang appealed on the ground that the decision breached Article 8 of
    the Human Rights Convention.

 2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  From now on I shall refer to Mr Agyemang as  "the
    appellant" and the Entry Clearance Officer as "the respondent".

 3. I was not asked to make an anonymity direction and I saw no  reason  to
    make one.

 4. The salient facts are as follows.  The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.
     He married Ms Aboagye in Ghana by proxy. That is to  say,  Ms  Aboagye
    did not attend  the  ceremony.   The  appellant's  case  was  that  his
    marriage was valid according to Ghanaian law and therefore ought to  be
    regarded as valid in the UK.  However, the respondent was not satisfied
    that a valid marriage had taken place.  The notice of  decision  stated
    as follows:

         "I note from your solicitor's letter  that  your  marriage  was  by
         proxy and that your sponsor was unable to attend the  ceremony  due
         to work commitments.  I also note in your custom  that  it  is  not
         uncommon for the bridegroom to be in another place as the  ceremony
         can proceed without him.  A marriage by proxy is one where  one  or
         both  partners  are  not  physically  present  at   the   ceremony.
         Marriages taking place under United Kingdom law are  not  valid  if
         they are by  proxy.   However,  United  Kingdom  law  may  in  some
         circumstances consider a proxy marriage to be valid if both of  the
         partners are 'domiciled' in a country which recognises marriages by
         proxy.  As your sponsor was domiciled in the UK at the time of  the
         wedding and you were residing in Ghana I do not accept that a valid
         marriage has taken place."

 5. The respondent also found against  the  appellant  in  respect  of  the
    genuineness and subsistence of the marriage and the  intention  of  the
    parties  to  live  together  permanently.   Furthermore,  some  of  the
    documents required to demonstrate that the maintenance rules  were  met
    were missing from the application.

 6. The grounds of appeal argued strenuously that the respondent's analysis
    of the validity of the marriage was erroneous and was  indeed  contrary
    to the respondent's  own  guidance  on  Ghanaian  customary  marriages.
    There was no reference in the guidance to  the  question  of  domicile.
    The grounds relied on the case  of  CB  (Validity  of  marriage:  proxy
    marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080, which stated in the head note that
    the validity of the marriage was governed by the lex loci celebrationis
    and there was no reason in public policy to deny recognition to a proxy
    marriage.

 7. The Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision  but  maintained  it.
    It seems that the grounds of appeal were submitted  separately  to  the
    notice of appeal and the arguments made in them  were  not  taken  into
    account.

 8. Judge Fox dealt with the matter in the following way.   He  obtained  a
    concession from the Presenting Officer  that  the  documents  submitted
    satisfied the requirements of the Rules with regard to maintenance.  He
    reasoned that the issue of  the  genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the
    relationship flowed from the decision on the validity of  the  marriage
    and therefore would stand or fall with his  decision  on  the  validity
    point.  The judge's consideration of the validity point was as follows:

         "9.  The [Presenting Officer] and [Counsel for the appellant]  also
             drew my attention to the recent case of Awuku  v  SSHD  [2017]
             EWCA Civ 178 ("Awukwu") which I familiarised myself with prior
             to the hearing.  [The  Presenting  Officer]  stated  that  the
             issue of proxy marriage could no  longer  be  pursued  by  the
             respondent in light of Awuku.

         13.  As stated  above  the  respondent's  decision  was  flawed  in
             relation to the issue of proxy  marriage  and  the  subsequent
             conclusions relating to the quality of the marriage.  Although
             [the Presenting Officer] has no instructions to  withdraw  the
             respondent's  decision  or  concede  he  made  no  attempt  to
             maintain the respondent's decision."

 9. In this way, the judge allowed the appeal. It was not also necessary to
    consider Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention  separately.  It  is
    clear the judge recognised that the fact the rules were met could  only
    mean that the  decision  was  disproportionate  and  therefore  not  in
    accordance with section 6 of the Human Rights Act.

10. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argued that the parties to the
    appeal and the judge fundamentally misunderstood the legal issue at the
    heart of the appeal  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  judge  accepted  a
    concession that was wrong in law.  The judge had erred  by  failing  to
    address the central issue, which was whether  the  marriage  was  valid
    given the domicile of the sponsor was in the UK.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Chohan because

         "the judge's findings are set out in two very short paragraphs  and
         there does seem to be a lack of  adequate  reasoning.   It  is  not
         clear absolutely as to what concession was  made  and  the  concise
         findings  have  not  helped  matters.   The  matter  needs  to   be
         explored."

12. In discussions at the hearing before me, it became  apparent  that  the
    parties were in effect in agreement that there was no material error of
    law in  the  decision  of  Judge  Fox  and  I  am  grateful  for  their
    assistance.  It follows that I find there is no error in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and the decision is upheld.

13. For the avoidance of doubt, the case of Awuku held  that  the  case  of
    Kareem was wrongly decided and it is not necessary to consider the  law
    relating to the validity of  proxy  marriages  in  the  EEA  national's
    country.  This is not an appeal in which a  proxy  marriage  has  taken
    place to an EEA national.  However,  the  court's  discussion  of  this
    issue began as follows:

         "15. In the law of England and Wales the general rule is  that  the
         formal validity of a marriage is governed by the law of the country
         where the marriage was celebrated ('the  lex  loci  celebrationis')
         (Dicey, Morris and Collins on the  Conflicts  of  Laws,  15th  Ed.,
         (2012), Rule 73).  The editors of Dicey, Morris and Collins explain
         (at 17-004) that a marriage celebrated in the mode or according  to
         the rites or ceremonies required by the law of  the  country  where
         the marriage takes place is, as far as formal requisites go, valid.
          In general the law of a country where  a  marriage  is  solemnised
         must alone decide all questions relating to  the  validity  of  the
         ceremony by which the marriage is alleged to have been constituted.
          (Sottomayor v De Barros (No.1) (1877) 3 P.D. 1, 5 (CA)) A marriage
         by proxy will be treated as valid in England if recognised  by  the
         local law, even if one of the parties is domiciled and resident  in
         England and the power of attorney authorising the proxy to  act  is
         executed in England.  The transaction is  not  contrary  to  public
         policy (Dicey, Morris and Collins 17-012).  In Apt v Apt [1948]  P.
         83 the Court of Appeal upheld the decision of Lord Merriman  P.  at
         first instance ([1947] P. 127) where he stated (at p. 147):

             'The celebration of marriage by proxy is a matter of the  form
             of the ceremony or proceeding, and not  an  essential  of  the
             marriage; that there is nothing abhorrent to  Christian  ideas
             in the adoption of that form; and  that,  in  the  absence  of
             legislation to the contrary, there is no  doctrine  of  public
             policy which entitles me to  hold  that  the  ceremony,  valid
             where it was performed, is not effective in  this  country  to
             constitute a valid marriage.'

         16.  In CB (Validity of Marriage:  proxy  marriage)  Brazil  [2008]
         UKAIT 00080 the Upper Tribunal rejected a submission that different
         rules should be applied to the legal framework  governing  validity
         of marriage when the issue arose in the context of immigration law.
          The Tribunal reaffirmed that the formal validity of a marriage  is
         governed by the lex loci celebrationis.  It upheld the decision  of
         the Immigration  Judge  that  since  the  lex  loci  celebrationis,
         Brazilian law, recognised proxy  marriages,  the  marriage  of  the
         appellant and his wife was valid under the law of England and Wales
         and, as  a  consequence,  the  relevant  requirements  of  the  EEA
         Regulations were met."

14. The submission of the Presenting Officer to the judge that he could not
    pursue the argument about the sponsor's domicile in the light of Awukwu
    could equally have been based on CB (Brazil).   The  marriage  was  not
    invalid under UK law. The respondent's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision allowing the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 11 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom



