
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12925/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |                                     |
|On 5 November 2020                   |On 18 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Adil Mehboob
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Rushforth, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, instructed by Lumbini Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: Adil Mehboob (appellant) and the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department (respondent).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on  2  March  1986.
    The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 4  March  2012  with  entry
    clearance as a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant.   On  12  June  2013,  the
    appellant applied for further leave as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant.   He
    relied on a TOIEC English language test which he had taken on 19  March
    2013.  His leave was extended until 27 June 2015.  On 9  October  2013,
    the appellant married in the UK.   On  15  April  2014,  the  appellant
    applied for leave as a dependent of a Tier 4 Student which was  granted
    until 4 March 2015.  On 3 March 2015, the appellant applied  for  leave
    to remain as a dependent spouse but this was refused on 2 July 2015.

 3. On 24 November 2016, the appellant's spouse  was  granted  ILR.   On  7
    December 2016, the appellant applied for leave to remain on  the  basis
    of his private and family life.  However, on 22 August 2017 he  applied
    for leave to remain as the spouse of a settled  person.   As  this  was
    before his application  made  on  7  December  2016  under  Art  8  was
    determined, that application was voided on the basis that it  had  been
    varied to an application as a spouse.  On 22 August 2017, the appellant
    was refused leave as a spouse.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a
    decision sent on 12 July 2018, Judge Veloso dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  In the course of  that  decision,  the
    judge found - as the respondent had contended - that the appellant  had
    dishonestly obtained an English Language certificate (TOEIC) by using a
    proxy to take part of that test on the appellant's behalf which he  had
    relied on in his 12 June 2013 application  for  leave.   Permission  to
    appeal was subsequently refused.

 5. On 27 December 2018, the appellant made a further application for leave
    based upon Art 8 and his family life with his British citizen spouse.

 6. On 10 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused that application  under
    the 'partner' rule relying, again, on the contention that the appellant
    had obtained a TOEIC English Language certificate by deception and  had
    used that certificate in order to obtain leave as a Tier 4  Student  in
    his successful application made on 12  June  2013.   In  addition,  the
    Secretary of State concluded that the appellant could not succeed under
    Art 8 outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A  hearing  took
    place before Judge Abdar on 13 November 2019.   At  that  hearing,  the
    appellant was  represented  by  Counsel  but  the  respondent  was  not
    represented.

 8. At the hearing, the appellant's Counsel told the judge of  the  adverse
    decision of Judge Veloso.   However,  neither  the  appellant  nor  the
    respondent (who was of course not  represented)  put  a  copy  of  that
    decision before the judge.  Having cited the relevant  decision  of  SM
    and Kadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229, the judge
    noted that the burden of proof was on the respondent.  At paras  31-36,
    the judge gave his reasons  for  concluding  that  the  respondent  had
    failed  to  establish  that  the  appellant  had  previously   used   a
    fraudulently obtained English language certificate:

         "31. With the onus being on the Respondent, the Respondent has  not
             served any evidence on the Tribunal on the allegations against
             the Appellant and, on that basis, I find that  the  Respondent
             has not discharged the Respondent's burden of raising a  prima
             facie issue of deceit.

         32.  I am informed by Mr Aslam [Counsel  for  the  appellant]  that
             there was an appeal against the decision of  22  August  2017,
             which was dismissed by the Tribunal on 13 December  2018  [it
             was actually 12 July 2018],  corroborated  by  the  Tribunal's
             records.  However, neither party has served the  copy  of  the
             decision on  the  Tribunal  and  I  am  unable  to  treat  the
             Tribunal's decision as a starting  point,  as  per  Devaseelan
             [2002] UKIAT 702.

         33.  It is clear from the  appellant's  credible  evidence  in  his
             statement that the  appellant  feels  very  aggrieved  by  the
             Respondent's conduct, particularly as the Respondent  has  not
             served any evidence to substantiate the allegations.   On  the
             evidence before me, I assume that no evidence on  the  alleged
             ETS fraud was served  on  the  appellant  or  filed  with  the
             Tribunal previously either.  Even if  I  am  wrong,  the  fact
             remains that the evidential burden is on  the  Respondent  and
             the Respondent has failed to discharge that burden by  failing
             to substantiate the allegations.

         34.   I  also  take  into  consideration  the   appellant's   IELTS
             certificate, dated 28 November 2011, in  which  the  appellant
             scored 5.5  in  his  speaking  test  and  the  fact  that  the
             appellant entering the UK and undertaking a course of study in
             English prior to the TOEIC the  appellant  undertook  to  find
             (sic) that the appellant would have had the necessary  English
             skills to pass the TOEIC on 19  March  2013.   I  give  lesser
             weight to the appellant's ESOL Level  B1.1  certificate  of  2
             December  2016  as  it  significantly  postdates  the   TOEIC,
             nevertheless I find it to be  a  credible  indication  of  the
             appellant's extant English skills.

         35.  In making my findings, I keep in mind that it has also  become
             trite law, see Adedoyin [2010] EWCA Civ  773  amongst  others,
             that when falsehood is relied upon by the Respondent, the onus
             is on the Respondent to show intentional dishonesty and I find
             that the Respondent has failed to discharge that burden.

         36.  For these reasons, on the  evidence  before  me,  I  find  the
             Respondent has failed to discharge the  evidential  burden  of
             proof in raising a prima facie case against the appellant  and
             I find the appellant does not fall foul of S-LTR.1.6.  of  the
             Rules."

 9. Then at paras 37-41, the judge went  on  to  find  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the substantive requirements of the Rules as a "partner"  and
    that, as he complied  with  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  he  had
    established a breach of Art 8 following TZ  (Pakistan)  and  Another  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. On 21 April 2020 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Fisher)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal against the judge's decision to
    allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

11. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, on 1 July 2020 the Upper  Tribunal
    (UTJ Bruce) issued directions expressing the provisional view that  the
    issues of whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  involved  the
    making of an error of law and, if so, whether the  decision  should  be
    set aside, should  be  determined  without  a  hearing.   The  parties'
    submissions were invited both on the substantive issues in  the  appeal
    and also on whether the appeal could be determined without a hearing.

12.  In  response  to  those  directions,  the  Secretary  of  State  filed
    submissions on 8 July 2020.  The appellant filed submissions  dated  21
    July 2020.  Finally, in response to those submissions, the Secretary of
    State filed further submissions dated 28 July 2020.

13. Following those submissions, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Finch) directed on
    19 August 2020 that the appeal should be listed for  an  error  of  law
    hearing to be conducted remotely.

14. That appeal was listed before me on 5 November 2020.  I  was  based  at
    the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre and Ms Rushforth, who represented  the
    Secretary of State, and Mr  Solomon,  who  represented  the  appellant,
    joined the hearing by Skype for Business.

15. At that hearing, in addition to the  previous  written  submissions,  I
    heard oral submissions  from  both  representatives.   In  addition,  I
    invited the representatives to  make  further  written  submissions  in
    respect of the Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Somalia) v SSHD [2007]
    EWCA Civ 1040, a  decision  which  I  drew  to  the  attention  of  the
    representatives during  their  submissions  at  the  hearing.   In  the
    result, I received written submissions  from  both  representatives  in
    respect of AA(Somalia).  I am  grateful  to  both  representatives  for
    their helpful submissions.

The Grounds of Appeal

16. The Secretary of State relies on number of grounds of appeal.

17. First, having  been  made  aware  of  the  Tribunal's  earlier  adverse
    decision in relation to the appellant, it was incumbent upon the  judge
    to establish  what  findings  had  been  made  and  whether,  following
    Devaseelan, the additional evidence presented at the hearing  permitted
    him, or entitled him, to deviate from those findings, which  otherwise,
    stood unchallenged.  (Ground 1)

18. Secondly, in assessing the  evidence,  the  judge's  consideration  was
    coloured by his assumption which  could  have  been  clarified  at  the
    hearing, that no evidence of the alleged fraud had been served  on  the
    appellant or filed with the Tribunal in the previous  appeal.   (Ground
    2)

19. In addition, in the respondent's initial submissions in response to the
    UT's directions, a further point was  raised,  namely  that  the  judge
    failed  to  give  reasons  why  he  reached  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant, it having not been established that he had  previously  used
    fraud, met the substantive  requirements  of  the  'partner'  Rules  in
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  (Ground 3)

The Submissions

20. Ms Rushforth submitted that, having drawn the earlier decision  to  the
    judge's attention, the appellant's representative should have  provided
    the judge with a copy of the determination or, alternatively, the judge
    should have sought a copy of the determination before  determining  the
    appeal.  The basis of her submission was  that,  following  Devaseelan,
    the earlier determination was always the "starting-point" for the judge
    in this appeal as it stood as a decision on the facts establishing  the
    appellant's earlier fraud in obtaining the English Language certificate
    and its use in an application in June 2013 for further leave as a  Tier
    4 Student.  Ms Rushforth accepted that the earlier Tribunal's  decision
    was, in her words, "a piece of evidence" and the  judge  had  erred  by
    proceeding without calling for that evidence.

21. Ms Rushforth sought to distinguish the views expressed by the Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Somalia) at [33]-[34] and [71] that it was not  an  error
    of law for a judge to determine an appeal without sight of  an  earlier
    judicial determination relevant to the issues of fact in the subsequent
    appeal where neither party had sought to produce that determination.

22. First, in AA(Somalia) the  earlier  determination  concerned  a  family
    member of the appellant  (his  sister)  not  an  earlier  determination
    whether the appellant was a party. Secondly, the Court of Appeal  found
    that the earlier determination was not material to the outcome  of  the
    appellant's appeal.  Thirdly, AA(Somalia) was not concerned with common
    law  fairness.  Thirdly,  Ms  Rushforth  relied  on  the  decision   in
    VH(Malawi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 645 at [25] where the Court of Appeal
    held that he AIT had not made a legal error by taking  into  account  a
    determination of the appellant's husband even  in  the  absence  of  it
    being relied upon by the Home Office.  She submitted  the  judge  could
    not 'close his eyes' to the determination  of  the  appellant's  sister
    once he knew of its existence.

23. Mr Solomon, relying upon his detailed  earlier  submissions,  submitted
    that where neither party relies on the  earlier  determination  then  a
    judge does not err in law by not referring to it.  That applied to  the
    appellant's appeal.

24. Mr Solomon  submitted  that  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  AA
    (Somalia) was not distinguishable.  There, albeit in the context of  an
    earlier appeal involving a family member of the  appellant,  the  court
    concluded that Devaseelan did not mean that the judge erred in law when
    determining  the  appellant's  appeal  without  sight  of  the  earlier
    determination in relation to the  family  member  where  neither  party
    relied upon it.  Fairness had not been the issue in the Court of Appeal
    and was not a ground of appeal in the present appeal.

25. Mr Solomon submitted that VH(Malawi) did not establish that a judge had
    a duty to obtain a copy of a determination which neither  party  relied
    on.  Rather, the case decided that it was not  wrong  for  the  AIT  to
    obtain a copy of the determination at its own volition and in doing  so
    had not impermissibly descended 'into the arena' and acted unfairly.

26. Mr Solomon submitted that although the Upper Tribunal in Nimo (appeals:
    duty of disclosure) [2020] UKUT 00088  (IAC)  concluded  that,  despite
    there not being a duty of candour on  a  party,  nevertheless  a  party
    could not knowingly mislead the Tribunal, that did  not  apply  in  the
    instant appeal.  The appellant's representative had not said that there
    was no previous decision  but  rather  had  drawn  it  to  the  judge's
    attention.  Nothing that had been said was misleading.

27. Mr Solomon submitted there was no unfairness.  The Secretary  of  State
    had not referred to the earlier decision in the  decision  letter.   If
    she had wished to rely upon it,  she  could  have  brought  it  to  the
    judge's attention even though not represented at the hearing.

28. Mr Solomon submitted that, in any event, any error was not material  as
    the judge (at para 35) had given adequate reasons for finding  that  he
    respondent had failed to prove fraud.

Discussion

    Ground 1

29. In this appeal, it was for the respondent to  prove  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the appellant had  previously  used  a  fraudulently
    obtained English Language certificate.  The decision  letter  sets  out
    the respondent's case on that issue.  It states as follows:

         "As part of your application at Sheffield Premium Service Centre on
         22 August 2017, ETS has a record of  your  speaking  tests.   Using
         voice verification software, ETS is able to detect  when  a  single
         person is undertaking multiple tests.  ETS,  has  via  the  use  of
         computerised voice recognition software and a further human  review
         by anti-fraud staff (each of whom has determined that a  proxy  was
         used), undertaken a check of your test and confirmed  to  the  SSHD
         that  there  was  significant  evidence  to  conclude   that   your
         certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of  a  proxy  test
         taker.  Your scores from  the  test  taker  on  19  March  2013  at
         Flexilearning Test Centre has now been cancelled by  ETS.   On  the
         basis of the information provided  to  her  by  ETS,  the  SSHD  is
         satisfied that your certificate was fraudulently obtained and  that
         you used deception in your application of 12 June 2013."

30. That, of course, is not direct evidence concerning the issue of  fraud.
    It is rather, at best indirect evidence and, perhaps, evidence of  what
    the Secretary of State knows from material that she has (see,  e.g.  RP
    (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086).

31. At no point in the decision letter did the Secretary of State refer  to
    the appellant's earlier appeal.  Indeed, no  mention  is  made  of  the
    appeal at all in the immigration history, let alone the Judge  Veloso's
    adverse finding in relation to  the  use  of  a  fraudulently  obtained
    English language certificate.  The decision  letter  does  not,  in  my
    judgment, set out any evidence upon which, in itself, a judge would  be
    entitled to make an adverse finding, given that the burden of proof  is
    upon the Secretary of State, on this issue.

32. There was no other evidence from the respondent  before  the  judge  at
    this appeal hearing.  Of course,  if  the  judge  had  been  shown  the
    earlier determination and it had been relied upon by the  Secretary  of
    State, as Ms Rushforth submitted, it would be the "starting point"  for
    the judge's determination as to whether the Secretary of State had,  on
    this occasion, established the fraudulent use of  an  English  Language
    certificate.  In the  absence  of  any  persuasive  evidence  from  the
    appellant, which the earlier judge had not  considered,  no  doubt  the
    judge could have found that the fraud had occurred.  That, however, did
    not happen.  Although Ms Rushforth informed me that  the  determination
    had been sent to the First-tier Tribunal prior to the appeal,  she  did
    so having consulted her  records,  there  is  no  record  held  in  the
    Tribunal's file to suggest that the FtT (let alone the  judge  himself)
    did receive the determination.  Indeed,  the  judge  proceeded  on  the
    basis that he did not have the determination  available  to  him.   The
    only copy of Judge Veloso's determination in the file is  one  attached
    to the respondent's submissions of 8 July 2020.

33. I do not accept Ms Rushforth's submission that  Devaseelan  imposes  an
    obligation upon a Tribunal, once it is aware that  there  has  been  an
    earlier appeal, including findings that might be relevant if brought to
    the Tribunal's attention, to obtain that determination so that  it  can
    be the 'starting-point' for its assessment and findings.   Ms Rushforth
    relied upon the IAT's view in  Devaseelan  that  the  earlier  decision
    would always be the 'starting point' in a subsequent  appeal  and,  she
    submitted, therefore the judge in the subsequent appeal would need  the
    earlier determination.  I do not accept  the  submission  that  follows
    from the determination being the 'starting-point'.  That  was  said  in
    the context of an appeal where the earlier determination was before the
    judge and was relied upon by at least one of the parties.

34. The case law, beginning with Devaseelan and approved by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in the subsequent case of LD(Algeria) v  SSHD  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    804, makes plain  that  the  effect  of  an  earlier  decision  has  no
    resonance in the doctrines of res judicata or issue estoppel (see, e.g.
    Ocampo v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1276  at  [26];  AA(Somalia)  at  [54]).
    Consequently, the earlier judgment is not a 'binding' decision  between
    the parties on the issue  determined  in  any  future  appeal.   As  Ms
    Rushforth accepted, an earlier determination  is  simply  a  "piece  of
    evidence"   in   the   subsequent   appeal.    I   agree   with    that
    characterisation. Nevertheless, the earlier determination, if  part  of
    the evidence, becomes relevant not least because of the  importance  of
    consistency of decision making, particularly in the public law  context
    (see, e.g. LD(Algeria) at [28];  AA(Somalia)  at  [66]).   In  general,
    judges reach decisions in cases based upon the  evidence  presented  to
    them by the parties.   Judges  do  not  usually  engage  in  their  own
    research relying upon evidence which neither party has referred them to
    or relied upon (but see VW(Malawi) below).  The imperative of  applying
    (and not deviating from) a  determination  which  is  res  judicata  is
    missing when the earlier determination is characterised as a  piece  of
    evidence albeit one that forms the 'starting-point' for  the  judge  in
    the subsequent appeal.

35. The respondent's position in this appeal was, in my judgment,  rejected
    by the Court of Appeal in AA (Somalia).  In that case,  the  Court  was
    concerned with the issue of whether Devaseelan should be applied  where
    the earlier determination did not involve the particular appellant  but
    rather a family member.  For these purposes it suffices  to  note  that
    the appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Somalia because of his
    clan affiliation.  In an earlier decision,  his  sister,  whom  it  was
    accepted must come from the same clan, had succeeded in her  appeal  on
    the basis that she was from a clan which put her at risk.  The Court of
    Appeal (by a majority) approved, albeit with a slight modification, the
    Court of Appeal's earlier determination in Ocampo v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1276  that  in  principle  Devaseelan  applied  where  the  earlier
    determination involved a family member and not the appellant,  provided
    that the factual matrix was substantially the same.

36. When it came to the disposal of the appeal in relation to the appellant
    "AA", all three  judges  approved  the  reasoning  of  the  AIT.   That
    reasoning dealt with the  fact  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  the
    Secretary of State had sought to introduce  the  determination  in  the
    appeal of that appellant's sister.  At [34] Hooper LJ  (dissenting  but
    not on this issue) agreed with the reasoning of the AIT at [75] of  its
    decision.  He set out the AIT's reasoning at [33] of  his  judgment  as
    follows:

         "75.  In  AA's  case,  there   had   been   a   previous   judicial
             determination.  We reject the suggestion that it was  for  the
             Home Office to produce it, or for the Adjudicator  to  inquire
             for it.  The case before  the  Adjudicator  was  that  of  the
             Appellant and the Adjudicator  was  to  determine  it  on  the
             material  before  him.   The  position  is   simply   that   a
             determination in [the sister's] case was not before him and in
             those circumstances he did not err in law by failing  to  take
             account of its contents.  Whether he had the determination  or
             not, we also reject a submission that it was binding on him in
             a sense that it regulated, or ought  to  have  regulated,  his
             determination of the appeal of the Appellant before  him.   He
             was bound to determine the appellant's appeal on the whole  of
             the evidence before him, as an independent judge of  fact  and
             law.  He did exactly that."

37. Likewise, Carnwath LJ approved the reasoning and outcome of the AIT  in
    AA's appeal at [71]:

         "In AA it is said that the Adjudicator should have regarded himself
         as bound, on the issue of  ethnicity,  by  the  earlier  favourable
         finding on the sister's claim.  The Adjudicator had been  aware  of
         the  previous  decision,  but  he  was   not   shown   the   actual
         determination.  Although the claimant was represented  by  Counsel,
         there is no indication that he  sought  to  rely  on  the  previous
         decision in respect of the issue of ethnicity.  The  simple  answer
         to this point, in my view, is the first answer given  by  the  AIT:



             'We reject the suggestion that it was for the Home  Office  to
             produce it, or for the Adjudicator to  inquire  for  it.   The
             case before the Adjudicator was that of the appellant and  the
             Adjudicator was to determine it on the  material  before  him.
             The position is simply that a determination in [the  sister's]
             case was not before him and in those circumstances he did  not
             err in law by failing to take account of its contents.'

         In view of the way in which the case was  presented  by  a  legally
         represented  claimant,  there  was  no  error   of   law   in   the
         Adjudicator's approach."

38. At [79], Ward LJ agreed with Carnwath LJ's reasons for dismissing  AA's
    appeal.

39. In my judgment, that reasoning equally  applies  in  this  appeal.   It
    matters not that the AIT would have reached the same conclusion even if
    the determination had been considered (see  [35]  citing  [76]  of  the
    AIT's decision).  It is the considered position of all three judges  in
    the Court of Appeal as to the correct legal approach.  The  party  upon
    whom the burden of proof lay, in  relation  to  the  issue  of  earlier
    fraud, was the respondent.   The  respondent  did  not  rely  upon  the
    earlier determination before the judge.  It was no part of the decision
    letter and, being unrepresented before the judge,  the  respondent  did
    not put forward a case based upon Devaseelan and the production of  the
    earlier determination.  Reading "respondent" for the "appellant" in the
    extract approved by the Court of Appeal from  the  AIT's  decision,  in
    this case the decision of Judge Veloso was not before the  judge.   The
    case before the judge in this appeal (on the issue of fraud)  was  that
    of  the  respondent  and  the  judge  was  required  to  determine  the
    respondent's case that the appellant had previously used fraud "on  the
    material before him".  The earlier determination was not binding on the
    judge "in the sense that it regulated, or ought to have regulated,  his
    determination  of  the  appeal".   He  was  bound  to   determine   the
    appellant's appeal (and  the  respondent's  case  in  relation  to  the
    allegation of fraud) on "the whole of the evidence before him".

40. I do not accept Ms  Rushforth's  submission  that  AA(Somalia)  can  be
    distinguished.

41. First, in my judgment, there is no difference in principle between that
    position in a case where the appellant  was  a  party  to  the  earlier
    appeal and, as in AA (Somalia) itself, it was a family member  who  was
    the  party  to  the  earlier   appeal.    In   both   situations,   the
    determinations are, albeit with slightly different emphases,  taken  as
    evidence when produced at a subsequent  hearing  and  are  a  "starting
    point".  In the absence of that determination, the judge  was  required
    to determine the appeal only on the evidence relied upon before him  by
    both parties.  The earlier determination was  simply  not  in  evidence
    before him.

42. Secondly, Ms Rushforth says, in her written submissions, that the Court
    in AA(Somalia) did not consider "common law fairness" but she does  not
    explain what difference that could have made to the Court's decision or
    reasoning.  The contention is not particularised.  It must be that  the
    judge acted unfairly by not taking action (by adjournment or otherwise)
    to obtain the earlier determination.  It is difficult to see  how  this
    could fall within the rubric  of  procedural  'fairness'  in  the  audi
    alteram partem principle (see R(Pathan) v SSHD [2020] UKSC 41  e.g.  at
    [153]-[161] per Lord Briggs).  The respondent had ample opportunity  to
    make representations as to the proper outcome of the appeal,  including
    if she wished relying  on  the  earlier  determination,  first  in  the
    decision letter,  and  secondly  at  the  hearing.   She  took  neither
    opportunity.  I see no basis in this appeal, or indeed in  AA(Somalia),
    for identifying any  unfairness  to  the  respondent  in  the  judicial
    process.

43. That then leaves the decision in VH(Malawi) which Ms  Rushforth  relied
    upon in her written submissions.  In that case, it was argued that  the
    AIT had committed a legal error when it obtained of its own volition  a
    determination relating to the appellant's husband which was relevant as
    to whether he had any status in the UK.  The  determination  showed  he
    had successfully appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  Having  obtained  the
    determination, the AIT made it available to the parties and  gave  them
    an opportunity to make submissions on it  and  to  adduce  any  further
    evidence they wished.  The Court of  Appeal  rejected  the  appellant's
    contention that the determination was  not  admissible  (see  [21]  and
    [25]).  It was argued that the AIT had  "descended  impermissibly  into
    the arena" in obtaining the evidence for itself.  The Court  of  Appeal
    rejected that argument.   Stephen  Richards  LJ  (with  whom  Pill  and
    Longemore LJJ agreed) said this at [25]:

         "If, as I have held, the husband's determination was admissible  in
         evidence, then it seems to me that the panel  were  entitled  (and,
         indeed, were required) to consider it in conjunction with the other
         evidence in reaching their findings on the key issues before  them.
         This was not an exercise of the kind that the tribunal can have had
         in mind in saying what it did  in  JK  (Conduct  of  Hearing)  C�te
         d'Ivoire; and in any event I do not think that  the  panel  can  be
         said to have trespassed beyond  their  permitted  function  in  the
         present case and to have fallen into  legal  error  by  taking  the
         husband's determination into consideration even in the  absence  of
         any positive reliance on it by the Home Office Presenting  Officer.
         I agree with the panel's own observation at paragraph 20  of  their
         determination (quoted above) that "[to] ignore that evidence  would
         be for the Tribunal to close  its  eyes  to  what  may  be  a  very
         material aspect of the case in determining risk".

44. Ms Rushford places reliance on this passage in the present  appeal  but
    it does not, in my judgment, make good her case.

45. It is important to notice that the  Court  of  Appeal  was  principally
    concerned with whether, in effect, the  AIT  had  acted  fairly  to  an
    appellant by obtaining an  earlier  determination  for  itself  despite
    neither party relying on it.  The Court of Appeal did not dissent  from
    counsel's  acceptance  in  the  case  that  the  AIT  had  a   "limited
    inquisitorial function" (see [21]).  That function, like the FtT as its
    successor, it clearly had even though proceedings in the AIT were  (and
    in the FtT are) essentially adversarial.  However, the Court recognised
    that a tribunal  should  not  'over-step  the  mark'  by  developing  a
    different case from that presented by the parties (citing  JK  (Conduct
    of Hearing) Cote d'Ivoire [2004] UKIAT  00061).   It  had  not  in  the
    seeking out a determination on a relevant issue raised before  it  (see
    [25]).  The Court recognised that a tribunal must act  fairly  but  the
    AIT had done so by bringing the determination to the attention  of  the
    parties and giving them an opportunity to make submissions and  present
    any further relevant evidence (see [23]).

46. Then, and this is the important point,  the  AIT  having  obtained  the
    determination and proceeded fairly, the Court held it was not an  error
    of law to take the determination into  account.   It  would  have  been
    wrong to ignore evidence that was properly before it.  That  does  not,
    in my judgment, place a duty or obligation on a tribunal to seek out  a
    determination of  its  own  volition.   That  is  what  the  respondent
    contends in this appeal but I do not understand VH (Malawai) to  impose
    such a duty.  The Court was concerned with the  legality  of  obtaining
    such a determination and then, having done so, taking it  into  account
    in reaching a decision.  In essence, the Court was concerned  with  the
    converse situation to that in AA(Somalia)  which  is  contrary  to  the
    respondent's contention in this appeal.  Although  the  Court  did  not
    refer to AA(Somalia), its reasoning does not  call  into  question  the
    considered view of the three judges in AA(Somalia).

47. Mr Solomon relied upon the decision in  Nimo.   In  that  case  the  UT
    (President, Lane J and VP Ockelton) held that the respondent  (and  the
    same must apply to an appellant) owed no duty of  candour  to  disclose
    material to the Tribunal.  In Nimo, the Tribunal held that the  earlier
    decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Miah  (interviewer's  comments;
    disclosure,  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  515,  which  had  held  that  the
    respondent did have a duty of disclosure, in that appeal in the context
    of a "marriage of convenience" case, was wrongly decided.  At [20], The
    UT said this:

         "It is plain from paragraph 21 of Miah, in which the Upper Tribunal
         made reference to the duty "to make disclosure (formerly discovery)
         of all material  documents  in  a  party's  possession  custody  or
         power", that the Upper Tribunal considered this duty, or  something
         very  like  it,  applies  in  immigration  appeals,  including  EEA
         appeals.  With respect, that is not right. Regrettably,  the  Upper
         Tribunal did not have cited to it the relevant  authorities,  which
         establish that there is a significant difference  between,  on  the
         one hand, appeals in the Immigration and  Asylum  Chambers  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal and, on the other, civil
         litigation as conducted in courts."

48. Having set out the analysis of the  UT  in  CM  (EM  country  guidance;
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) at [36]-[38] rejecting any
    analogy between judicial review proceedings and statutory appeals,  the
    UT concluded at [23]:

         "... the Upper Tribunal in Miah appears to  have  equated  judicial
         review proceedings with those of a  statutory  immigration  appeal.
         However, these two types of litigation are distinct.  There  is  no
         legitimate reason to import into immigration appeals  the  duty  of
         candour, which exists in judicial review."

49. If there is no duty of candour upon the respondent, there can  be  duty
    of candour upon the appellant.

50. In Nimo, the UT nevertheless recognised, at least in  relation  to  the
    Secretary of State, that there was a duty not  to  "knowingly  mislead"
    the Tribunal (relying on the UT's decision in CM at  [38]).   At  [35],
    the UT said this:

         "The duty not to mislead, as described by the Upper Tribunal in CM,
         will require the respondent to disclose form ICD.4605, where  there
         is something in it that could materially assist the appellant,  but
         which is not mentioned in  the  respondent's  decision  or  in  the
         records of interview.  If, for example,  the  interviewing  officer
         comments that the appellant or  spouse  appeared  to  be  seriously
         unwell during the interview, and that this might  account  for  the
         unsatisfactory answers given, then the respondent is under  a  duty
         to disclose.  The presenting officer would, in such  circumstances,
         be misleading the Tribunal, if she were to rely on  the  discrepant
         or otherwise unsatisfactory answers, without drawing  attention  to
         what the  interviewer  had  had  to  say  about  the  interviewee's
         apparent state of health.  The possibility that  such  a  piece  of
         information might lie within  form  ICD.4605  is  not,  however,  a
         reason to require its automatic production,  any  more  than  there
         ought, for such a reason, to be a general duty of disclosure on the
         respondent in respect of all internal communications leading to any
         decision in the immigration field, which may  be  appealed  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal."

51. That was said in the context of a document (ICD.4605), provided to  the
    decision-maker  with  the  marriage  interview,  which  set   out   any
    recommendations by the interviewing officer to the decision-maker.

52. Here, however, I agree with Mr Solomon's submission that it  cannot  be
    said that the appellant's legal representative misled the Tribunal.  It
    is clear that the Tribunal was told about the earlier decision  by  the
    appellant's legal representative and that the appeal was dismissed (see
    para 32 of the determination).  It could hardly be relied upon directly
    as the appellant's earlier appeal was dismissed.  There is  nothing  in
    the determination, or in the material  to  which  I  was  shown,  which
    suggests that  the  appellant's  legal  representative  put  forward  a
    positive case based upon that earlier decision contrary to the  earlier
    decision's finding in relation to  the  fraudulently  obtained  English
    Language certificate.  If it was said, for example, that the judge  was
    told that the earlier judge had found in the appellant's favour on  the
    fraud issue that would, undoubtedly, have been quite different.  It  is
    not this case.  Having referred to the fact that the appellant's  legal
    representative had informed the Tribunal  of  that,  the  judge  simply
    noted that as neither party had served a copy on the  Tribunal  he  was
    unable  to  treat  that  Tribunal's  decision  as  a  "starting  point"
    following Devaseelan.  In my judgment, the judge was  correct  to  take
    that position and the judge then went on to consider, in the absence of
    any evidence having been put before him from the respondent other  than
    the assertions in the decision letter, that the respondent  had  failed
    to establish the allegation of a fraudulently obtained English Language
    certificate.

53. To the extent that it might be thought that it is somewhat  incongruous
    that two judges should reach different conclusions on this issue, there
    is no  basis  for  that  perception.   Both  judges  were  required  to
    determine the issue on the basis of the evidence that was presented  to
    them.  The first judge had evidence which  he  accepted  and  therefore
    concluded the respondent had established her case on  the  issue  of  a
    fraudulently obtained English language certificate.  The  second  judge
    had no evidence at all of any significance  from  the  respondent.   He
    only had the statements, without any direct supporting evidence, in the
    decision letter.  No doubt the position would have  been  otherwise  if
    the respondent had been  represented  at  the  hearing.   The  lack  of
    evidence would have  been  obvious  and  the  absence  of  the  earlier
    determination as part of the evidence to be taken  into  account  on  a
    Devaseelan basis, would also have been obvious.  That, however, was not
    the situation as presented to the judge.   Given  the  absence  of  the
    earlier  determination  and  any  direct  evidence  relating   to   the
    appellant's fraud, it is not the least surprising that the judge  found
    that the respondent had failed to establish her case on this issue.  As
    I said earlier, the evidence (such that it was) could  not  conceivably
    have discharged the burden of proof  on  the  respondent  to  establish
    fraud.

54. For these reasons,  I  reject  the  first  ground  relied  upon  by  Ms
    Rushforth in this appeal.

    Ground 2

55. Turning to the second ground of appeal, that  relates  to  the  judge's
    comment in para 33 that he "assume[d] that no evidence on  the  alleged
    ETS fraud was served on the appellant or filed with Tribunal previously
    either".   Ms  Rushforth  submitted  that  that  was   an   unwarranted
    assumption.  It may well, in fact, have been an unwarranted assumption.
     But, it had no impact upon the judge's decision.  It would  have  been
    relevant  if  the  judge  were  being  asked,  and  agreed,  to   apply
    Devaseelan.  But he did not as he made clear in para 32 in the  absence
    of the determination.  What he then says in para 33 does not affect his
    conclusion that the respondent on the basis of the evidence relied upon
    had  not  discharged  the  evidential  burden  of  substantiating   the
    allegation of fraud.  The judge made that plain  in  para  33  when  he
    begins the sentence, immediately following the one objected  to  by  Ms
    Rushforth, with the words "even if I am wrong ..." and goes on to find
    that the evidential burden is not discharged.  For this reason, I  also
    reject ground 2.

    Ground 3

56. That then leaves the third issue raised in the respondent's submissions
    in response to the UT's directions.   Mr  Solomon  did  not  raise  any
    objection to this point being  relied  upon  by  Ms  Rushforth  in  the
    appeal.  There is, in my judgment, no proper answer to the point  made.
    At para 37 of his determination the judge found, and this  is  not  now
    challenged, that the appellant had lawful leave at  the  relevant  time
    because the respondent had wrongly based her decision  on  the  premise
    that he had entered the UK with limited leave as  a  visitor  when,  in
    fact, he had entered the UK with  leave  as  a  Tier  4  Student  which
    continued, and was renewed, subsequently.

57. Then at para 39, the judge said that the respondent had, in effect, not
    raised any other issues as to the eligibility requirement in  E-LTRP2.2
    of the Rules.

58. At para 40 the judge found that the appellant and sponsor were  married
    and had a genuine subsisting relationship and, stated that  there  were
    no other reasons given by the respondent, for refusing the  appellant's
    application.  He then concluded that the appellant met the requirements
    of the Rules as  a  partner  and  that,  applying  TZ  (Pakistan),  the
    appellant succeeded under Art 8.

59. The difficulty with this reasoning is that the appellant had two routes
    to succeed in meeting the requirements in Appendix  FM  as  a  partner.
    The first route - sometimes referred to as the 5-year route -  required
    the appellant to establish all the eligibility requirements in  Section
    E-LTRP (see R-LTRP.1.1.(a)-(c)).  The  alternative  route  -  sometimes
    called the 10-year route - required  the  appellant  to  establish  the
    eligibility requirements only in E-LTRP.1.2-1.12. and 2.1-2.2 but also,
    in the absence of establishing the remaining elements  of  eligibility,
    also the requirements of para EX.1 (see R-LTRP.1.1(a),  (b)  and  (d)).
    That, in effect,  required  the  appellant  to  show  that  there  were
    "insurmountable obstacles" to him continuing his family life  with  his
    spouse in Pakistan.

60. One of the eligibility requirements is that an individual  should  meet
    the financial requirements set out  in  E-LTRP.3.1-3.4.   In  order  to
    qualify under the 5-year route the appellant must establish that he met
    the financial requirements (see R-LTRP.1.1.(c)).  However, that is  not
    one of the requirements specified in R-LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and (d)  under
    the 10-year route.

61. The respondent considered the appellant's claim as a partner only under
    the  10-year  route,  including   the   requirement   in   para   EX.1.
    Consequently, the respondent  reached  no  conclusion  on  whether  the
    appellant could meet the  financial  requirements  in  E-LTRP.3.1.-3.4.
    Indeed, if  the  appellant  could  have  met  those  requirements,  the
    respondent  would  have  reached  a  conclusion  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's entitlement under the 5-year route.

62. Consequently, before the judge, in order to succeed in establishing the
    substantive requirements under the 'partner' rules in Appendix  FM,  in
    addition to the  matters  upon  which  the  judge  was  satisfied,  the
    appellant had to establish either

          a) that he met the financial requirements in E-LTRP.3.1.-3.4 (and
             he would then succeed under the 5-year route); or

          b) if he could not do that, that he satisfied the requirement  in
             EX.1,  in  particular  that  having   a   genuine   subsisting
             relationship with his partner, and there  were  insurmountable
             obstacles to their family life continuing in Pakistan (and  he
             would then succeed under the 10-year route).

63. The respondent had made no concession in the decision letter in respect
    of the financial requirements and the judge made  no  finding  on  that
    issue.  Likewise, the respondent had reached an adverse  conclusion  in
    relation to para EX1 in the decision  letter  but  the  judge  made  no
    finding, indeed he did not address at all, the issue  of  whether  para
    EX.1 was met.




64. Consequently, it is unclear upon  what  basis  the  judge  reached  the
    conclusion, in allowing the appeal under Art 8, that the appellant  was
    entitled to succeed because he met the requirements  of  the  'partner'
    rules.  In failing to give reasons why he did meet the requirements  of
    the Rules, on whichever basis the  appellant  sought  to  succeed,  the
    judge erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.


65. Mr Solomon submitted that error was not material.   He  relied  upon  a
    casework instruction from August  2020  which  instructed  caseworkers,
    where a judge had found in an ETS case such as the present, that  there
    was no fraud to allow the appellant a grant of  leave  of  60  days  in
    order to make a new  application  or  to  leave  the  UK.   Mr  Solomon
    submitted that, in effect, applying that policy the  judge  would  have
    allowed the appeal under Art 8.


66. I do not accept that submission.  First, this is a  policy  that  dates
    from August  2020  and,  therefore,  postdates  the  judge's  decision.
    Whether or not any error was material requires a  conclusion  that  the
    judge, on the basis of the material before him, would  inevitably  have
    allowed the appeal but for his error in concluding that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of the 'partner' rules.  This post-hearing  policy
    cannot sustain such a conclusion.  Secondly, in any event,  the  policy
    is concerned with a wholly different basis upon which an  appeal  might
    have been allowed.  To conclude that there is a breach of Art 8 because
    an individual establishes their claim to a period of  leave  under  the
    Immigration Rules - usually 30 months - under the 5-year route  or  10-
    year routes, is entirely different from  the  casework  instruction  to
    which Mr Solomon referred which allows an individual 60 days  in  order
    to make a new application or to leave the UK.


67. For these reasons, the judge's error in allowing the appeal under Art 8
    based on the 'partner' rules was material to his decision.

Decision

68. For these reasons, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal
    involved the making of an error of law.  That decision cannot stand and
    is set aside.

69. Both representatives invited me to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal if an error of law was established.  Mr  Solomon  has  invited
    me, if the respondent only succeeded on the issue  concerned  with  the
    'partner' rules, to preserve the judge's finding  that  the  respondent
    had failed to establish the  fraudulent  use  of  an  English  language
    certificate.

70. Given that I have found that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the respondent had not established  her  case  on  that
    issue, I agree that that finding should be preserved.  In remaking  the
    decision under Art 8, the issue will be whether  the  appellant,  given
    that he is now shown to meet the 'suitability' requirements in Appendix
    FM, meets the remaining requirements of the Rules,  in  particular  the
    eligibility requirements applicable under the 5-year or 10-year routes.



71. The appeal is, therefore, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to remake
    the decision under Art 8 to the extent indicated above.  The appeal  to
    be heard by a judge other than Judge Abdar.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            13 November 2020
