
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: HU/12361/2015

                                                      HU/12362/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                           |On 20 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

              pendaford ayitey justice-feehi (first Appellant)
               pascaline j a justicE-feehi (second Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr L Youssefian of IMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are the  linked  appeals  against  the  decisions  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parker promulgated on 7 June 2017.


2.   The Appellants are brother and sister, both nationals  of  Ghana.   The
    first Appellant was born on 7 October 1997; the  Second  Appellant  his
    sister was born on 30 March 2000.  The Appellants are the  children  of
    Mr Pendawashington Justice-Feehi a national of Ghana born on 11  August
    1966 settled in the United Kingdom.  Mr Justice Feehi is the  'sponsor'
    for the purposes of these appeals.


3.   The Appellants applied for entry clearance on 20 July 2015 -  at  which
    point the oldest Appellant was not yet 18 years old.  The  applications
    were refused for reasons set out in respective Notices  of  Immigration
    Decision dated 16 October 2015 with particular reference  to  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules.  It was said in support of the  decisions
    to refuse entry clearance that the Appellants had  a  parent  currently
    residing in Ghana; moreover it had not been shown that the sponsor  was
    exercising sole responsibility in respect  of  the  upbringing  of  the
    children; yet further, there were no serious  compelling  circumstances
    that warranted the grant of entry clearance.


4.   It was also said  that  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellants were related  as  claimed  to  the  sponsor.   However,  DNA
    evidence has since been produced and this particular issue was conceded
    on behalf of the Respondent before the First-tier Tribunal (Decision at
    paragraph 19).


5.   The Appellants appealed to the IAC.


6.   The appeals were dismissed for the reasons set out in the Decision  and
    Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


7.   The Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 29 November 2017.


8.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  21  December  2017
    essentially  arguing  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   reached
    conclusions that were open to him on the evidence and did not misdirect
    himself in law.


9.   The focus of the challenge before the Upper Tribunal is the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's finding that the Appellants  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof to show that the sponsor exercised sole responsibility.


10.  It is clear that the Judge directed himself to the relevant  principles
    in this regard - in particular by way of  detailed  recitation  of  the
    guidance to be found in the case  of  TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e):  'sole
    responsibility') Yemen [2006] UKAIT 0049 (Decision at paragraph  21  et
    seq.).  The Judge also clearly had regard to submissions made  in  this
    respect by the Appellant's Counsel: see for  example  at  paragraph  38
    "Counsel was correct to say that the test in TD is whether the  parents
    are continuing control and direction of the children's upbringing".


11.  However, it is argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    making no finding on aspects of the testimonies of the sponsor and  the
    Appellants that were before him, and otherwise erred  in  marginalising
    the witness statements of the Appellants  as  being  essentially  self-
    serving.  In this latter regard reference is made  in  support  of  the
    challenge to the cases of Moyo [2002] UKIAT 01104 at paragraph 14,  and
    R (SS) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department)  (self-serving
    statements) [2017] UKUT 164.


12.  It is to be noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  make  any
    express finding  to  the  effect  that  any  of  the  sponsor  and  the
    Appellants lacked credibility.  Moreover  it  is  apparent  that  under
    cross-examination the sponsor was not directly challenged  with  regard
    to any aspect of his evidence.  This is apparent both from paragraph 10
    of Decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and also  from  the  record  of
    proceedings which is on file.


13.  In advancing the challenge  Mr  Youssefian  adopts  and  amplifies  the
    grounds upon which permission to  appeal  was  sought  -  albeit  those
    grounds were drafted by a  different  Counsel  (the  Counsel  that  had
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal).  In this regard my  attention
    is drawn in particular to aspects of the testimonies that  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal by way of the witness statements of each of the
    Appellants, and the witness statement of the sponsor which  he  adopted
    in his oral evidence.  (Similar, but not identical, witness  statements
    from each of the Appellants,  both are dated 9 May 2017, were  included
    in the Appellants' bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.)


14.  Before consideration of the contents of the witness  statements  it  is
    perhaps appropriate to say something of the broader chronology of these
    cases.  The Appellants' parents separated in 2002, at which  point  the
    Appellants stayed with  their  mother.   The  Appellants'  father,  the
    sponsor, remarried in 2003.  In December 2006  the  Appellants'  father
    came to the UK accompanying his second wife.  In 2007  the  Appellants'
    mother remarried and moved away (albeit in Ghana).  At this  point  the
    Appellants relocated to the home of their  paternal  grandmother  where
    they have remained to date - save that the Second Appellant also spends
    time as a boarder at school.


15.  The First Appellant refers to the time when his  mother  had  remarried
    and moved away.  He states at paragraph 4 of his witness statement that
    his mother would visit every weekend, but that in due  course  she  had
    her own family and "eventually stopped visiting us".  Reference is also
    made at paragraph 5 to the First Appellant being sent to  a  particular
    school to complete his primary education.   The  sponsor  was  able  to
    clarify that this was the second primary school that the  children  had
    attended, and that they had changed school in consequence of relocating
    from their mother's home to the home of their paternal grandmother.  As
    I say, the First Appellant - and indeed  the  Second  Appellant  -  has
    identified that it was the sponsor who sent  them  to  this  particular
    school.  The evidence of both of the  Appellants  also  refers  to  the
    sponsor's involvement in advising which church  the  Appellants  should
    attend and also in respect  of  advising  them  with  regard  to  their
    education and in particular the retaking  of  examinations  to  improve
    their grades.


16.  The Second Appellant  also  makes  reference  to  her  mother  stopping
    visiting, but additionally  said  this  with  regard  to  her  father's
    encouragement in her schoolwork "This is so important because  our  mum
    hasn't been in our lives" (witness statement at paragraph 7).


17.  The sponsor, in his witness statement (also dated 9 May  2017),  refers
    to the way in which he has  been  responsible  for  the  direction  and
    control of the Appellants' lives by reference to  their  education  and
    church.  He refers to the Appellants' mother in these terms:

         "The refusal letter and the Entry Clearance Manager's  states  that
         my children have a parent who resides in Ghana.  The last thing  we
         knew of her was that she resided in Ghana but she has  had  nothing
         to do with her children for over ten years so it is not fair to say
         because their mother lives in  Ghana  that  they  cannot  with  the
         parent who has supported them  both  financially  and  emotionally"
         (paragraph 12).


    It seems to me that that is a clear statement to the  effect  that  the
    Appellants' mother has not been  involved  in  the  upbringing  of  the
    children since in or about 2007 - which would accord  with  the  notion
    that  she  continued  to  have  only  brief  contact  with  them  after
    remarrying which soon thereafter petered out.




18.  I accept that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  made  no  findings  in
    respect of these aspects of the evidence that were before him.


19.  The Judge considers  the  facts  and  evidence  with  regard  to  'sole
    responsibility' at paragraph 32 of  the  Decision  with  reference,  in
    particular, to letters that  had  been  produced  from  the  children's
    school indicating that their father was paying the fees and was to that
    extent involved in directing their education.  The Judge observes  that
    these letters were in effect silent on  the  question  of  whether  the
    Appellants' mother had contact "it does not say  their  mother  had  no
    contact".  The silence of those letters on the issue  of  the  mother's
    contact is in no way contradictory to the testimonies of the Appellants
    and the Sponsor.  At best it seems to me that the absence of  any  such
    reference in the letters from the schools was a neutral factor.  It was
    not an  adverse  factor  that  went  against  the  testimonies  of  the
    witnesses.


20.  Paragraphs 38-40  are  the  key  paragraphs  setting  out  the  Judge's
    conclusion in respect of sole responsibility.  Paragraph 38 essentially
    echoes the analysis at paragraph 32 in that it refers  to  the  letters
    from the school and that they "do not confirm" that it is the case that
    the sponsor has exercised responsibility solely for the  children.   It
    is also in this paragraph that we see reference to the  marginalisation
    of the Appellants' own evidence as being self-serving:  "We  have  only
    the self-serving  evidence  from  the  Appellants  themselves  on  this
    point".


21.  I entirely agree with the challenge that it was inappropriate  for  the
    Judge to marginalise this  evidence  by  characterising  it  as  'self-
    serving'.


22.  Paragraph 39 makes reference  to  the  involvement  in  the  children's
    lives of their grandmother.  It seems to me, however, that  the  nature
    of the involvement referred to by the  Judge  does  not  contradict  or
    otherwise undermine the clear testimonies of the witnesses.   There  is
    certainly nothing therein that absolves the Judge from making  a  clear
    finding on the assertions of the sponsor and the Appellants.


23.  For these reasons I accept that the Judge fell into material  error  in
    his consideration of the evidence such as to amount to an error of law.


24.  In my  judgment  that  means  that  the  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside.


25.  Both representatives acknowledge that it  would  be  possible  for  the
    Tribunal to remake the decisions in the appeals without  referring  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.   In  this  context  it  to  be
    recalled that the Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal did
    not challenge directly the testimony of the sponsor during  the  course
    of evidence. When invited to comment on whether there was anything that
    might be said to gainsay the testimonies now,  Mr  Tarlow  declined  to
    identify anything.


26.  In the circumstances it seems to me that in substance the  evidence  on
    appeal  of  the  sponsor  and  the   Appellants   remains   essentially
    unchallenged.  I find that the burden of demonstrating that the sponsor
    has had sole responsibility for the Appellants is thereby discharged.


27.  I  remind  myself  that  this  is  not  an  appeal  brought  under  the
    Immigration Rules but  an  appeal  brought  on  human  rights  grounds.
    However, in circumstances where in substance paragraph 297 is met,  and
    where  the  sponsor  has  sole  responsibility  for   the   Appellants'
    upbringings, I find that family life is  established.  As  regards  the
    proportionality of interfering with that family life by refusing  entry
    clearance, in my judgement the answer - including consideration of  the
    public interest considerations pursuant to section 117B of the 2002 Act
    - is subsumed in the Rules. The Appellants satisfy specific Rules  that
    have at their core the protection and  promotion  of  family  life.  In
    those circumstances I find that it would indeed be disproportionate  to
    uphold the Respondent's decision.


28.  In all the  circumstances  I  conclude  that  the  Respondent  has  not
    established  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance   is   a
    proportionate  interference  with  the  mutual  family  lives  of   the
    Appellants and the sponsor, and accordingly the appeals are allowed  on
    human rights grounds.


Notice of Decisions


29.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of
    law and are set aside.


30.  I remake the decisions in the appeals.


31.  Appeal HU/12361/2015 is allowed on human rights grounds.


32.  Appeal HU/12362/2015 is allowed on human rights grounds.


33.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARDS

I have allowed the appeals and in all of the circumstances make a  full  fee
award in each of the appeals.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
