





Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12196/2015

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2017                         |On 18 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                          Ms Sacarah Vanique Heslup

                        (No anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     The Entry Clearance Officer, Shefo

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bexsom Counsel instructed by AJA Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ms Sacarah Vanique Heslup  date  of  birth  15  February
    1998, is a citizen of Jamaica.  Whilst at  the  time  of  the  original
    application the appellant was a minor, the appellant is now  an  adult.
    Having considered all the circumstances, I do not consider it necessary
    to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid. I have for the purposes of this appeal  kept  the
    designation of the parties as they appeared in the appeal in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. The original  application  was  made  on  14  October  2015  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as the child of a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom under the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    article 8 of the ECHR. The judge allowed the appeal  of  the  appellant
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  the  appellant  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom to join her mother. The respondent  had
    considered the application under the Immigration Rules and  also  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The decision of the first-tier Tribunal Judge had been promulgated on 6
    May 2017.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on  13  July  2017.  Thus  the  matter
    appears before me to determine in the first  instance  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the original decision.

 5. Within the Explanatory Statement the  respondent  had  highlighted  the
    following factors in refusing the application: -

         a) It was accepted that the appellant was the natural child of  the
         sponsor.

         b) It was accepted that the sponsor was present and settled in  the
         United Kingdom and working for the NHS.

          c)      It  was  not  accepted  that  the  sponsor  had  had  sole
         responsibility for the appellant. Whilst a large  number  of  money
         transfer had been submitted  to  establish  that  the  sponsor  was
         financially supporting the appellant, sole  responsibility  engaged
         factors  other  than  mere  financial  support.  The  ECO  was  not
         satisfied that  there  was  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  ever
         provided emotional or other support or paid an abiding interest  in
         the upbringing of the child. There was no evidence that the sponsor
         had been involved in the major decisions in the child's life.

         d) Whilst WhatsApp Internet conversations had been  provided  these
         covered a limited period of January 2015 to July 2015.

         e) Whilst a number of photographs had been submitted, these did not
         establish that the sponsor had had a major and active role  in  the
         appellant's life.

         f) There  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  sponsor  had  any
         involvement in any decisions affecting education, moral,  religious
         social, medical or other significant  aspects  of  the  appellant's
         life.

         g) There was no evidence of any serious or compelling circumstances
         which would make exclusion undesirable.

 6. In the light of the refusal letter it was incumbent upon the  judge  to
    deal  with  those  aspects  of  the  evidence  which  proved  that  the
    appellant's mother had been materially involved in the  emotional  life
    of the appellant and had participated in the  major  decisions  of  the
    child's life.

 7. Nowhere in the decision does the judge  identify  those  factors  which
    lead him to conclude that the sponsor has had active  participation  in
    the major decisions involving the appellant's life. Indeed it does  not
    appear that the judge came to a conclusion on that requirement  of  the
    rules.

 8. Further was incumbent upon the judge to identify  those  factors  which
    led  him  to  conclude  that  there   were   serious   and   compelling
    circumstances which made exclusion of the appellant undesirable.  Again
    the judge appears to have wholly failed to deal with  the  evidence  in
    respect of that element of the rules or to make  a  conclusion  on  the
    issue.

 9. Indeed before me it was conceded that an examination of the decision by
    the judge disclosed  that  he  had  made  errors  of  fact  as  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant. Those circumstances related not only to
    the medical condition of the appellant but also as to who  exactly  was
    looking after the appellant and what their relationship was.

10. Accordingly the judge in assessing the article 8 rights of the  parties
    had to consider first and foremost the requirements of  the  rules  and
    has failed to do so. That I am satisfied is an error of law.

11. In the light of the error of law disclosed the only courses is for this
    matter  to  be  heard  afresh  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In   the
    circumstances there is a material error of  law  which  undermines  the
    findings of fact made by the judge and the judge  has  failed  to  deal
    with the issues in the case. The case is remitted back  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

     Notice of Decision

12. I allow the appeal to the extent that the appeal is  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

13. I do not make an anonymity direction


Signed

Date 12th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



