
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12420/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 September 2020               |On 24 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                MELANIE DANO

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation    (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mr C M Mahfuz of Counsel, instructed by Ashfield
                    Solicitors

For the respondent:    No submissions received



Background

1.   This appeal comes before  me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on  26  March  2020  against  the
determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge S  Lal,  promulgated  4  November
2019 following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 31 October 2019.

2.   The appellant is a Filipino national born on 22 May 1973.  She  appeals
against the respondent's decision of 2 July 2019 to refuse  her  application
for leave to remain as the unmarried partner of  a  British  national.  They
had  met  in  the  Philippines  in  November  2018   following   an   online
relationship of a few months. After he returned  to  the  UK,  she  came  to
visit him in December 2019 and again in February 2019. Her  application  was
made in May 2019.

3.   The appellant's case was  that  her  partner  could  not  live  in  the
Philippines because of various health conditions and because  he  cared  for
his elderly mother.  Further,  as  she  had  not  been  able  to  annul  her
marriage, their relationship would be viewed as adulterous  and  be  frowned
upon.

4.   The appellant was unrepresented when the appeal came before the  First-
tier Tribunal. Judge Lal heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her
partner. He accepted that the relationship was genuine  and  subsisting  and
that the appellant met the  language  requirements.  He  was  not  satisfied
however that very significant obstacles had been shown to  the  continuation
of family life outside the UK. He  further  found  that  the  appellant  had
failed to show private and family life capable of  engaging  article  8  and
considered that she could make  an  entry  clearance  application  form  the
Philippines. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

5.   The appellant then obtained legal representation and sought  permission
to appeal on seven grounds (i) that the judge failed to recognise  that  the
burden was on the respondent under  article  8(2);  (ii)  that  it  was  not
necessary to show that the relationship had been  subsisting  for  at  least
two years; (iii) that he did not adequately consider EX.1  and  applied  the
wrong test when doing so; (iv) that he failed to  assess  all  the  relevant
evidence including the sponsor's ill health and also that in  requiring  the
appellant to return to seek entry clearance, he had  failed  to  follow  the
guidance in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40; (v) that no  weight  was  attached  to
the considerations in s.117B, no consideration  whether  the  appellant  was
less  of  a  burden  on  the  tax  payer  or  whether  she  was  financially
independent; (vi) that  there  was  no  consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE
(1)(vi); and (vii)  that  the  proportionality  assessment  was  inadequate.
Permission was granted on the last three grounds.

Covid-19 crisis

6.   Normally, the matter would have  been  listed  for  hearing  after  the
grant of permission, but due to the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
precautions against its spread, this did  not  happen.  Instead,  directions
were sent to the parties by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 3 July 2020.  They
were asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with  on  the
papers and to make any further submissions on the error of law issue  within
certain time limits.

7.   Mr Mahfuz's submissions for the appellant  were  received  on  14  July
2020 but no reply has been received from  the  respondent.  I  am  satisfied
that the directions were properly served. I  now  proceed  to  consider  the
matter.

8.   In doing so I have regard to the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v The Parole Board  [2013]
UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020: Arrangements  during  the
Covid-19 pandemic (PGN) and the Senior President's Pilot Practice  Direction
(PPD). I have regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule  2
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  being  "to  enable
the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly".  To  this  end  I
have considered that  dealing  with  a  case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
dealing with it in ways that are proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the
case, the complexity of the issues, etc; avoiding unnecessary formality  and
seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,
that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the  proceedings;  using
any special expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  effectively;  and  avoiding
delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration of  the  issues  (Rule
2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

9.   I have had regard to the submissions  made  and  to  all  the  evidence
before me before deciding how to proceed. The appellant has objected to  the
matter being determined on the papers but no good reasons have  been  given.
There is no need for the appellant to see Counsel  go  through  the  grounds
with the judge. They have been clearly put  and  can  be  properly  assessed
without the need for further submissions. There are no matters arising  from
the papers which would require clarification and so an  oral  hearing  would
not be needed for that purpose. The respondent has been directed to  provide
her submissions on the matter but has not done so. I am satisfied that I  am
able to fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers before me  and
I now proceed to do so.

Submissions

10.  Mr Mahfuz expands upon the grounds in his submissions. He submits  that
there  was   a   substantially   inadequate   consideration   of   paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) and that this impacts upon the consideration of the article  8
assessment. It is submitted that there are very  significant  obstacles  the
appellant's reintegration on return because she would have to  leave  behind
her partner. If he accompanied her he would find  it  difficult  because  of
his ill health and he would have to leave behind his  99  year  old  mother.
The fact that he and the appellant  would  not  be  able  to  live  together
legally on account of the appellant still being married was  also  a  matter
that  had  not  been  considered.   It  is  submitted  that  there  was   no
consideration of s.117B. The appellant commenced her relationship  when  she
was lawfully present in the UK.



Discussion and conclusions

11.  The appellant was not assisted by the fact that she was a  litigant  in
person and that extremely limited documentary evidence  in  support  of  her
appeal  was  presented.   She   may   consider   the   benefits   of   legal
representation for future proceedings.

12.   Although  Judge  Kelly  refused  permission  on   the   insurmountable
obstacles point, I agree with Mr Mahfuz's submission that  this  impacts  on
the proportionality assessment of the  article  8  claim  and  as  that  was
arguably found to be inadequate, I consider that ground 4 also has merit.

13.  The assessment of the evidence is, indeed, brief.  Whilst  often  there
is merit in brevity, that is not the case on  this  occasion.  The  findings
seem to me to consist of conclusions without any reasoning.

14.  The judge finds, for example, that the appellant  had  failed  to  show
that there would be very significant difficulties for her  and  the  sponsor
to live in the  Philippines  but  gives  no  reason  for  why  or  how  this
conclusion was reached (at 11). He  confirms  that  he  has  had  regard  to
s.117B (at paragraph 13) but nowhere does he apply the facts to the  various
factors for consideration. The determination is silent on  matters  such  as
whether the appellant would be a burden on the tax  payer,  whether  she  is
financially  independent  and  her  status   when   the   relationship   was
established. At paragraph 14 the judge finds  that  the  appellant  has  not
provided evidence of a private or family life capable of engaging article  8
but this contradicts his earlier acceptance  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship (at 12) and there is no assessment whatsoever of the nature  of
the claims the appellant put forward. In considering article 8  outside  the
rules, there is no consideration of whether the  circumstances  put  forward
in oral evidence were exceptional or, if not, why.  Indeed, it is a  mystery
as to what facts are accepted by the judge  (other  than  the  relationship)
and what are not accepted. It is also unknown what  position  was  taken  by
the respondent as there are no submissions  recorded  in  the  determination
from the Presenting Officer.

15.  The judge appears to have relied solely on the fact that the  appellant
would be able to apply for entry clearance to  dismiss  the  appeal  but  in
reaching  that  conclusion  he  gave  no  consideration  to  the   Chikwamba
principles. As the appellant was a litigant in person, she  could  not  have
been expected to put forward any arguments in that respect and  it  was  for
the judge to assist her ensure  that  her  case  was  fully  put.  There  is
nothing to suggest that the procedure was explained to her or that  she  was
given an opportunity to make any submissions.

16.  This is an extremely brief determination with scant, if any,  reasoning
and not what one should  have  to  accept  from  the  Tribunal.  I  have  no
hesitation in setting it aside in its entirety. The  appellant  is  entitled
to know why her appeal was dismissed and regrettably the determination  does
not make that clear. The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
a fresh hearing and for a decision to be made by another judge.



Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  it
is set aside. It is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
and a decision to be made on all issues.

Anonymity

18.  There has been no request for an anonymity order and I  see  no  reason
to make one.



Directions

19.  Directions shall be issued by the First-tier Tribunal in due course.


Signed

R. Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge

Date: 21 September 2020
