
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/12802/2017
     hu/12805/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2018                           |On 03 December 2018           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                   ms AvB
                                  miss ACB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first named  appellant  is
    the mother of the second named appellant.  They were born in  1980  and
    2003 respectively.

2.   The appellants were unrepresented and did not  make  an  appearance  at
    the hearing.  The  clerk  made  enquiries  and  no  messages  had  been
    received.  Notice of the proceedings appeared to  have  been  correctly
    served.  There  was  no  explanation  for  the  non-attendance  of  the
    appellants.  Ms Pal had no updated information about the whereabouts of
    the appellants.  In all the circumstances I was satisfied that  it  was
    appropriate to proceed with the hearing under Rule 38 and that  it  was
    in the interests of justice to do so.

3.   The appellants appeal the refusal of their human  rights  claim  on  10
    October 2017.  The Secretary of State took into account the  fact  that
    the first appellant had  numerous  convictions  and  was  a  persistent
    offender and that her conduct was not conducive to the public good  and
    she could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6.   In
    addition the appellant had  in  the  case  of  a  previous  application
    submitted  a  false  United  States  of  America  passport  and   birth
    certificate claiming that the second appellant was  a  citizen  of  the
    United States when in fact she was a  Nigerian  national.   Accordingly
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  S-LTR.2.2.
    Although the second appellant had lived continuously in the UK  for  at
    least seven years it was not unreasonable to expect her to leave the UK
    with the first appellant, her mother, as a family unit.  The respondent
    noted that the first appellant did not meet the various requirements of
    the Rules including financial and English language requirements.

4.    In  considering  whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  the
    respondent took into account the best  interests  of  the  child  as  a
    primary consideration but noted that  the  second  appellant  would  be
    returning back to Nigeria with the first appellant who could  help  her
    adjust to the ways and customs of Nigeria.  It was  acknowledged  there
    would be a degree of disruption but the second appellant could continue
    any friendships built up in the United Kingdom using modern technology.
     Reference was made to Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and it was considered that in  the  light  of  the
    fact that the child would be accompanying her mother and that both were
    citizens of Nigeria the second appellant would be able to continue  her
    education and she had not reached an age where she  would  have  gained
    non-transferrable skills.  There were no special educational or medical
    needs that the respondent had been made aware of.

5.   In relation to the second appellant, she could not  meet  the  relevant
    requirements of the Rules.  While she was under the age of 18  and  had
    lived continuously in the UK for at least the last seven years it would
    be reasonable for her to leave and return to Nigeria with  her  mother.
    She did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Rules.

6.   The appellants appealed and their  appeals  came  before  a  First-tier
    Judge on 11 April 2018.  The appellants were  then  represented  by  Mr
    Read, of Counsel.  He relied on  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  it  was
    submitted that she met the requirements of  the  Rules  since  she  was
    under the age of 18 and had lived continuously in the UK since the  age
    of 1.  She was now 14 and it would not be reasonable to expect  her  to
    leave the UK.  If she were successful it would lead to  the  appeal  of
    the first appellant being allowed on human rights grounds.   Mr  Alagh,
    who appeared for the respondent, pointed out  that  there  had  been  a
    previous hearing before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  in  2014
    where most of the issues had been dealt with and reference was made  to
    the guidelines in Devaseelan (Sri Lanka) [2002] UKIAT 00702.

7.   The First-tier Judge concluded his determination as follows:

         "18. There has been no argument or  submission  that  the  starting
             point in my consideration should not be the  Determination  of
             Judge Greasley.  During the submissions it was suggested by Mr
             Read that proper consideration had  not  been  made  by  Judge
             Greasley of the second  Appellant's  best  interests.   I  was
             however provided with the Notice of  Decision  of  Application
             for Permission to Appeal against the  Determination  of  Judge
             Greasley which was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 5
             June 2014.  Although I  have  not  seen  the  grounds  of  the
             appeal, in the  Notice  of  refusal  at  paragraph  2  is  the
             following finding 'contrary to the assertion in  the  grounds,
             he did give consideration to the circumstances of  the  second
             Appellant and in so doing took account of her best  interests.
             He was entitled to reach the conclusions that he  did  on  all
             the evidence before him and  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
             disclose any arguable errors of law in his decision.'


         19.   I  deal  firstly  with  the  best  interests  of  the  second
             Appellant, which are a primary consideration.   At  paragraphs
             35 and 36 of  his  Determination,  Judge  Greasley  found  the
             following:


                  'I find her daughter will be able  to  transfer  into  the
                  Nigerian educational system, although I  do  accept  there
                  will  be  some  degree  of   disruption   involved.    The
                  Appellants have visited Nigeria  in  recent  years.   They
                  have family member  there  who  can  provide  support  and
                  assistance ... In relation to section 55 of  the  Borders,
                  Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the  best  interests
                  of the second Appellant are maintained, I  find  by  being
                  accompanied by her mother in Nigeria.  I find  the  second
                  Appellant will be able to adapt to life in  Nigeria  where
                  she has visited in the past and  with  whose  culture  and
                  traditions I find she will be familiar with.'


         20.  Mr Read has submitted that four years is a significant time in
             the life of  a  14-year-old.   I  accept  that.   However  the
             evidence points to the second  Appellant  having  shown  quite
             substantial ability to  adapt.   During  her  mother's  recent
             imprisonment, which was over several months, she  stayed  with
             her aunt at weekends and  during  the  week  stayed  with  her
             mother's  best  friend.   She  undertook  the  travel  without
             apparent difficulty.   The  school  reports  which  have  been
             exhibited  demonstrate  that  what  may   be   considered   as
             instability has apparently had no adverse effect on  her.   At
             page 27 of the bundle her class  teacher  made  the  following
             comment on 11 December 2017:


                  'C (the second Appellant) has made a good  start  to  year
                  10.  She is a hardworking student who has the potential to
                  succeed in the  future.   She  has  solid  attendance  and
                  punctuality and can be  very  focused  upon  her  studies.
                  Well done! Keep it up!'


         21.  The second Appellant gave evidence that her GCSEs will not  be
             sat until the end of the next academic  year.   There  are  no
             imminent exams apparently of  any  importance.   There  is  no
             reason to believe that any disruptive effect in  being  taught
             in Nigerian schools would be  substantial.   She  has  visited
             Nigeria in the past and other are family members  in  Nigeria.
             The first Appellant gave evidence that since  her  arrest  and
             imprisonment in  February  2017  she  has  received  financial
             support from friends and family in the sum of �800 per  month.
             Part of that sum was  used  for  the  benefit  of  the  second
             Appellant.  There was  no  credible  evidence  to  suggest  or
             reason to believe that financial assistance will not continue.
              The first Appellant has  given  evidence  that  she  has  six
             brother and sisters a number of who remain in Nigeria.  On the
             evidence made available  today  there  is  no  reason  not  to
             believe that the second Appellant would be well  supported  in
             Nigeria and  would  continue  to  show  the  adaptability  and
             resilience that  is  noted  above.   I  discount  any  of  the
             criminal behaviour of her mother in my consideration and reach
             the same conclusion as Judge Greasley that her best  interests
             would be maintained by being  accompanied  by  her  mother  in
             Nigeria.


         22.  Turning to the first Appellant,  her  criminal  behaviour  was
             described at some considerable length, at paragraphs 6  to  12
             by Judge Greasley.  There has been no challenge to the entries
             made in the PNC printout.  At page 1 of the printout there  is
             a summary of her convictions as follows: one  offence  against
             property; six fraud and kindred offences; 18 theft and kindred
             offence; six offences relating to  police/courts/prisons.   In
             giving evidence today the first Appellant referred  to  having
             reached an understanding as to  why  she  committed  offences.
             She acknowledged that notwithstanding  conditional  discharges
             and  community  orders  she  was   sentenced   to   8   months
             imprisonment on 22 March 2017.  Although she has now  had  the
             benefit of completing her LLB there is  no  credible  evidence
             that she is reformed person.


         23.  The offence for which she was imprisoned in  March  2017  was,
             she has stated in evidence, for a matter which related to  the
             commencement of  her  employment  in  2015.   She  used  false
             documentation.  It is significant  and  revealing  as  to  her
             character that she has apparently  learned  nothing  from  her
             experiences and the comments made by Judge Greasley in 2014 at
             paragraphs 28 and 29 which is in the following terms:


                  'Whilst the offences in themselves may not be individually
                  serious,  collectively  the  Appellant's  conduct  over  a
                  period of time, does, in my judgment reflect a serious and
                  determined willingness to commit offences  of  dishonesty.
                  The fact  that  the  Appellant  when  apprehended  has  on
                  different occasions used an alias adds  to  the  deceptive
                  nature of these  matters.   Eight  different  aliases  are
                  noted  in  police  records.   She  has  shown  a   blatant
                  disregard for  the  immigration  laws  of  the  UK  and  a
                  cavalier attitude to the  criminal  laws  of  the  UK  ...
                  Indeed it  is  clear  from  the  oral  evidence  that  the
                  Appellant  has  not  notified   her   employers   of   the
                  immigration appeal hearing she  has  secured  a  character
                  reference  letter  from  her  employer  which   makes   no
                  reference to her criminal past and who has been given  the
                  false  impression  that  the  letter  was  required  as  a
                  character statement for alternative  employment.   I  find
                  that this further demonstrates the  extent  to  which  the
                  Appellant is prepared to deceive and mislead others ...  I
                  find  that  the  Appellant  has  committed   offences   of
                  dishonesty over a prolonged period with repeated use of an
                  alias she has committed other allied offences and has done
                  so whilst as a visitor in the  United  Kingdom,  the  host
                  country I find that she has also shown  a  willingness  to
                  deceive her current employers recently in relation to  the
                  reference letter produced before the tribunal'.


             On the evidence before me she clearly went on to  deceive  yet
             another employer following the hearing in 2014.


         24.  She attempted to explain her behaviour  by  claiming  that  in
             doing so, and receiving a benefit by  deception,  she  avoided
             claiming state benefits which would have been paid out of  the
             national funds.  This however entirely misses the  point  that
             she has committed  further  acts  of  dishonesty  without  any
             apparent aptitude to change her ways. She  added  when  giving
             her evidence that she always challenged the decisions  of  the
             Respondent and the tribunal, presumably in relation  to  fact-
             finding and other matters, to enable her to remain  longer  in
             the United Kingdom or she put it 'to regularise her stay.'


         25.  In 2014 Judge Greasley found  at  paragraphs  32  and  33  the
             following:


                  'I also  find  that  the  appeals  must  be  dismissed  in
                  relation to article 8 family and private life in  relation
                  to both Appellants.  I accept that the Appellant  and  her
                  daughter have established private  life  interest  in  the
                  United Kingdom during their residence ... Equally  I  find
                  that both Appellants can both return together  to  Nigeria
                  and resume their private life interests there.'


         26.  Apart from the passage of time there is no evidence before  me
             to reach a different conclusion.


         27.  During his oral submissions,  Mr  Alagh  reminded  me  of  the
             conclusions in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  I
             have considered the second Appellant's best interests  without
             reference to the immigration status of her mother  and  indeed
             her father who remains in the USA.  I have  found  that  there
             would be no substantial impact on her educational development,
             progress and opportunities of the future.


         28.  Mr Read during  his  submissions  argued  that  paragraph  276
             ADE(1)(vi) should be found in that it would not reasonable  to
             expect the second Appellant to leave the UK.  I  do  not  find
             that to be the case for reasons found above.


         29.  Mr Read also submitted that in considering section 117B  which
             I am obliged to do in consideration of all Article 8  appeals,
             particular focus is required on section 117B (6).


         30.  In dealing with  the  broader  issues  in  section  117B,  the
             maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
             interest.  Both the Appellants speak English.  I have received
             oral  evidence,  but  nothing  more  that   is   substantially
             credible, from the first Appellant; that  she  receives  money
             from family and friends.   Although  she  is  not  financially
             independent she has stated in  evidence  that  she  is  not  a
             burden on taxpayers.  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
             private life stablished  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the
             person's immigration status  is  precarious.   I  accept  that
             little weight does not mean no weight.


         31.  Section 117B(6) has been the subject of  substantial  judicial
             consideration since  Judge  Gresley's  determination.   In  AM
             Pakistan and others v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180 the question of
             reasonableness was considered at length.   In  this  appeal  I
             accept that the second Appellant is  a  qualifying  child  who
             satisfies the seven-year rule and the first  Appellant  has  a
             genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  her.  I  do
             find for the reasons above that it is  reasonable  to  require
             the second Appellant to leave the UK.  Although  it  may  have
             been  argued  that  it  is  in  the  second  Appellant's  best
             interests to remain in the UK, for the reasons found by  Judge
             Greasley that was not the conclusion  he  reached,  which  was
             open to him and not criticised on appeal.  In the  absence  of
             any new evidence of substance to suggest otherwise I reach the
             same conclusion  as  Judge  Greasley.   For  these  reasons  I
             dismiss the appeals."

8.   There was an application for permission to appeal  and  permission  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on 19 September 2018.  It was found to be
    arguable that the judge had provided insufficient reasons on the issues
    of the best interests of the second  appellant  and  reasonableness  of
    return as the facts were similar to those in MT and ET (Nigeria) [2018]
    UKUT 00088 (IAC).  Reference was also made to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705 - significant weight should be  given  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom for over seven years.

9.   Ms Pal submitted that the judge had been correct to take  into  account
    the findings made by Judge Greasley.  He had referred in  paragraph  25
    to Judge  Greasley's  conclusion  that  both  appellants  could  return
    together to Nigeria and resume their private life interests there.   He
    had made it clear that he had considered  the  child's  best  interests
    without reference to the immigration status of her mother in  paragraph
    27 of his decision.  He had referred to AM (Pakistan) in  paragraph  31
    of his decision.  He had concluded that it was  reasonable  to  require
    the second appellant to leave the UK.  Ms Pal referred to the  decision
    of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and Others [2018] UKSC 53.   While
    the status of the mother had an indirect impact on the appellant he had
    correctly focussed on the best interests of the child who  would  leave
    with her parents.  There was no material error of law in the  decision.



10.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the decision of the First-tier Judge  if  it
    was flawed in law.

11.  Ms Pal referred to the recent decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria).  While the sins of the parents should not  be  visited  upon
    the children "the record of the parents may become indirectly material"
    as is pointed out in paragraph 18 of the judgment.  In  this  case  the
    behaviour of the appellant's mother is of course deplorable and  it  is
    summarised in the judge's conclusions which I have set out  above.   As
    the judge noted there was no credible evidence that the first appellant
    was a reformed person.  However it is important to  note  that  at  the
    conclusion of paragraph 21 the judge discounted  any  of  the  criminal
    behaviour of the  first  named  appellant  in  his  consideration  when
    concluding that the child's best interests would be maintained by being
    accompanied by her mother to Nigeria.

12.  The judge in my view did not err in his consideration of  the  case  in
    the light of the authorities then available and his decision would have
    been no different had he had the benefit of the  recent  Supreme  Court
    decision.  He explored exhaustively the issue of the best interests  of
    the child noting, for example, her ability to adapt during her mother's
    recent imprisonment.  In paragraph 27 the judge refers to  his  finding
    that  there  will  be  no  substantial  impact   on   her   educational
    development, progress and opportunities.   He  confirmed  that  he  had
    considered the child's interests without reference to  the  immigration
    status of her mother.  The case referred to in the grant of  permission
    was decided before the recent Supreme Court case.  The Tribunal  in  MT
    and ET refers to the "present state of the law" in paragraph 33 of  its
    decision.  It is very doubtful that the Tribunal  in  the  case  of  MT
    would have described the  behaviour  of  the  first  appellant  in  the
    instant case as being that of a "somewhat run of the  mill  immigration
    offender...".  As the Supreme Court makes clear the record of the first
    appellant becomes indirectly material and one needs  to  focus  on  the
    position "in the real world" - see the extract from EV (Philippines)  v
    Secretary of State referred to in paragraph 19 of the decision  of  the
    Supreme Court.

13.  For the reasons I have given I am not satisfied that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge was materially flawed  in  law.   This  appeal  is
    dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Judge shall  stand.   It  is
    appropriate to make an anonymity order in this case.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date: 26 November 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

