
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
hu/12257/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 7th November 2017                   |         On 7th December 2017        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR E S R
                        (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the appellant is the Secretary of State I refer to the parties
    as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen or Morocco born on 25th December 1963 and he
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 29th  April  2016
    to make a deportation order pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders
    Act 2007.  The reasons are set out in a letter dated 5th May 2016.

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in October 1974, aged  10,  on
    his mother's passport.  He remained in the United Kingdom, was educated
    here, worked here and had a family here.

 4. On 7 August 2009 the appellant was convicted at  Kingston  Crown  Court
    for possession of a class A drug, namely crack cocaine and supplying  a
    controlled drug, class B cannabis resin and was sentenced to two years'
    imprisonment.  Following the conviction he was served with a notice  of
    liability to deportation and in April 2010 the appellant  was  detained
    and a deportation order signed and served  on  him.   That  deportation
    order was successfully appealed in  September  2010  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lobo and on 6 September 2011 the appellant  was  granted
    three years' discretionary leave to  remain  following  his  successful
    appeal.  In September 2014 he submitted an  application  for  leave  to
    remain giving rise to  the  decision  under  appeal.   In  effect,  the
    Secretary of State saw fit to make a further deportation order  against
    the appellant  on  the  same  index  offence  of  2009  that  had  been
    successfully appealed previously.  She was entitled to do so under  the
    amended Immigration Rules.

 5. Between 1980 and 1987 the appellant had received five  convictions  for
    some fifteen offences including offences against  property,  theft  and
    kindred offences.  The sentencing remarks of the  judge  at  the  Crown
    Court in 2009 included the following remarks:

         "Finally R... three Counts.  The first two of supplying Class A and
         being concerned in the supply of  Class  A,  and  the  third  Count
         supplying cannabis.  Very different.   Again,  the  motivation  for
         this offending was your own addiction...

         ...the offending in your case was motivated by your own  addiction,
         just like the others.  And your last conviction I note was 27 years
         ago.  That's a long time ago.  You're now aged I  think  about  45,
         and you actually so I'm told had a longstanding alcohol problem and
         together with that, much more recently but nonetheless had in glove
         with it, drug abuse or drug using.  The quantities were very  small
         in your case and I think that the appropriate sentence in your case
         is one of two years.  You'll serve two years concurrently on Counts
         1 and 2 and 14 days on Count 4....".

 6. The appellant's appeal against the second deportation order came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll in  February  2017  who  allowed  the
    appeal. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  and  I
    found an error of  law  and  set  the  decision  aside  with  preserved
    findings.  Judge Carroll found  the  appellant  could  not  fulfil  the
    exceptions under paragraph 399A as there were no significant  obstacles
    to his integration in Morocco. The judge, however, proceeded  to  allow
    the appeal on the basis that appellant's length of residence alone  was
    a compelling  reason.   That  was  an  error  of  law  and  there  were
    inadequate findings in relation to the  public  interest.   The  weight
    ascribed by the judge to the public interest was not demonstrated  when
    reading the decision as a whole.  The court in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016]
    UKSC 60 referred to "a  very  strong  claim  indeed"  in  order  to  be
    successful in relation to deportation.

 7. The matter was retained in the Upper Tribunal.

 8. At the resumed hearing before me, Mr Tufan cross-examined the appellant
    at some length.

 9. The appellant confirmed that he was last in Morocco  in  May  2014  and
    although there was a house there all his family and  children  were  in
    the United Kingdom.  He had a daughter who  had  severe  mental  health
    problems  whom  he  supported  and  in  the  last  two  years  he   had
    rediscovered and developed a relationship with her.  He  supported  her
    during her mental health illness.   He  confirmed  that  he  did  speak
    Arabic but mostly English.  He also confirmed that when he came out  of
    prison he worked in a bakery but was now nearly 55 years old with  poor
    health.  He would find it very difficult to work and support himself in
    Morocco.  His parents receive state pensions and his  various  siblings
    had their own families to support.  They could not give  him  financial
    support.

10. His partner, L H gave evidence and confirmed that she had been a friend
    of the appellant's for  30  years  but  they  had  become  romantically
    involved since 2015.  Although she was prepared to support him  in  his
    removal to Morocco she had  her  children  and  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom one of whom was still a student.

11. Z D, the appellant's eldest daughter also attended to give evidence and
    confirmed that she had regular contact with her father every other  day
    and would stay with him at weekends.  He supported her  when  she  went
    into hospital and she suffered from cyclical  vomiting  syndrome.   Her
    grandfather had hitherto supported her but now he was now very old  and
    was unable to support her.  She had experienced very severe  ill-health
    and depression, with which her newly renewed contact  with  her  father
    assisted her and he also helped her with budgeting  her  finances  with
    which she had difficulty.

12. The appellant's daughter C, who  was  28  years,  old  also  gave  oral
    testimony and adopted her statement.

13. In submissions Mr Tufan relied  on  the  case  of  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC) and advanced that
    the issue in this  case  was  whether  the  appellant  succeeded  under
    paragraphs 399A:

         "399A.  This  paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
                  of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported."

14. As Mr  Tufan  submitted  paragraph  399A(c)  was  mirrored  by  Section
    117C(4)(c), that is, there should be  consideration  of  whether  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
    the country to  which  it  is  proposed  he  was  deported.   Mr  Tufan
    submitted that the evidence was that the appellant spoke Arabic and his
    parents had a home in Morocco.  He had been economically active in  the
    past.  In the case of Bossade an appellant who was from the DRC and who
    had been here since the age of 2 or 3 years had been  returned  to  his
    country  of  origin.   This  authority  outlined  the  demanding   test
    regarding 'very significant obstacles'.

15. I was also referred to the case  of  AS  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1204  which
    commented on the case of  SSHD  v  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  [37]
    confirming that 'it is not appropriate to treat the statutory  language
    as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a  court
    or tribunal to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to
    use'. The test for integration was a broad evaluative test but the test
    of  very  significant  obstacles  erected  a  self  evidently  elevated
    threshold.

16. In the alternative  I  needed  to  consider  whether  there  were  very
    compelling  circumstances  under   paragraph   398C.    None   of   the
    circumstances described amounted to very compelling circumstances.  The
    appellant had been in the UK since the age of 11.  It was the case that
    there had been a previously allowed appeal  but  it  was  open  to  the
    Secretary  of  State  under  the  Immigration  Rules  to  make  a   new
    deportation order although the case was unusual.

17. Ms Solanki relied on her recent skeleton argument.  She submitted there
    were significant obstacles to his return.  He had only visited  Morocco
    six times since he had left and he was integrated in line with the test
    set out in the case of Kamara.  That underlined that integration was  a
    broad concept and not confined to the mere ability to find a job or  to
    sustain life while living in the other country.  The  authority  of  AS
    did not say that the integration test in Kamara was incorrect.

18. The appellant had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life
    and this was where his formative childhood years between the ages of 11
    to 18 had been formed.  He had not lived in Morocco since his entry  44
    years ago.  All of his family, his mother, father,  sisters,  brothers,
    partner, children, grandchildren and friends, uncles and aunts were  in
    the UK and were British and all settled in  the  UK.    Indeed  he  had
    continued to pursue his relationships with British nationals.

19. The test for integration as set out in Kamara was not  limited  to  the
    ability to get a job but that said it would be very difficult for  this
    appellant to get work  and  being  able  to  get  work  would  be  very
    important to his ability to support himself.

20. Ms  Solanki  accepted  that  under  paragraph  398  the  test  of  very
    compelling circumstances as set  out  in  MK  (section  55  -  Tribunal
    options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT  00223  and  Chege  (Section  117D  -
    Article 8 - approach )[2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC)  underlined there  needed
    to be a convincing and/or a strong case.

21. I was referred to Hesham Ali, particularly at paragraph 15 such that  I
    should consider the conduct since the offence.  In the case of  a  non-
    settled migrant it would be rare to allow a  case  outside  the  Rules.
    This was not a non-settled migrant, he was settled  and  therefore  did
    not fall into the "rare case" category.  Ninety percent of his life had
    been in the UK with lawful leave and KD (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 418 did not say that this could
    not constitute an exceptional circumstance.  It was important  to  look
    at the circumstances of the offences and most of the offences had  been
    committed when he was a minor.  The 2009  index  offence  was  for  two
    years and  was  not  for  an  offence  of  violence,  albeit  that  the
    representative did not attempt  to  diminish  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence.  I was invited to consider at what point the  public  interest
    was outweighed by the length of his residence in the UK and  it  should
    be noted that he had not been  imprisoned  for  the  demarcating  'four
    years'.  In terms  of  his  offending,  the  Crown  Court  Judge,  when
    sentencing, had not recommended the appellant for deportation  and  had
    noted that the offence was  for  the  purposes  of  his  own  substance
    misuse.  That had been very clearly addressed and the circumstances  of
    the offence no longer existed.  Since 2009 there had  been  no  further
    offending and indeed in 2010 the Tribunal had found he  was  low  risk.
    He is now of no risk.

22. Ms Solanki  submitted  that  KD  (Jamaica)  confirmed  that  where  the
    Secretary of State had delayed in  taking  effective  steps  to  deport
    someone, and that period of respite was put to good use, that could  be
    a factor to be taken into account  in  terms  of  rehabilitation.   The
    appellant's previous appeal was allowed in 2010 and  before  the  Rules
    were introduced and he had three years' leave following  that  previous
    deportation order on the same index offence.   It  was  submitted  that
    paragraph 399C confirmed that the Secretary  of  State  could  serve  a
    second deportation order but the factual scenario had  not  changed  to
    his advantage.  In that case he had split from his partner  but  had  a
    new partner, all his children were adult and  there  is  now  a  social
    worker report confirming that the appellant had good relations with his
    children.  After the appellant had a stroke he chose  to  rely  on  his
    siblings and children rather than resort to professional help.   I  had
    heard evidence from Z D, his daughter who had long-term  mental  health
    issues and since her father had entered  her  life  he  had  helped  to
    stabilise her condition.   For  her  removal  would  be  unduly  harsh.
    Reference was made to AJ (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1012  and
    there could be no doubt that the public interest had been served by the
    appellant having to experience two deportation orders and  experiencing
    several court hearings.

Conclusions

23. First I accept that the appellant should be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness under the Presidential Guidelines on vulnerable  witness  owing
    to his health conditions. The medical  evidence  presented  showed  the
    appellant had a myocardial infarction (heart attack) in 2009  and  also
    an ischemic  attack  (stroke)  on  24th  September  2014.   His  expert
    independent social worker,  Azra  Jabbar  gave  'up  to  date'  written
    evidence, dated 28th October 2017,  on  the  appellant's  presentation,
    which I have no reason to doubt  as  it  was  supplemented  by  medical
    evidence, and which confirmed that

          "While communicating with Mr R it became apparent he  experiences
          ongoing difficulties with his  memory  and  verbalising  a  clear
          response.  I noted  Mr  R  to  start  speaking  and  then  repeat
          himself."

    I also note that Ms H explained that Mr R  still  experiences  problems
    processing information:

24. Secondly I also find that Ms Z D  should  be  considered  a  vulnerable
    witness owing to her severe mental health issues.  Much of the evidence
    however was not  contested.   It  was  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    received a prison sentence of two years in 2009 following a  conviction
    for drugs offences and that a deportation order was made in 2010  which
    the appellant successfully appealed.  I will return to this point later
    in my decision.

25. The starting point for my decision under Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702
    is the decision of Judge Lobo.  Judge Carroll set out these sections in
    his decision and I set  out  the  relevant  sections  of  his  decision
    verbatim:

         "18.     The evidence of the appellant and  his  witnesses  may  be
             summarised as follows:-

             (a) The appellant is  a  Moroccan  national...  and  has  been
                  living in the United Kingdom since 1974 when he  was  aged
                  11.

             (b) Prior to the  most  recent  offence,  the  appellant  last
                  offended in 1980s and had not re-offended  for  27  years.
                  He had never previously received a custodial sentence.

             (c) The appellant was in a longstanding relationship with S T,
                  a British national.  The couple have six children all born
                  in the United Kingdom and British nationals.

             (d) The appellant lives with his  parents,  who  are  elderly.
                  The  appellant  helps  them  on  a  day-to-day  basis,  by
                  practical support.

             (e) The appellant has siblings living in London, who also form
                  part of his family network.

             (f) The appellant is currently assessed as being of  low  risk
                  to the public and low risk of re-offending.  The appellant
                  is currently working with his brother in his business.

             (g) The appellant is no longer a substance misuser and  is  on
                  probation supervision, the terms of which he has  complied
                  with since release.

             (h) The appellant has an important role in the life of his six
                  children and continues to do so, not only  in  respect  of
                  those below the age of majority whom he calls  every  day,
                  but also in respect of those who are over 18.

             (i) The appellant is still close to  the  mother  of  the  six
                  children, S T.

         20.      On the evidence we find these facts:-

             (a) The appellant is Moroccan and came to the  United  Kingdom
                  at the age of 11 and has lived here for the last 36 years.

             (b) The appellant had a relationship  with  S  T  from  before
                  1987.  They began living together in 1987.  They have  six
                  children...

             (c) In the United  Kingdom  the  appellant  has  his  parents,
                  uncles and aunts, grandparents and siblings.   He  has  no
                  relations in Morocco.

             (d) The appellant has six criminal convictions in  the  period
                  from October 1980 until July 2009 when he was sentenced to
                  prison  for  the  supply  of  drugs.    The   first   five
                  convictions were between 1980 and 1987 when the  appellant
                  was 17 to 24 years of age.  He never received a  custodial
                  sentence until the sixth  offence  22  years  later.   The
                  appellant acknowledges his previous addiction to drugs and
                  alcohol which caused him and S T to separate and  led  him
                  into bad company, resulting in the drug offences  of  2009
                  and a two year prison sentence.

             (e) Notwithstanding his drug  and  alcohol  problems  and  his
                  separation from S T:-

                  (i)  The appellant has performed his  parental  duties  as
                      evidenced by the testimonies of his children and S T.

                  (ii) The appellant continues to be an important  influence
                      and factor in the lives of all of his  children  even
                      though most are now grown up.

                  (iii)      The role of the appellant in the lives  of  his
                      two youngest children is  much  greater.   He  spends
                      recreational time with them and offers them advice.

                  (iv) None of the appellant's children were born in Morocco
                      and those that have been there  have  only  travelled
                      there on holiday.

             (f) The appellant lives with his elderly parents  (his  mother
                  is 71, his father is 72), who suffer ill-health, and speak
                  little English.  The appellant assists them with visits to
                  the doctor and hospital, performs shopping duties for them
                  and generally looks after them and acts  as  a  translator
                  for them as they do not speak English.

             (g) The appellant has been employed in unskilled jobs for most
                  of his adult life.  He is now employed by his brother  who
                  has replaced the appellant as the manager of  one  of  his
                  two grocery shops.

             (h) The appellant has passed voluntary and mandatory tests  in
                  prison  to  establish  that  he  is  alcohol  free.    The
                  appellant is no longer a substance misuser as confirmed by
                  his probation officer, with whom he is on licence until 16
                  April 2011.  The appellant's brother and employer  confirm
                  that the appellant does not take drugs  or  alcohol.   The
                  appellant's brother sees him every day and would not  risk
                  his business by having a substance misuser in charge.

             21. As the appellant is an integrated alien  his  family  life
                  and private life are  intertwined  and  he  enjoys  mutual
                  relationships with his children, including those who  have
                  reached majority, his parents, his siblings and his former
                  partner, a British citizen.  To remove  the  appellant  to
                  Morocco would interrupt those  lives  in  a  manner  which
                  engages Article 8.  The interference would be  within  the
                  law as it would have the objective of immigration  control
                  and protecting  society.   The  question  is  whether  the
                  interference is proportionate or not.

             22. In assessing proportionality the  test  for  an  Appellate
                  Immigration Authority is to strike a fair balance  between
                  the rights of the  appellant  on  the  one  hand  and  the
                  interests of the community... on the other.

             23.  The  appellant  committed  a  serious  offence  and   was
                  sentenced  to  two  years'  imprisonment.   However,   the
                  sentencing  judge  remarked  that  the  offence  was   not
                  committed to gain subsequent financial advantage, but  was
                  related to the  appellant's  own  substance  misuse.   The
                  appellant is seeking to address his own  misuse  of  drugs
                  and  alcohol.   Despite  the  appellant  having  committed
                  previous offences, he is currently assessed as being at  a
                  low risk of  re-offending  and  was  not  recommended  for
                  deportation.  He holds indefinite  leave  to  remain,  has
                  been living in the United Kingdom since  the  age  of  11,
                  which is the entire formative period of his  life.   There
                  are six children to his relationship with his partner.  He
                  maintains a good relationship with his children,  who  are
                  all  British,  and  the  youngest  two  are  minors.   The
                  appellant  lives  with  his  elderly  parents,  and  their
                  evidence in this case indicates a level of  close  support
                  to them.  The appellant has no significant  or  meaningful
                  level of connection with Morocco.  The appellant  has  not
                  breached the terms of his licence and  wishes  to  address
                  the underlying cause of the original events.

             24. It is for these reasons, coupled with the  length  of  his
                  presence in the United Kingdom  and  other  circumstances,
                  that we find the offence was not so serious in itself,  as
                  to justify expulsion of the  appellant  and  we  therefore
                  allow the appeal."




26. I preserved the following paragraphs of Judge Carroll's decision, which
    had been set aside, with the proviso that it was open to the  appellant
    to provide further evidence on which findings would be made:

         "19.     In September 2015 the appellant formed a relationship with
             L H.  She has known him as a friend for more  than  30  years.
             They do not live together.

         20.      Since mid-2016 the appellant has been in touch with Z D, a
             British  citizen  born  on  6   October   1983   following   a
             relationship between the appellant and the mother of Z D.  The
             appellant and Ms D are now in touch on a regular  basis.   She
             suffers from bipolar and has found the relationship  with  the
             appellant to be very valuable and beneficial  to  her  health.
             There is no medical evidence to support  this  aspect  of  the
             appellant's appeal.

         21.      Contrary to the evidence that was before Immigration Judge
             Lobo, the appellant (and his family members in the UK) do have
             relations in  Morocco  with  whom  they  are  in  touch.   The
             appellant's parents who are resident  in  the  United  Kingdom
             also have a house in Morocco.  I attempted to clarify with the
             appellant the extent to which he has visited Morocco in recent
             years.  Much of the evidence given by him was characterised by
             evasiveness and there is incomplete passport  evidence  before
             me.  In his oral evidence  the  appellant  said  that  he  has
             visited Morocco approximately six times since he first came to
             the United Kingdom.  Three of these visits took place in  2013
             and a further 2 or 3 in 2014.  The appellant said also that he
             had visited Morocco approximately twice in 2012  and  that  he
             had first returned there, having arrived in the United Kingdom
             in 1974, in 1981.  The appellant also has a  bank  account  in
             Morocco (see page 58 contained in the respondent's bundle).

         22.      It was found by Immigration Judge  Lobo that the appellant
             assists his elderly parents with  visits  to  the  doctor  and
             hospital, performs shopping duty for them and generally  looks
             after them.  Whilst I am satisfied that the appellant lives in
             an annex next to his parents, the oral evidence he gave at the
             hearing of this appeal as to his role  in  the  lives  of  his
             parents differed very substantially from the evidence in 2010.
              The appellant said in this appeal that he did  not  take  his
             parents to hospital and he demonstrated only a very vague idea
             of their various health issues.  I heard  evidence  also  from
             the appellant's brother who lives in London and  he  confirmed
             that he, together with the appellant's sister who  also  lives
             nearby, plays an active role in  helping  to  look  after  the
             appellant's elderly parents.

         23.      It is claimed that the appellant also plays  an  important
             role in supporting S T who is a full-time carer  for  her  86-
             year old mother who suffers from dementia  and  that  he  also
             plays a significant role in the  lives  of  his  children  and
             grandchildren.  The appellant, however, claims  also  that  he
             has a job offer and that, if  successful  in  his  appeal,  he
             plans to work as an assistant chef from 8 until 5 six  days  a
             week.  If so, he would clearly be unable to provide the  level
             of support he claims to have provided to  family  members  and
             his ex-partner.

         24.      I begin by considering the appellant's appeal by reference
             to paragraph 399A of HC 395.  It is not in dispute that he has
             been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of  his
             life.  Immigration Judge Lobo found the appellant  to  be  'an
             integrated alien' and I am satisfied, in the light of  all  of
             the evidence, that the appellant is  socially  and  culturally
             integrated into the United Kingdom.  The  evidence  does  not,
             however, demonstrate that  there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to the appellant's integration into Morocco.   As  I
             have noted above, he has visited that  country  frequently  in
             recent years, his family has a property there and he also  has
             family members there.   I  asked  the  appellant,  by  way  of
             clarification, the purpose of recent visits to Morocco and  he
             said that he was trying to get used to the country to  see  if
             he could live there."



27. Under paragraph 399A(a)  it  is  clear  that  the  appellant  has  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  most  of  his  life.   It  was
    accepted by Mr Tufan and I  agree  that  under  paragraph  399A(b)  the
    appellant is socially and culturally integrated into the UK.   That  is
    evidenced by the extent of his family  connections,  and  that  he  has
    worked here and been educated here.  The real question is whether there
    would be very significant obstacles to his integration into the country
    to which it is proposed he is deported.

28. I make these departures from the preserved findings  of  Judge  Carroll
    bearing in mind the evidence before me. Not least I had the benefit  of
    the independent social worker report dated 28th October 2017 from  Azra
    Jabbar, who was a qualified social worker with a range of  professional
    experience and qualifications.  I accept his evidence  because  of  his
    expertise  and  because  he  made  a  careful,  detailed  and  thorough
    assessment of the personal circumstances and family background  of  the
    appellant and commented on the possible consequences of removal.

29. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Carroll's  findings  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant had a relationship with Z  D  which  was  found  to  be  very
    valuable.  Although Judge Carroll stated there was no medical evidence,
    with regard her mental health  condition  that  was  rectified  by  the
    report of Dr Sharpe from the [             Surgery], who, in a  written
    report dated 26th September 2017, confirmed that  Z  D  had  a  complex
    history of mental health problems.   I accept the evidence of Z  D  who
    attended court and gave consistent oral evidence  in  this  regard  and
    with regard her father. Z D's doctor from the [                Surgery]
    confirmed that 'her father being deported is likely  to  be  a  trigger
    that could lead to her mental health worsening'.

30. Judge Carroll found the appellant's evidence  to  be  characterised  by
    evasiveness [21].  As can  be  seen  from  the  reports  the  appellant
    suffers with memory loss and his oral evidence should be considered  in
    that light.  With regards paragraph 24 of the previous decision,  I  do
    not accept that the appellant has visited the country  'frequently'  in
    recent years.   The passport evidence was recorded as incomplete and it
    was suggested that the appellant had returned a total of only six times
    since he first came to the United Kingdom aged 11 years  old.   He  was
    now nearly 55 years old.  The last of his said  visits  took  place  in
    February 2014.  I note that  the  appellant  experienced  a  stroke  in
    September of that year and after the last visit. Further, visiting  six
    times since coming to the UK at a very young age and prior to  his  ill
    health, is very different from living in Morocco. That he  has  a  bank
    account in Morocco does not  indicate  to  me  that  he  will  have  no
    difficulties in integrating there.

31.  At paragraph  22  Judge  Carroll  found  that  his  evidence  differed
    substantially from that found by Judge Lobo in terms of the  assistance
    he gave to his parents because of their health issues.  What  is  clear
    is from the medical evidence presented to me at this appeal is that the
    appellant himself has suffered myocardial infarction in 2009  and  also
    an ischemic attack on 24th September 2014.  His  expert  social  worker
    gave written evidence, which  I have no  reason  to  doubt  as  it  was
    supplemented by medical evidence which confirmed that the appellant had
    memory difficulties and that

         "Memory loss is  something  that  everyone  experiences  at  times,
         increasing with age, or following a stroke.  It is  estimated  that
         approximately one-third of cerebrovascular accident survivors  will
         develop memory problems."

32. It is not surprising, if the appellant is struggling with memory  loss,
    that his evidence might have appeared evasive and it was noted that his
    brother was now instrumental in the parents' care.

33. Nor does this undermine the evidence given that the  appellant  affords
    support to his daughter Z D particularly as it  consists  of  emotional
    support.

34. Bossade sets out in the head note


           '...By requiring focus on integration  both  in  relation  to  a
           person's circumstances in the UK as well as in  the  country  of
           return, the new Rules achieve a much more holistic assessment of
           an appellant's  circumstances.  Thereby  they  bring  themselves
           closer to Strasbourg jurisprudence on  Article  8  in  expulsion
           cases which has always seen consideration of both dimensions  as
           requiring  a  wide-ranging  assessment:  see  e.g.  Jeunesse   v
           Netherlands (GC) App.No. 12738/10, 31 October  2014,  paragraphs
           106-109'.

35. The appellant has an extensive family life in the  United  Kingdom  and
    this is evidenced by the expert social worker report which I accept  in
    full. The expert not only confirmed having interviewed two of  the  six
    children  but  also  obtained  written  information   from   them   and
    effectively confirmed the very close relationship that the  appellant's
    children had for him and their care and concern for him.  I  find  that
    the appellant would not be able to replicate his relationships with his
    family when in Morocco and  which  is  a  significant  factor  for  his
    health.

36. As set out at paragraph 4.04  of  the  expert  report  Mr  R  would  be
    returning to an environment where he would have to start  from  scratch
    and rebuild his support networks.   The home in Morocco was in  fact  a
    holiday home used by various members of the family and it would not  be
    available on a permanent basis. I note that he can  speak  some  Arabic
    but a key factor will be whether he can support himself financially and
    access support in Morocco.  Employment  opportunities  in  Morocco  are
    said to be based on contacts already established and thus limited given
    his long absence from Morocco; he was likely to be very  disadvantaged.
    His access to employment opportunities would therefore be  considerably
    hindered although in reality, owing to his poor  health,  there  was  a
    high possibility of him being unable to find suitable employment.  That
    he has worked in this country in apparently unskilled work  would  not,
    at his age assist him in finding, unskilled work in Morocco.

37. Not having the financial means to support himself was  also  likely  to
    impact on his ability to  engage  in  healthcare  in  Morocco  as  "all
    healthcare in Morocco must be paid  for".   The  expert  social  worker
    found that:

         "Given Mr R's  age and health complaints it  is  more  than  likely
         that he will continue to require  regular  medical  monitoring  and
         support, hence it is of some concern that Mr R would  be  relocated
         to a country where none of his support networks reside."

38. I am required to look at the focus on integration both in relation to a
    person's circumstances in the UK as well as in the  country  of  return
    and a holistic assessment of an appellant's circumstances  in  relation
    to 399A.  I also note that the  partner,  although  she  has  expressed
    support for the appellant and that she would be prepared to support the
    relocation to Morocco, has her own family here  with  children  one  of
    whom is still in college.

39. It is quite clear from the expert social worker that  the  family  life
    enjoyed by Mr R  with  his  children,  albeit  that  they  are  adults,
    provides a very effective protective factor and bearing in mind his ill-
    health and his length of time in the UK.  I do indeed accept that there
    would be very significant obstacles to his return  both  under  Section
    399A and Section 117C(4)(c), not least his memory loss would hinder his
    employment prospects.

40. This is not a case where somebody as in the case of Bossade  is  young,
    able-bodied and of an adaptable age.  There  was  evidence  of  both  a
    mental and physical disability and bearing in mind the relatively  weak
    family connections that he might experience in Morocco I  am  satisfied
    that although his long residence would not be enough simply  by  itself
    to prevent his removal, it is an important  element  and  he  would  be
    forced to leave his protective  factors  behind  in  the  form  of  his
    family. This would persuade me that he has indeed reached the  exacting
    standard required under paragraph 399A and Section 117C.

41. I have taken into account the authority of Kamara which identified   an
    elevated threshold confirmed at paragraph 14 that

           'In my view, the concept of a foreign  criminal's  "integration"
           into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported  as
           set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph  399A,  is  a  broad
           one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or  to
           sustain life while living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
           appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject  to  some
           gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or  tribunal
           simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has  chosen
           to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a  broad  evaluative
           judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be  enough
           of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society
           in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity   to
           participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to  be
           accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in
           that society and to build up within a reasonable time a  variety
           of human relationships to give  substance  to  the  individual's
           private or family life'.

42. The appellant may speak some Arabic and have working  skills  but  save
    for some visits his life has been centred in the  United  Kingdom  over
    many many years.  Overall there would be very significant obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration in Morocco.

43. Even if the claimant could not benefit from paragraph 399A I would need
    to consider whether there are any very  compelling  circumstances.   As
    set out in Hesham Ali at paragraph 50:

         "In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out its  task  on  the
         basis of the facts as it finds them to be on  the  evidence  before
         it, and the law as established by statute and case law. Ultimately,
         it has to  decide  whether  deportation  is  proportionate  in  the
         particular case before it, balancing the  strength  of  the  public
         interest in the deportation of the offender against the  impact  on
         private and family life. In doing so, it  should  give  appropriate
         weight to Parliament's and the Secretary of State's assessments  of
         the strength of the general public interest in the  deportation  of
         foreign offenders, as explained in paras 14, 37-38  and  46  above,
         and also consider all factors relevant  to  the  specific  case  in
         question. The critical issue for the  tribunal  will  generally  be
         whether, giving due weight to the strength of the  public  interest
         in the deportation of the offender  in  the  case  before  it,  the
         article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it. In  general,
         only a claim which is very strong indeed - very compelling,  as  it
         was put in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed."

44. Hesham Ali also rejected as a mistaken interpretation  that  the  Rules
    and the Rules alone govern appellant decision-making  when  considering
    whether they constitute a complete code.  The policies adopted  by  the
    Secretary of State and  the  Rules  are  nevertheless  a  relevant  and
    important consideration  for  Tribunals  determining  appeals  both  on
    Convention grounds and because  they  reflect  the  assessment  of  the
    general public interest.    It  remains,  however,  for  the  Tribunals
    giving due weight to the strength of public interest in deportation and
    the factors brought into account  on  the  other  side  as  to  whether
    deportation would be disproportionate.

45. In my  analysis  I  must  also  have  regard  to  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Akinyemi  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 236 discussed the approach taken to Section 117C (in  relation
    to foreign criminals) which reads:
           "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
           interest.
           (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
           the criminal.
           (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
           Exception 2 applies.
           (4) Exception 1 applies where-
           (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
           of C's life,
           (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
           Kingdom, and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
           (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
           relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
           subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
           unduly harsh.
           (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to
           a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
           interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2.
           (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
           into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
           to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason
           for the decision was the offence or offences for which the
           criminal has been convicted."




46. The appellant does not need to satisfy  the  exceptions  under  Section
    117C in order that a finding of compelling circumstances be made.  This
    approach was considered to be  too  literal  in  Akinyemi  and  it  was
    underlined moreover that the Tribunal must only 'have regard' to giving
    weight to these factors in an Article 8 consideration.

47. When considering the public interest it is clear that the  majority  of
    the offences committed by this appellant - five convictions secured  by
    him were at a very young age - and as the sentencing judge remarked  in
    2009 he had not committed an offence for 26  years  and  there  was  no
    recommendation for deportation made.  His drug offences were related to
    his addiction which has since been resolved.  This is not to  undermine
    the seriousness of the offence.  As advanced by Ms Solanki, Hesham  Ali
    specifically states that the record of offending should be  taken  into
    account.  In 2010, the appellant as being low risk to  the  public  and
    low risk of reoffending.  He was also considered  no  longer  to  be  a
    substance misuser and had complied with  the  terms  of  his  probation
    supervision.  It is clear that in the  last  eight  years,  since  that
    conviction, the appellant has not reoffended.

48. AJ (Zimbabwe), however, emphasises the force of the public interest  in
    deportation and the  relationship  with  children  is  not  considered,
    without more to amount to a compelling reason, let alone a relationship
    with an adult child albeit she has mental  health  problems.  Emotional
    damage was considered to be inevitable when a parent  is  deported  and
    that would not justify a conclusion that interference  with  Article  8
    rights was disproportionate.

49. I recognise that parliament in the United Kingdom has chosen to  put  a
    'heavy premium on the removal of foreign criminals' and that it is  for
    each state to determine what weight to give to the public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals.  Further I recognise it is  a  mistake  to
    view the public interest 'principally in terms of the potential  damage
    caused by the  particular  individual  re-offending,  whereas  that  is
    merely an element - and by no means even the most important  element  -
    of the relevant public interest as perceived in the UK' AJ (Zimbabwe).

50. I take  into  account  the  factors  cited  in  relation  to  the  very
    significant obstacles which I do find to be  relevant,  not  least  his
    family connections and the length of time that he had spent in  the  UK
    and his health but there are two further and particular issues which  I
    consider to be of specific relevance in my consideration of this appeal
    as to whether there are very compelling circumstances.

51. The first is that I was invited to balance the length of time that  the
    appellant had spent in the UK against the length  of  his  imprisonment
    and to note that the four years'  demarcating  sentence  had  not  been
    reached.  To that end I find that  paragraph  38  of  LW  (Jamaica)  is
    relevant.  This confirms that the length of  residence  is  a  relevant
    factor in concluding whether  there  are  compelling  reasons  for  not
    deporting someone although not necessarily determinative.  I note  that
    the appellant was not sentenced to four years in prison but  I  proceed
    under this limb of the Rules as if he had not fulfilled  the  exception
    under paragraph 399C and thus whether the four years is reached or  not
    is not necessarily  relevant.  The  test  of  compelling  circumstances
    remains  the  same.    However  the  circumstances  overall   must   be
    considered including the  proportion  of  sentence  compared  with  the
    length of residence.  The appellant was sentenced to 2 years in  prison
    as compared with his 40 years' lawful residence.    The  proportion  of
    this sentence in relation to the length of time he has been resident in
    the United Kingdom and integrated here is a factor to be considered  in
    relation to compelling circumstances.

52. Even if the factors  under  399A  were  not  sufficient  to  reach  the
    exception under that Rule (which in this case I do  not  accept)  those
    factors would still need to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  overall
    assessment.  The Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60,
    while emphasising the importance of the Immigration Rules has  departed
    from the view that the Immigration Rules are a  'complete  code'.   All
    relevant factors should be taken into account  including  giving  great
    weight to the public interest in deportation.

53. The second point is this.  I accept the Secretary of State was entitled
    to issue a further deportation order and indeed Paragraph 399C sets out
    the following:

         "Where a foreign criminal who has previously been granted a  period
         of limited leave under this part applies for further limited  leave
         or indefinite leave to remain his deportation remains conducive  to
         the public good and in  the  public  interest  notwithstanding  the
         previous grant of leave."

    That provision was introduced into the Immigration Rules on  28th  July
    2014.

54. The policy guidance on criminality: Article 8 ECHR cases  published  on
    22nd February 2017 also states that:

         "Where a foreign criminal has previously been granted limited leave
         on the basis of Article 8 they will only be granted  further  leave
         if  they  qualify  under  the  Article  8  provisions  set  out  in
         paragraphs 398 to 399A, even if their first  period  of  leave  was
         granted before those provisions  came  into  force  or  before  the
         previous private and family life Rules were introduced  on  9  July
         2012."
    I accept that as confirmed in DB (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 440 in order
    to avoid deportation a foreign criminal must  advance  "a  very  strong
    case indeed" and that the Tribunal "have emphasised the need not merely
    the need to deter" but also "the need to express the ...  revulsion  at
    the serious crime".  The fact is however that  the  appellant  appealed
    his deportation order in 2010 and following an extensive examination of
    his circumstances that deportation order was found to be in  breach  of
    his human rights.  Since that appeal  was  allowed  the  appellant  has
    committed no further offending.  With the public  interest  nonetheless
    in mind, Nguyen V SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 258 confirms that a  significant
    passage of time - five years or more since the commission of an offence
    can diminish the public interest in  deportation.   Clearly  this  will
    depend of the facts but is relevant in this case.  I  find  his  health
    has deteriorated and his links  to  Morocco  minimal,  which  I  accept
    bearing in mind the length of time spent there, such that I have  found
    there are  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  Morocco.
    Notwithstanding the previous decision by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    in 2010 the Secretary of State saw fit to use the  same  index  offence
    when the appellant applied for further leave to remain to generate  and
    sign a further deportation order.

55. I accept that the rules have changed and  that  they  are  a  'starting
    point' and thus the goal posts have changed but, as set out  in  Hesham
    Ali,  it remains for a judge on the facts as they are found, giving due
    weight to the strength of public interest in deportation,  to  conclude
    whether that deportation would be disproportionate.  I give  weight  to
    paragraph 399C, and the  current  Rules  but  the  fact  is  that  this
    appellant has had his case  explored  extensively  by  the  Immigration
    Tribunal, and now on three occasions and his appeal  has  been  allowed
    each time. I acknowledge that the decision of  Judge  Carroll  was  set
    aside and the preserved findings from his decision have been  modified.
    The public interest as Ms Solanki submitted has  been  sharply  brought
    home to the appellant and little is served in terms of public resources
    by further expression of  revulsion  through  a  signing  of  a  second
    deportation order on exactly the same index offence.

56. In the intervening period since 2010 and the  first  Tribunal  decision
    allowing the appellant's appeal his health has deteriorated and he  has
    forged even closer bonds with his adult children (and indeed there were
    adult children when the appeal was allowed in 2010).  I find that there
    would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  in
    Morocco.  He has never lived there as an adult and now would find  very
    significant difficulties in financially supporting himself. As  such  I
    consider that all these  are  relevant  factors  when  considering  the
    strength of his case as against the public  interest.   As  the  social
    worker found the impact on the appellant in terms of  his  future  life
    and health would be severe and it would be questionable what support he
    would be able to access in Morocco. The appellant  is  however  in  the
    'high risk category' for a further cerebrovascular  accident  or  heart
    attack.  There has been a significant time since his last offence. Even
    if I am incorrect about the very  significant  obstacles,  overall  the
    factors cumulatively and as  cited  above  constitute  very  compelling
    circumstances, such that the appellant's appeal should be allowed.



Notice of Decision

Mr R's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 6th December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because of the complexities involved in the case.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 6th December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



