
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13510/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2018                         |On 22nd March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                  KANIS [K]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hossain, instructed by Hossain Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a national of  Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  1978.   The
    appellant's leave to remain under her Tier 4 visa  had  been  curtailed
    and expired  on  12th  May  2015.   On  that  same  date  she  made  an
    application on the basis of her family life with her partner (a British
    citizen) and subsequently raised the issue of her new born  child  with
    whom she and her partner "share parental responsibility". The Secretary
    of State refused the application and based her decision on paragraph S-
    LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM.   She also considered the matter under  Article
    8. The Secretary of State considered whether there were any significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Bangladesh where she  had
    lived for 29 years prior to her residency in the UK and where  she  was
    educated and worked before coming to the  UK  as  a  student.   It  was
    concluded she had not lost all social and cultural  ties  to  her  home
    nation.  From her passport endorsements she had travelled to Bangladesh
    in 2010 which underlined that she had remaining ties with her  country.



 2. The requirements of paragraph  R-LTRP.1.1(d)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules (based on being a partner) are that:

      i) the applicant must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  Section  S-LTR:
         Suitability leave to remain; and

     ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2-1.12.
         and E-LTRP.2.1-2.2; and

    iii) paragraph EX.1 applies.

 3. The Secretary of State  confirmed  that  the  appellant's  TOIEC  test,
    submitted as part of her previous Tier 4 (General) Student  application
    on 22nd May 2012 was withdrawn by ETS and declared  questionable.   The
    appellant was required to  attend  a  further  interview  and  at  that
    interview on 10th February 2016 the Secretary of  State  concluded  she
    had obtained her original ETS certificate by deception.  The  appellant
    admitted at question 1 to having taken the ETS TOEIC  English  language
    test but was unable to confirm where and when she had taken the test or
    how long it had lasted.  Her scores from the test taken on  18th  April
    2012 at Sevenoaks College had been cancelled by ETS on the basis of the
    information provided by ETS.

 4. The Secretary of State concluded that the appellant's presence  in  the
    UK was not conducive to the public good because her  conduct,  that  is
    the deception, made it undesirable to allow her to remain in the UK and
    therefore her application was refused under suitability S-LTR.1.6.

 5. The appellant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    18th May 2016 to refuse her application for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds and following a hearing on  13th
    October 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore considered the  basis  for
    the decision  and  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    finding that the ETS test certificate was  fraudulently  obtained.  The
    appellant appealed that decision.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. Ground (i)

    It was advanced that the judge referred to the decision of Majumder and
    Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 but did  not  explain  how  he  applied  the
    principles of that case.  The appellant could  not  precisely  remember
    the name of the place where the English language test was taken but she
    went through a series of academic courses and it was not  possible  for
    her to remember the details of each test centre.   The  judge  did  not
    place proper weight on the  evidence  that  the  appellant  passed  the
    English language courses under City & Guilds with  first  class  scores
    and in IELTS she scored band 6.   She  had  completed  several  courses
    including  the  postgraduate  diploma.   These  demonstrated  her  pre-
    existing competence in English language.   Moreover,  the  Home  Office
    concerns were mainly about the spoken part  of  the  TOEIC  test.   The
    appellant demonstrated her competence in English and her oral  evidence
    given during the hearing was fluent.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    failed to consider and make a decision on the balance of probabilities.

    Ground (ii)

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the best interests  of
    the child was not adequate bearing in  mind  the  child  is  a  British
    citizen by birth.

    Ground (iii)

    The judge failed to carry out a freestanding assessment in relation  to
    Article 8.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing Mr Hossain submitted  that  the  partner  had  been  her
    partner for two years as at the date of hearing and the  appellant  had
    taken the IELTS test and passed.  The judge had not had the benefit  of
    the medical evidence such that she had lost  things  from  her  memory.
    There was sufficient evidence for the judge to allow the  appeal.   The
    judge had not followed the  correct  principles  of  Majumder  and  the
    burden of proof.  Mr Hossain accepted that medical evidence had come by
    way of surprise to him in the  hearing  that  the  appellant  had  been
    subject to mental health  issues.   She  was  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom and did not have a criminal  record.   I  was  referred  to  SF
    (Albania) (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT  00120,  which
    states specifically at paragraph 7:

         "Mr Wilding,  however,  has  with  the  fairness  which  Presenting
         Officers always  attempt  to  apply,  drawn  our  attention  to  an
         important guidance document.  It  is  the  Immigration  Directorate
         Instruction -  Family  Migration  -  Appendix  FM,  Section  1.0(B)
         "Family Life as a Partner or  Parent  and  Private  Life,  10  year
         Routes". It is the edition of August  2015  and  therefore  not  in
         force at the date of the decision under appeal, but it was in force
         at the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing and decision, and is
         still in force. It contains important guidance about the  following
         topic at 11.2.3: Would it  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
         Citizen Child to leave the UK? We will set out the relevant  parts,
         they are as follows:

             'Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must
             not take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer
             of a British Citizen child where the effect of  that  decision
             would be  to  force  that  British  child  to  leave  the  EU,
             regardless of  the  age  of  that  child.  This  reflects  the
             European Court of Justice Judgment in Zambrano.

             ...

             Where a decision to refuse the  application  would  require  a
             parent or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,
             the case must always be assessed on the basis that it would be
             unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU
             with that parent or primary carer.

             In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to
             the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain  in  the
             UK  with  the  child,  provided  that  there  is  satisfactory
             evidence of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

             It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where
             the conduct of the parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
             considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the
             child could otherwise stay with another parent or  alternative
             primary carer in the UK or in the EU.

             The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

                . criminality  falling  below  the  thresholds  set  out  in
                  paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;

                . a very poor immigration history, such as where the  person
                  has repeatedly and deliberately breached  the  Immigration
                  Rules.

             In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision
             maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation.
             If the decision maker is minded to  refuse,  in  circumstances
             where separation would be the  result,  this  decision  should
             normally be discussed with  a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
             appropriate, advice may be  sought  from  the  Office  of  the
             Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare of the
             child, in order to inform the decision.'

         We were not  specifically  referred  to  any  other  part  of  this
         document and we do not need to set any more out".

    It was unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.   The  child's
    father was a British citizen, the child's mother  had  no  freedom  and
    this would restrict the child's welfare.

 8. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had made no error in the  application
    of the principles in relation to Majumder and  I  was  referred  to  MA
    (ETS) at paragraph 57 which confirmed that there  were  a  plethora  of
    reasons why someone may employ a proxy.  The case of Majumder confirmed
    that generic evidence was sufficient and I was  referred  to  paragraph
    12.

 9. In relation to the British national child the father was of  Bangladesh
    origins and the mother was of Bangladesh nationality.  At  paragraph  8
    it was clearly the case that there was a possibility of an  alternative
    primary carer and in that case it was not one where the conduct of  the
    mother was such as to give rise  to  considerations  of  weight  as  to
    justify separation.  The deception at this level was a relevant factor.

Conclusions

Ground (i)

10. The judge was clear as to the principles enunciated in Majumder and set
    out at paragraph 21 that the Court of Appeal had held that the  generic
    evidence relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State  was  sufficient  to
    discharge the initial burden of proof; the judge noted that  the  legal
    burden of proof rested with the respondent  to  show  dishonesty.   The
    judge also set out that each case would be fact-sensitive but the judge
    stated "Thus, clearly the initial evidential burden with regard to  the
    generic evidence lay with the Secretary of State".

11. The judge had before him confirmation of an ETS invalid  test  analysis
    and also the interview record sheet for the interview on 10th  February
    2016 which found the appellant not credible.  The  judge  analysed  the
    evidence before him in relation to the appellant's explanation  and  as
    follows at paragraphs 20 and 23 :

         "20.      The  appellant  has  claimed  in  evidence  that  she  is
             competent  in  the  English  Language  and  speaks  it  in   a
             reasonable manner  and  competently.   She  makes  this  claim
             bearing in mind her 1994 academic certificate and  achievement
             in education in Bangladesh, and also the  fact  that  she  has
             undertaken and completed serious academic courses  in  the  UK
             which would have  been  conducted  in  the  English  language.
             However, notwithstanding that I accept  that  appellant  might
             have been nervous at this hearing, her apparent  understanding
             was poor in relation to numerous questions that  were  put  to
             her, not only by her own legal representative, but  also  when
             questioned by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and  by
             myself.  My  record  of  proceedings  clearly  shows  that  in
             respect of many questions the appellant failed  to  understand
             and initially replied 'sorry'.  On  many  occasions  questions
             had to be put to her  on  two  or  three  occasions  sometimes
             eliciting no response  at  all.   As  a  matter  of  fact  the
             appellant towards the end of her evidence then  accepted  that
             she knew the name of the test centre  because  it  was  to  be
             found in the Respondent's refusal letter".

         "23.     The appellant was interviewed on 10th February 2016 and at
             that time could not remember where the test was  taken,  other
             than it was outside London, and 'maybe the test was  taken  in
             2012', but she could not remember the exact date.  To be  fair
             to the appellant she was able to state that  the  test  had  4
             parts, including listening, reading, writing and speaking  and
             maintained that the elements of the test were spread over  two
             days.  She claimed to have chosen the  English  Language  test
             because 'it was popular' and because 'everybody  participated'
             in that test.  However, at this hearing the  appellant  denied
             stating that, and after a question was put to her and repeated
             due to a lack of understanding, the appellant stated that  she
             could not remember saying that it was popular, but the  reason
             she chose the college was because it was closest to her  home.
             I do not accept that the interviewer  would  have  incorrectly
             recorded the appellant's response as  to  why  she  chose  the
             college.  I would also have expected the appellant to have had
             some recall as to where she took the  test  bearing  in  mind,
             that according to her, the choice of college was based on  the
             fact that it was nearest to her home.

             The appellant now claimed at this hearing  that  she  did  not
             know whether she was fit and well to be interviewed  and  that
             she was suffering from depression at that time.  However,  the
             appellant accepted at her interview that she was fit and  well
             enough to be interviewed and there  is  no  reliable  evidence
             demonstrating that due to  depression  or  any  other  medical
             condition she was not well enough to be interviewed.   In  all
             the circumstances I do not accept that this appellant attended
             the test centre on 18th April 2012 in order  to  undertake  an
             English  language  test.   In  those   circumstances   it   is
             inevitable that the certificate relied upon by this  appellant
             was obtained fraudulently, and that the  appellant  must  have
             exercised deception in order to  obtain  such  a  certificate.
             Even at this hearing  the  appellant's  understanding  of  the
             English language was poor despite having apparently taken  the
             English Language test more than 5 years ago and  having  lived
             in the UK since that time, and in most recent years apparently
             living together  in  a  household  with  her  British  Citizen
             partner.  The appellant has therefore demonstrated a disregard
             for the public interest and relevant immigration  requirements
             whereby applicants are required to demonstrate a certain level
             of English language ability".

12. Shezhad v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 615 confirmed that it was  possible  for
    the Secretary of State to discharge the initial evidential burden  with
    her generic evidence and the lookup tool which was indeed  included  in
    this appeal.  Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 does not  deviate  from
    this approach and indeed accepts that such appeals are fact  sensitive.
    As Lord Justice Underhill reasoned at  paragraph [33] of Ahsan

         'However, I am not prepared to accept  -  and  I  do  not  in  fact
         understand Ms Giovannetti to have been contending -  that  even  in
         such specially strong cases the observations in the  earlier  case-
         law to  the  effect  that  a  decision  whether  the  applicant  or
         appellant has cheated is fact-specific are no longer applicable  or
         that there is no prospect of  their  oral  evidence  affecting  the
         outcome'.


13. Simply the judge found, having considered and  carefully  analysed  the
    evidence as can be seen at paragraph  20,  including  the  courses  the
    appellant had undertaken and those conducted  in  English  language  to
    which appropriate weight was given, that the appellant did  not  appear
    to understand English and  further  that  on  two  or  three  occasions
    questions elicited no response from the appellant.    The  judge  found
    the appellant knew the name of the test centre because  it  was  to  be
    found in the respondent's refusal letter.  As  can  be  seen  from  the
    judge's analysis at paragraph 23 the appellant appeared to have changed
    her evidence.  The conclusions were open to the judge.

14. There was no material error of law in the judge's treatment of the said
    examination certificates and  courses  undertaken.   MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC
    testing) [2016] UKUT 00450(IAC) confirmed at paragraph  57  that  there
    was indeed a variety of reasons why people proficient in  English  (and
    this appellant was clearly found not to be so proficient even  after  a
    number of years in the UK) might engage in fraud not least  a  lack  of
    confidence fear of failure, lack of time and contempt for  the  system.
    Indeed the examinations may have carried more weight had the  appellant
    been less underwhelming in her English at the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

15. The judge identified that although the appellant raised the  factor  of
    being unwell at the hearing before him there was no evidence to support
    that assertion and the appellant had confirmed that  she  was  fit  and
    well at the date of the Home Office interview. Although  the  appellant
    claimed that she  was  suffering  from  depression,  and  although  the
    decision letter was dated 18th May 2016 and  a  witness  statement  was
    submitted dated 4th October 2017, at no point in that statement did the
    appellant make any mention of any  mental  health  difficulties.   Even
    before me, no medical evidence  was  submitted  despite  the  appellant
    stating that she had received medical attention in  2016.   Mr  Hossain
    stated that the submissions were not made before  him  until  the  last
    moment.

16. As the judge stated, and this was open to the judge, he did not  accept
    that the appellant attended the English language centre to conduct  the
    test on 18th April 2012 and it was thus inevitable that the certificate
    relied on by the appellant was obtained fraudulently.

17. There is no indication in the analysis by the judge that he has deduced
    the wrong principles from the relevant case law  or  has  applied  them
    incorrectly.  The judge made a careful and detailed  analysis.   Simply
    the Secretary of State having discharged the initial evidential  burden
    the appellant failed to discharge that same burden when  it  passed  to
    her.

Ground (ii)

18. Nor is there force in the contention that the judge failed to have  the
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  "best
    interest" considerations.  It is quite clear that  he  found  that  the
    child's best interests were to remain with the mother but the judge was
    also clear that the birth father was a British national.

Ground (iii)

    I am not persuaded that the judge failed to consider Article 8  outside
    the Rules.  The judge applied the correct test in line with  Agyarko  &
    Ors v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 and took into account the  relevant  factors.
    On the evidence the judge  was  unarguably  entitled  to  conclude  the
    removal would not result unjustifiably harsh  consequences.  The  judge
    applied as he was obliged  to  do,  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

19. The judge had referred to the appellant's deceitful conduct  and  noted
    at paragraph 28 that the appellant in exercising deception with  regard
    to her English language certificate clearly intended to  frustrate  the
    Immigration Rules.  FZ (China) v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 550
    confirms that the critical question  is  whether  there  is  an  entire
    dependency of the relevant  child  on  the  person  who  is  refused  a
    residence permit or who is being deported.  As set out in the Secretary
    of State's reasons for refusal there was shared parenting  between  the
    appellant and the appellant's partner of the  child  and  there  is  no
    doubt that the child  could  remain  in  the  UK  with  the  father  if
    required.  The judge was aware that the child was a  qualifying  child.
    The fact is that the appellant, as the  judge  found,  had  engaged  in
    deceitful conduct and as such the Secretary of State  was  entitled  to
    refuse her application under S-LTR.1.6.  That is the starting point  in
    the  assessment  under  Article  8.   The  judge  considered  the  best
    interests of the child.  Clearly it is a choice as to the parents as to
    whether they wish to remain together and remove together or whether the
    child is left in the UK with the father.  As Mr Tufan pointed out  both
    parents are of Bangladesh origin.  Essentially, they found that it  was
    reasonable for the child to leave but the  child  was  not  obliged  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  The  Secretary  of  State  in  VM  (Jamaica)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 255 confirmed that a British child's location in the UK
    was not to be treated as a fixed point and that the Article 8  analysis
    had to be moulded in that light.  The presence of children  in  the  UK
    does not as a result of the operation of EU law have to be treated as a
    fixed point for the purposes  of  the  proportionality  analysis  under
    Article 8 and the possibility that the  appellant  and  children  would
    remove with the partner would not necessarily violate  the  fundamental
    precepts of EU law.  Indeed, paragraph 64 stated:

         "It follows that the presence of the children in the UK  does  not,
         as a result of the operation of EU law, have to  be  treated  as  a
         fixed point for the purposes of the proportionality analysis  under
         Article 8.  It was legitimate for the FTT in the 2015 FTT  decision
         to consider for the  purposes  of  its  Article  8  proportionality
         analysis whether the family unit could  be  expected  to  take  the
         option, which EU law allows the Secretary of State to present to KB
         and the children, of relocating to Jamaica with VM".

20. This was exactly what the judge undertook in this case.  Albeit that VM
    (Jamaica) was a deportation case,  it  has  been  identified  that  the
    appellant had engaged in conduct which was not conducive to the  public
    good.  As the judge said at paragraph 26:

         "It is the  father's  choice  not  to  accompany  his  partner  and
         therefore the child would live in Bangladesh  with  the  mother  in
         that family unit.  I also have  not  accepted  that  there  are  no
         family members upon which the appellant could rely for support  and
         assistance.  The appellant gave evidence that there is still a home
         in Bangladesh which he owned upon  the  death  of  her  husband  in
         2010". ... "In all the above circumstances I am satisfied  that  it
         would be reasonable to expect the child to live in the UK with  the
         appellant who is her mother".

21.  Underlying  this  decision  is  the  maintenance  of   the   effective
    immigration. The judge found the life of the family could reasonably be
    expected  to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking  full  account   of   all
    considerations and that the decision did not prejudice the family  life
    of the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach
    of the fundamental right protected by article 8,  Huang v  SSHD  [2007]
    UKHL 11

22. As such, the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction is made.

Notice

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain a material  error
of law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 19th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

