
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13417/2018
                                                               HU/13418/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2019                     |On 15th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                        KHANDAKER [B] - 1st Appellant
                             SH - 2nd Appellant
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Swain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of Bangladesh. The first Appellant who
    I shall refer to as the Appellant is the mother of the  2nd  Appellant,
    SH. The Appellant was born on 2 January 1980. SH was born on 7  October
    2002 and is now 16 years of age. They  appeal  against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Geraint Jones  QC  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 7 January 2019 in which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeals
    against decisions of the Respondent dated 7 June 2018. Those  decisions
    were to refuse the Appellant's application for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of their family and private life in the  United  Kingdom  because
    she could  not  meet,  inter  alia,  the  suitability  requirements  of
    Appendix FM. She had employed a proxy test taker on 6  March  2013  and
    she and her children could relocate to Bangladesh.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 8 September 2009 with valid
    leave as a Tier 4 (General) student valid until 28 February 2011. On 21
    February 2011 the Appellant applied for a further tier 4  student  visa
    which was granted until 26 January 2014. This  was  extended  until  30
    August 2014 but an application made on 7  August  2014  for  a  Tier  2
    (skilled worker) visa was refused on 16 October 2014. An appeal against
    that decision was dismissed and  the  Appellant's  appeal  rights  were
    deemed exhausted on 23 September 2015. On 3 November 2015  she  applied
    again for a Tier 2 (skilled worker) visa but this  was  voided  by  the
    Respondent on 29 November 2016. By then  the  Appellant  had  made  her
    application on 20 April 2016 the refusal of which has given rise to the
    present proceedings.

 3. SH arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 February 2012 having  previously
    been left in Bangladesh when the Appellant came to the  United  Kingdom
    in 2009. Whilst in the United Kingdom the Appellant gave birth  to  two
    further children: L on 1 August 2012 who is now 6 years of  age  and  A
    born 12 May 2017 who is now one year of age. None of the three children
    of the Appellant were qualifying children within  the  meaning  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    at the date of the hearing before the First-tier.

The Appellant's Case

 4. The Appellant resides with  her  husband  who  is  also  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh and has no lawful immigration status. Neither the  Appellant
    nor her husband work and the family lives  on  help  from  friends  and
    other family members. Contrary to  the  claim  of  the  Respondent  the
    appellant took an English language test herself on  6  March  2013  and
    duly passed it. Each of the children are familiar with the lifestyle in
    the United Kingdom and their welfare and development would be seriously
    hindered if any of them were required to relocate to Bangladesh even if
    that was as a family unit. The children would be at a  disadvantage  in
    Bangladesh because they could only speak and understand Bengali "to  an
    extent". At home the entire family conversed in English. The  Appellant
    relied on a report from Ms Diana Harris an independent  social  worker.
    She stated that a move would cause disruption to the children's studies
    and unwanted change in the  children's  lives  would  have  deleterious
    effects on them.

The Decision at First Instance

 5. At [29] of his determination the Judge set out  his  findings  of  fact
    noting that neither the Appellant nor her husband had  any  immigration
    status in this country. The Appellant had chosen to remain illegally in
    the United Kingdom since losing her appeal in the Tribunal in 2015. The
    family members conversed between themselves in  Bengali  and  SH  could
    speak and understand  that  language.  He  had  undoubtedly  used  that
    language until he came to the United Kingdom when he  was  9  years  of
    age. The family wished to continue residing in this country even if  it
    involved illegality. The family lived in  unsatisfactory  housing  with
    only one bedroom and were maintained by the earnings of the Appellant's
    husband in what the Judge described as "the grey market".  He  rejected
    as untruthful the evidence  that  the  family  was  maintained  by  the
    generosity of friends or relatives. The Appellant's  husband  would  be
    able to enter the labour market  in  Bangladesh  and  provide  for  his
    family there. The Judge rejected evidence of the cost of  education  in
    Bangladesh.

 6. The Judge directed himself that he was obliged to apply the decision of
    the Supreme Court in KO [2018] UKSC 53. The question whether or not  it
    was reasonable to expect a child to leave must be seen  in  the  entire
    factual context not judged in some artificial vacuum. That was  not  to
    blame the children for the sins of their  parents  who  had  chosen  to
    flout the immigration laws of  this  country.  The  issue  of  powerful
    reasons being required where qualifying children were involved did  not
    arise in this  case  because  none  of  the  children  were  qualifying
    children. There were no exceptional compelling circumstances  requiring
    the appeal to be allowed outside the immigration  rules.  SH  would  be
    departing at the very least with his own mother  and  as  a  matter  of
    probability with his entire family unit. He would be able  to  continue
    his education in Bangladesh  along  with  having  the  satisfaction  of
    growing up in and contributing to the country of  his  nationality.  No
    significant obstacles to relocation were identified.

 7. The Judge rejected the evidence of Ms Harris having  considered  it  at
    [22] to [27] of his determination. He noted that  the  report  did  not
    give particulars about the nature and extent of what was said to  be  a
    strong support network for the family. Ms Harris could not confirm what
    educational facilities would be available for the Appellant's  children
    in Bangladesh. A move would cause disruption, that was simply a  matter
    of common sense not expertise. There was no comparison made about  what
    the family's relative circumstances might be in Bangladesh compared  to
    the unsatisfactory accommodation of one bedroom they currently  had  in
    the United Kingdom. It  was  speculation  by  Ms  Harris  that  if  the
    Appellant's children went to Bangladesh the impact of grief at the loss
    of their current home, school,  friendships  and  bonds  would  have  a
    detrimental impact on their emotional well-being. Ms Harris had  argued
    that  they  might  entertain  negative  feelings  such  as  resentment,
    behavioural issues, anxiety, eating disorders, self-harm,  feelings  of
    sadness and depression. The Judge commented at  [24]  that  Ms  Harris'
    evidence "falls well short of persuading me that it  is  more  probable
    than not that any of those consequences would flow". He  dismissed  the
    appeal.

The Onward Appeal

 8. The Appellants appealed against that decision arguing firstly that  the
    Judge gave inadequate  reasons  for  finding  the  Appellant  had  been
    dishonest in the matter of the  English  language  test.  The  ultimate
    issue in relation to the English language test was  whether  the  legal
    burden of proving dishonesty was  discharged  by  the  Respondent.  The
    Appellant had proffered an innocent explanation  which  met  the  basic
    level of plausibility.

 9. The 2nd ground argued there been a flawed approach to Appendix  FM  and
    the assessment of the children's best  interests.  The  Judge  had  not
    struck  a  fair  balance   when   considering   Article   8   and   the
    proportionality assessment. The grounds referred  to  the  Respondent's
    policy guidance dated October 2017 [which in fact has  been  superseded
    since the Supreme Court decision in KO].  The  Judge  was  required  to
    consider as a primary consideration the best interests of the  children
    rather than what was reasonable. What mattered was the substance of the
    attention given to the overall well-being of the  child.  It  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh to require the Appellant and her minor children  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

10. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 8 February 2019. In  a
    grant of permission to appeal which was not always easy to  follow  and
    which concentrated almost exclusively  on  the  English  language  test
    issue, he found it arguable that the Judge had imposed too high a  test
    at [20] when considering whether the evidential burden had  shifted.  I
    pause to note here that [20] was where the Judge  had  considered  that
    the evidence adduced by the Appellant was not  sufficiently  cogent  or
    reliable to lead to the conclusion that  it  had  displaced  the  prima
    facie position relied upon by the Respondent in relation to the English
    language test.

11. The grant continued by saying that  it  was  arguable  that  the  other
    credibility factors referred to by the Judge  had  attracted  too  much
    weight. It was arguable this led  to  the  rejection  of  the  evidence
    adduced by the  Appellant  in  the  context  of  the  shifting  of  the
    evidential burden. The Judge had taken into account adverse credibility
    findings at [29] where he had referred to the Appellant  having  chosen
    to remain in the United Kingdom  illegally.  It  was  unclear  to  what
    extent  this  factor  had  attracted  an  adverse  credibility  finding
    undermining the nature and quality of the explanation  put  forward  by
    the Appellant. Credibility findings set out at [29] included a specific
    finding that the Appellant had taken her English test in March 2013  by
    proxy  and  thereby  acted  fraudulently.   The   Appellant's   witness
    statements on the point were insufficiently analysed by  the  Judge  at
    [18].

12. The grant continued: "It is arguable that  distinctions  exist  between
    the elements referred to in terms of the  test  applied  and  that  the
    scope of plausibility in relation to the explanation  provided  by  the
    Appellant should first be approached on  the  footing  of  the  nature,
    extent and quality of the explanation  in  relation  to  those  matters
    raised  in  the  statements  relied   upon   by   the   Respondent   in
    contradistinction to the more general findings of credibility which are
    in any event arguably affected in the manner referred to". Finally,  in
    one sentence at the very end of his decision to grant permission  Judge
    Hollingworth wrote: "it is arguable that the  proportionality  exercise
    has been affected".

13. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission pursuant to Rule  24,
    arguing that there were no arguable errors of law in the determination.
    That the Appellant could  speak  English  did  not  mean  she  had  not
    employed a proxy test taker.

The Hearing Before Me

14. In consequence of the decision to grant permission to appeal the matter
    came before me to determine in the first  place  whether  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination such that it fell to be  set
    aside. If there was not then  the  decision  at  first  instance  would
    stand.

15. At the outset of the hearing both advocates raised two issues with  me.
    The first was that SH was now a qualifying child  having  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for more than 7  years,  SH  having  arrived  in  United
    Kingdom on 29 February 2012 just over 7 years  ago.  Counsel  submitted
    that this information was for background only. I indicated that as this
    was at error of law stage the appeal fell for decision on the facts  as
    they were at the date of the hearing at 1st instance. On 19  March  the
    Upper Tribunal received an e-mail with attachments from the Appellant's
    solicitors which purported to raise a new  matter  under  section  120,
    namely that SH was now a qualifying  child.  I  did  not  receive  this
    communication myself until after the hearing but in view  of  counsel's
    concession and my ruling that I was only  concerned  at  error  of  law
    stage with the facts as they were before Judge Jones QC the e-mail from
    the Appellant's solicitors did not, in  any  event,  take  matters  any
    further.

16. At the hearing I was informed that there  was  also  a  development  in
    relation to the English language test  which  counsel  stated  was  not
    presently relied upon by the Appellant. The Appellant's representatives
    had told the Respondent that they had now heard what was said to be the
    recording of the Appellant's English language test but it was  not  the
    Appellant's voice on the recording which had  been  supplied  to  them.
    Another  of  the  attachments  to  the  e-mail  from  the   Appellant's
    solicitors,  mentioned  that  the  Appellant  had  received  an   audio
    recording of her TOEIC test but did not mention  that  it  was  someone
    else's voice on the recording. Again, as  with  the  7-year  qualifying
    child point, the e-mail did not affect the error of law stage.

17. I observed to the parties  that  in  his  grant  of  permission,  Judge
    Hollingworth had concentrated almost exclusively on the  issue  of  the
    English language test which was the focus of the hearing before me. The
    appeal proceeded and the first point made on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    was that the Judge was wrong to say that the Appellant had  only  given
    scant details regarding her taking of the English  language  test.  She
    had made two witness statements on the 2 and 7  January  2019  and  had
    said how she had prepared for the test, referred to the day in question
    and the setup of the room. There would  be  CCTV  images  of  the  test
    centre on that day and they  could  be  checked  to  confirm  that  the
    Appellant attended the test centre. If the Judge was not satisfied with
    this evidence and  did  not  consider  that  it  provided  an  innocent
    explanation, he should have given proper reasons  why  the  Appellant's
    evidence was not accepted but that was not done.

18. The Judge had referred to what he described as the  Appellant  and  her
    husband's poor immigration history but counsel argued that that was not
    correct, rather the Appellant had a good immigration history. I queried
    this with counsel since it was evident that the Appellant  had  had  no
    leave to remain in United Kingdom since 30  August  2014,  almost  five
    years and her husband likewise. Counsel argued that  this  was  not  an
    Appellant who had evaded the attention of the authorities but  who  had
    made  a  number  of  applications  within   time   albeit   they   were
    unsuccessful.

19. There were other points in the determination in issue. At [7] the Judge
    had referred to the Appellant's evidence that the family was  supported
    by unspecified friends and unidentified family but no evidence  of  any
    such financial support  had  been  forthcoming.  At  page  328  of  the
    Appellant's bundle details of these charitable friends  were  set  out.
    There had been no proper enquiry by either the Respondent or the  Judge
    of the exact nature of the Appellant's stay in the United Kingdom since
    she had arrived here in 2009. The Judge had attached  undue  weight  to
    what he referred  to  as  the  Appellant's  poor  immigration  history.
    However, it was not the case  that  the  family  were  splitting  their
    immigration applications for maximum tactical advantage  as  the  Judge
    had suggested at [42].

20. Closer examination would have revealed that after the Appellant's  Tier
    4 application had been granted in  2013  the  Appellant's  husband  had
    appealed because his application as her  dependent  had  been  refused.
    That appeal was unsuccessful. He  was  not  named  in  the  Appellant's
    subsequent points-based system  application  under  Tier  2  which  was
    refused  in  October  2014.  At  this  point  the  presenting   officer
    interjected to explain that on 3 June 2015  the  Appellant's  husband's
    appeal was dismissed. Counsel continued that the husband then made  his
    own human rights application in August 2015 at which time the Appellant
    was still in the middle of challenging her Tier 2  2014  refusal.  That
    was why the applications were  split  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband, it was not tactical.

21. In reply the presenting officer submitted that there  was  no  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision. The grounds were  a
    disagreement with the Judge's findings. At [18]  the  Judge  had  dealt
    with the Appellant's evidence of how she was said  to  have  taken  her
    English language test. The Judge's conclusions on  this  evidence  were
    open to him. The Judge was entitled to take notice  of  the  number  of
    years the Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom without any  leave.
    The reference to other people supporting the Appellant and  her  family
    was merely an argument  as  to  the  weight  to  be  ascribed  to  that
    evidence. The Judge had assessed everything. At [29] the Judge set  out
    his findings of fact and  explained  why  he  found  relocation  to  be
    reasonable.

22. In conclusion counsel argued that the  Respondent  had  "taken  up  the
    baton" by overemphasising and  interpreting  unfairly  the  immigration
    history of the family as the Judge had done. In the  rule  24  response
    the  Respondent  had  referred  to  a  "breath-taking   disregard"   of
    immigration rules by the Appellant but the immigration history did  not
    bear that out.

Findings

23. The appeal in this case is essentially a reasons-based  appeal  against
    the adverse credibility findings made by the Judge when dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal. The primary focus of the appeal is on  whether  the
    Judge was correct to find that  the  Appellant  could  not  provide  an
    innocent explanation for the allegation that she had employed  a  proxy
    test taker for her English language test in March 2013. The  Judge  was
    aware of the Appellant's claim that she had taken the test but  pointed
    out specifically that the Appellant had sought to revise  the  contents
    of her 1st witness statement of 2  January  2019  in  her  2nd  witness
    statement of 7  January  2019.  The  Judge's  characterisation  of  the
    details given by the Appellant for the tests that she attended on 6 and
    18 March 2013 was that the evidence was scant.

24. As  counsel  acknowledged  in  submissions  to  me,  the  Tribunal  was
    concerned about the spoken language test. It was a matter for the Judge
    to consider whether the evidence provided by the Appellant of her  test
    was plentiful, sufficient or scant. To say that the Judge was wrong  to
    characterise the evidence as scant is to make  a  submission  that  the
    Judge's fact-finding was perverse. That, I remind  myself,  is  a  very
    high threshold to cross and I do not accept that either in the  grounds
    or in the submissions made to me that that threshold has been  crossed.
    I do not find that the Judge's assessment of the  evidence  before  him
    was perverse. On the contrary I consider that  the  Judge  gave  cogent
    reasons for his findings.

25. It is correct that in a number of places in the determination the Judge
    used strong language to describe the Appellant's  immigration  history.
    He referred to the Appellant using a strategy in her appeal,  that  the
    evidence that the Appellant's husband had not worked was fanciful, that
    the family were determined to reside  in  this  country  even  if  that
    involved illegality, and that the family were engaged in  a  deliberate
    abuse  of  the  process  in  the  way  they  were  making   immigration
    applications.

26. It is not necessarily a material error of law for  a  Judge  to  employ
    strong language in criticising the behaviour of a party to the case. It
    is relevant if the use of language can be said to be so extreme that it
    betrays a bias or otherwise indicates that the party had  less  than  a
    fair hearing. I do not consider that the strong  language  employed  by
    the Judge, who  was  clearly  unimpressed  by  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband's immigration history, could be said to be indicative  of  bias
    or otherwise an unfair hearing.

27. Part of the difficulty for the Appellant in this case is the failure on
    her part or her representatives' part to understand that living in  the
    United Kingdom for almost 5 years without any  form  of  leave  is  not
    indicative of a good immigration history but rather is indicative of  a
    bad immigration history. The Appellant might argue that there are  many
    others  who  come  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  have   worse
    immigration histories then she has. That may be so but  that  does  not
    excuse the  Appellant's  behaviour  nor  does  it  transform  her  poor
    immigration record into a good one.

28. It is not an answer for the Appellant to say that  she  has  not  lived
    "under the radar"  but  has  made  a  series  of  applications  to  the
    Respondent over the years. The fact of the matter is that since  August
    2014 those applications were unsuccessful strongly suggesting that they
    were without  merit.  Repeated  meritless  applications  tie  down  the
    resources of the Home Office  which  are  already  stretched  and  they
    cannot be said to be indicative of a good immigration history.

29. The Appellant's defence of the separate applications that she  and  her
    husband have made run into the difficulty that nevertheless there  were
    times  when,  without  reasonable  cause,  they  did  not  make   joint
    applications but made separate applications. The Judge came to the view
    that that was tactical and not for example a mere coincidence and  that
    there was no plausible explanation other than that this was  some  form
    of strategy being employed. That may  be  considered  to  be  a  strong
    condemnation of the Appellant's case but it was nevertheless  one  that
    was open to the Judge on the evidence before him.

30. The Judge noted that whilst the  Appellant  could  speak  English,  her
    English was "imperfect"  which  belied  the  notion  that  this  was  a
    language used by her on a day-to-day basis within her family unit.  The
    Judge drew the conclusion from that that the children  would  therefore
    be able to speak Bengali to an appropriate standard (which  they  would
    require in Bangladesh) because that was the language used in the  home.
    That was an issue which went to the  reasonableness  of  requiring  the
    children to leave the United Kingdom but it also touched on  the  issue
    of the Appellant's claimed innocent explanation for the  allegation  of
    the use of a proxy test taker. The poorer the  Appellant's  English  in
    2018, five years after allegedly taking a  test,  the  less  likely  it
    would be that the Appellant had proficient English in 2013.

31. The Appellant complains that the Judge incorrectly referred to  a  lack
    of evidence confirming the existence of friends  and  family  who  were
    providing support to the Appellant and her family. The Judge stated  at
    [27] that he had been presented with an Appellant's bundle  running  to
    397 pages but he was not referred to any of them other  than  a  report
    from Ms Harris "except for pages 34, 364 and 386 to 387". In short, the
    Judge was not referred to the evidence of the charitable friends during
    the course of the hearing but was left instead  to  plough  through  an
    unwieldy bundle in his own time. In those circumstances  it  is  hardly
    surprising that the Judge was sceptical about the Appellant's claim  to
    be supported by friends.

32. It also appears that Ms Harris  did  not  comment  to  any  significant
    degree on how the family had had the financial means to survive for  so
    many years without work or State benefits. This was arguably  an  issue
    that went to the children's welfare but the Judge was not  assisted  by
    the report. Despite this the Judge did consider the bundle particularly
    as it  related  to  the  educational  circumstances  of  the  children.
    Notwithstanding the difficulties that were placed in the Judge's way as
    a result of poor preparation by the Appellant's representatives, he did
    what was expected of him and gave anxious scrutiny to this appeal.

33. The Judge had two issues to decide. The first was whether the Appellant
    had employed a proxy test taker. The Judge did not  consider  that  the
    Appellant had been able to offer an innocent explanation for that.  His
    reasoning in that respect was cogent and there was no material error of
    law in his finding of dishonesty. The second issue was whether  in  the
    real world the natural expectation would  be  whether  the  2  children
    would follow the Appellant and her husband (the stepfather of  SH)  and
    relocate to Bangladesh.

34. There were  no  specific  submissions  made  to  me  either  under  the
    immigration rules or Article 8. As I have indicated Judge  Hollingworth
    did not deal with this 2nd issue in any detail save that if  the  Judge
    was wrong in his finding of dishonesty in  the  taking  of  an  English
    language  test  that  would  have  an  impact  on  the  proportionality
    exercise. I assume this was from the point of view of an assessment  of
    the credibility of the Appellant's evidence about  any  obstacles  that
    might exist to relocation and/or on the question of reasonableness more
    generally.

35. As I do not consider that the Judge did materially err on the issue  of
    the English language test, it is not strictly necessary for me to  deal
    with that aspect in any detail but for the sake of completeness I would
    add that the Judge gave sound reasons why the family could be  expected
    to relocate and why it would be reasonable  for  the  two  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom. At [32] he correctly  directed  himself  that
    the behaviour of the parents could not  be  visited  on  the  children.
    Referring to the duty imposed by section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 he noted that the  children's  best  interests
    were to remain within the nuclear family, not necessarily in the United
    Kingdom, see [35].

36. None of the three children were qualifying children at the date of  the
    hearing. It may be that the Appellant makes a  further  application  to
    the Respondent on the basis that SH is now a qualifying child and/or  L
    will become so after 1 August 2019. That  will  be  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent to decide but the Respondent  may  wish  to  consider  Judge
    Jones' determination in informing his, the  Respondent's,  decision  on
    any further application that might be made.

37. Judge Jones's findings in so far as they are  relevant  were  that  the
    children could speak Bengali to a much  higher  level  than  was  being
    suggested by the Appellant and her husband, that the husband had worked
    in the United Kingdom and could find work upon  return  to  Bangladesh.
    The Judge was sceptical about the evidence that the family had  existed
    on charity for several years  particularly  given  that  the  Appellant
    herself had said she had not worked, even though at times she had had a
    status that would  have  permitted  some  work.  The  proposition  that
    charitable friends had supported the family over an  extremely  lengthy
    period of time from 2008, in the  Judge's  words,  stretched  "credence
    beyond breaking point". It is difficult to see how even with charitable
    support such a situation could have been sustainable for so many years.



38. If the Appellant does seek to make  any  further  applications  to  the
    Respondent, she will need to produce rather  more  persuasive  evidence
    than was presented to the Judge at 1st instance. I do not consider that
    there was any material error of law in the Judge's determination and  I
    dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 25 March 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 25 March 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

