
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13923/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 30 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                               Mr Justice Goss
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A R
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimants:     Ms S Iengar, instructed by David Benson, Solicitors
For the appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).



 1. This is a decision to which both  judges,  sitting  as  a  panel  at  a
    hearing on 10th December 2019, have contributed.

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Griffith promulgated on 1st October 2019,  allowing
    the respondent's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    dated 15th June 2015 to  refuse  his   human  right  claim  brought  in
    response to a deportation order made on 16th March 2018.  Permission to
    appeal this decision was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 18th
    October 2019.  For the avoidance of confusion we  shall  refer  to  the
    respondent as 'the claimant'.

 3. The Secretary of State contends that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    was materially flawed by reason of errors of  law  and  should  be  set
    aside.  We are grateful to the parties' advocates for their written and
    oral submissions.

Relevant background & Chronology

 4. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity, born on 26th
    April 1990, so now aged 29 years, who claimed to enter the UK  on  28th
    April 2005, aged 15 years.   His asylum claim was refused  but  he  was
    later granted discretionary leave to remain.  On 7th September 2014  he
    committed an offence of wounding with intent to cause  grievous  bodily
    harm.  Two weeks later he was attacked and seriously injured.   On  4th
    November 2015, having been convicted of offences of theft from employer
    and making false representations for gain on 29th  September  2015,  he
    was sentenced to 12 weeks' imprisonment suspended for 2  years  with  a
    supervision requirement.   On 19th May 2016 he went  through  religious
    ceremony with PR, a British citizen.  Their son, AA, was born  on  27th
    November 2016.   He failed to attend  his  trial  for  the  offence  of
    wounding with intent in November 2016 and was convicted in his absence.
     On 12th March 2017 he was arrested when attempting to  fly  to  Canada
    using a false passport and, on 7th April  2017,  was  sentenced  to  7�
    years' imprisonment with the suspended sentences being activated.   The
    claimant remains in detention with a release date on  licence  of  11th
    December 2020.

 5. On 16th March 2018 the Secretary of State made a deportation order and,
    on 15th June 2018, his human rights claim was refused.

 6. Following a hearing on 17th September 2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith, in her decision promulgated on 1st October 2019, allowed  the
    appeal, in summary, on the grounds that

      a) there were sufficient adverse reasons making it  unduly  harsh  for
         the claimant's child to be expected to follow him to Sri Lanka;

      b) it would be unduly harsh for his wife to remain in the  UK  without
         him;

      c) he would face very significant obstacles to  his  integrating  into
         Sri Lanka; and

      d) there were  very  compelling  circumstances  which  outweighed  the
         public interest in deportation.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, it is submitted that the judge
    erred in law in failing to resolve challenges to  the  content  of  the
    psychiatric report, to which she attached considerable weight and  upon
    which she relied in making findings in the claimant's favour,  and  did
    not explain why.  Second, she erred in that her finding that  it  would
    be unduly harsh for the claimant's wife and child to  live  in  the  UK
    without him were devoid of sufficient reasons and that  any  identified
    harshness did not go beyond the commonplace, so she applied  the  wrong
    test.  Reliance is placed on SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ  1213,
    in particular, on paragraphs [43] and [46].

The relevant statutory provisions

 8. The claimant is a foreign national as defined in section 32 of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007, having been convicted of an offence and sentenced  to
    a period of imprisonment of more than 12 months.  He is required to  be
    deported subject to the exceptions set out in section 33  of  the  Act,
    the material parts of which provide:

         "33 Exceptions

         (1)  Section 32(4) and (5) -

             (a)  do not apply where an exception in this  section  applies
             (subject to subsection (7) below),

         ...

         (2)  Exception 1 is  where  removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

             (a)  a person's Convention rights, ..."

 9. Part 5A of the nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  makes
    specific provision in relation to the consideration of Article 8 in the
    claimant's circumstances.  Section 117A provides:

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2)."

10. Section 117 C provides

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         ...

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

11. The relevant Immigration Rules, as amended, provide:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

             ...

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months;

         ...

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) ... applies  if
         -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to  be  deported;
                      or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.



         ...

         399C. Where a foreign criminal who has previously  been  granted  a
         period of limited leave under this Part applies for further limited
         leave  or  indefinite  leave  to  remain  his  deportation  remains
         conducive  to  the  public  good  and  in   the   public   interest
         notwithstanding the previous grant of leave."

First-tier Tribunal Judge's Assessment

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge recited in paragraphs 15-31 inclusive  of
    her decision the reasons why the Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept
    there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deporting the claimant.  She heard oral evidence  from  the
    claimant, his wife, and 2 friends.  There was a social worker's  report
    and a psychiatric report from Dr Dhumad, who interviewed  the  claimant
    and his wife on the day before the  hearing.   After  setting  out  the
    evidence and respective submissions  of  the  parties,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, having rejected any claim under Articles 2 and 3 of the
    ECHR, found that the claimant's removal would very likely have  adverse
    consequences for his wife's parenting abilities on  the  basis  of  the
    detrimental effect of separation on her mental health and, in turn,  on
    the child's best interests.  The claimant's wife had made it plain that
    she would not return to Sri Lanka  with  her  son  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was satisfied that there were sufficient adverse reasons
    to make it plainly harsh to expect her son to follow  the  claimant  to
    Sri Lanka.  She also found it would be unduly harsh  for  his  wife  to
    remain in the UK without the claimant, even though  she  is  a  British
    citizen and have access to the NHS and Social Service, making reference
    to the 'significant factor' of the long-term effect of separation  from
    him and her ability to parent the child adequately.  She had a  history
    of self-harming, and made two attempts at suicide; in the opinion of Dr
    Dhumad, her mental health would deteriorate  dramatically  if  he  were
    removed and her risk of suicide would  increase.   Further,  she  found
    that the claimant was  socially or culturally integrated in the UK  and
    would face very significant obstacles to his integration in Sri  Lanka,
    stating that  the  most  significant  factor  was  his  mental  health,
    referring to the report of Dr Dhumad, which she described as  "fragile"
    and for which he is  receiving  treatment,  with  a  moderate  risk  of
    suicide, with the risk of suicide increasing if removed.   In  relation
    to the public interest she acknowledged that  the  claimant  needed  to
    show very compelling circumstances over and  above  those  set  out  in
    Paragraphs 399 and 399A.  Adopting  the  balance  sheet  approach,  she
    referred to the effect of alcohol in the offence, his wishing to  be  a
    better person and live a positive life, his own  state  of  health  and
    that of his wife and it being "doubtful that his medical  health  needs
    could be adequately monitored and treated" if he was  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka and "although not specifically mentioned" she had  not  dismissed
    the possibility that if there is deterioration  in  his  wife's  mental
    health, which is the opinion of both the ISW and Dr Dhumad, there was a
    risk that the child might be taken into care which would not be in  his
    best interests.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded her  judgement
    in these terms:

         "My decision is finely balanced, bearing in mind the strong  public
         interest in the appellant's deportation, but I am prepared to  find
         that cumulatively, there are very compelling circumstances in  this
         case  that  outweigh  the  public   interest   in   deporting   the
         [claimant]."

The submissions in the appeal

13. It is submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State that, by reason  of
    conflicts in the medical evidence relating  to  the  claimant  and  the
    absence of a credible medical history in relation to his wife, it was a
    material error on the First-tier Tribunal Judge's part  to  attach  the
    significant weight to the medical evidence that she did.  Reference  is
    made to paragraph 8.11 of Dr Dhumad's report reciting a letter relating
    to his counselling sessions between 22 May 2019 and 3rd July 2019 as  a
    result of which "his anxiety and post-traumatic symptoms  have  reduced
    from severe to moderate... At the point  of  discharge  [the  claimant]
    feels fairly stable  emotionally  and  presents  no  risk  to  self  or
    others".  It was submitted that this was "at  odds"  with  Dr  Dhumad's
    opinion that he  "remains  unwell  despite  receiving  the  recommended
    treatment for his condition".  This is said to  undermine  the  ensuing
    view of Dr  Dhumad  that  "he  is  very  likely  to  suffer  a  serious
    deterioration in his mental health if he were to  be  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka..."

14. In relation to RP, reference is made to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    at [92] noting that "... no credible medical history has been  provided
    and it is unclear how the psychiatrist was able to make the conclusions
    he did  in  the  absence  of  documents.   His  findings  were  clearly
    speculative.  She told the psychiatrist that she barely goes  out,  but
    today states that she goes to work five  days  a  week".   However,  Dr
    Dhumad did have her medical notes and, within his report (at  13.1  and
    13.4 respectively), he stated "she feels settled in the UK  and  has  a
    good job" and  "... she has very  poor  social  network  and  has  been
    socially isolated".

15. So far as the second ground is concerned, complaint is  made  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to identify why the psychiatric report
    should be deemed forceful  and  of  weighty  consideration,  given  the
    absence of corroborating medical documents and its alleged  speculative
    nature.  There was a failure  to  engage  with  the  evidence  of  RP's
    ability to care for their child during the claimant's imprisonment  and
    the speculative nature of the risk of the child having to go into  care
    if he was removed.

16. But for all these alleged material errors, it is said that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge would not have found that it would be unduly  harsh
    nor would she have found the circumstances to be very compelling.

17. An additional submission, made  in  oral  argument,  was  that  PR  was
    complicit in the claimant's attempt to flee the jurisdiction to  Canada
    in 2017 and that this was in  conflict  with  medical  evidence  of  Dr
    Dhumad that  the  impact  of  separation  from  her  husband  would  be
    detrimental to her mental health, which would "deteriorate rapidly"  if
    he was removed to Sri Lanka, "coupled  with  the  risk  of  suicide"  .
    However, it was clear from the evidence that she  was  unaware  of  his
    intended flight and this submission and was not pursued.

18. In response, in addition to those matters  already  addressed,  it  was
    emphasised on the claimant's behalf that no issue was or is taken  with
    the claimant's credibility or of any of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    findings of fact or her application of the correct test in relation  to
    assessing criminal deportations within the remit of Article 8. Nor  was
    there any challenge to the expertise  or  clinical  methodology  of  Dr
    Dhumad or any conflict within the expert medical  opinion.   Dr  Dhumad
    conducted examinations of PR as well as the claimant  and  the  working
    five days a week (her evidence was for four hours a day namely 8 am  to
    12 noon)  was not  in  conflict  with  her  other  evidence  of  social
    isolation and so there  was  no  conflict  in  the  evidence  requiring
    resolution or capable of undermining the psychiatric opinion.

19. In relation  to  the  second  ground,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    conducted a two-fold  unduly  harsh  assessment,  first  assessing  the
    child's position, then his ability to remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    claimant.  No issue as  taken  with  her  conclusion  that  there  were
    sufficient reasons to make it unduly  harsh  to  expect  his  child  to
    follow him to Sri Lanka.  In relation to separation from the  claimant,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  assessed  and  linked  PR's  ability  to
    parent their child if the claimant was  removed.   In  particular,  she
    relied on Dr Dhumad's opinion in paragraphs 13.3 and 13.4 of his report
    that

         "In  my  opinion  the  risk  of  self  harm  and  suicide  is  very
         significant in case (sic) of her husband's removal  to  Sri  Lanka.
         She has a history of self-cutting and suicide attempt  (sic)  which
         is very likely to increase significantly at times  of  high  stress
         and hopelessness.  In my opinion the risk to her child  would  also
         increase in such event, it is very unlikely she would mentally [be]
         capable of care for her child.

         ...  Therefore in my opinion, her mental  health  will  deteriorate
         dramatically if her husband [is] removed to Sri Lank, coupled  with
         [an] increased risk of suicide."

20. Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in reliance on this report,
    found that, as separation  from  the  claimant  would  be  dramatically
    detrimental to PR's mental health, this would  naturally  have  adverse
    consequences for her ability to parent and this informed her conclusion
    that it would be unduly harsh for her and their son to remain in the UK
    if the claimant were deported.

    Discussion

21. It is clear that a thorough Hesham Ali  balancing  sheet  exercise  was
    undertaken.  It is not for this court to re-make  the  assessment.   We
    accept the submissions made by Ms Iengar on  behalf  of  the  claimant.
    There was no error in law in the conclusions to  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's came, or in her reasoning.  She took full  account  of
    the claimant's offending behaviour  and  the  facts  of  the  case  and
    reached a conclusion to which she was  entitled  to  come,  recognising
    that it was finely balanced, and to find that the consequences for  the
    claimant's child of deportation would be unduly harsh.  The evidence of
    Dr Dhumad was not flawed by reason of any contradictions in the report.
     The evidence of PR working part-time did not mean that she could  not,
    in other respects be socially isolated.  On the  evidence,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to rely on  the  medical  evidence  to
    conclude that  separation  from  the  claimant  would  be  dramatically
    detrimental to PR's health, and, in  consequence,  on  her  ability  to
    parent their child.  This conclusion was supported by cogent  reasoning
    and, in consequence, the effect on both mother and  child  amounted  to
    very compelling reasons, and she was thereby entitled to  find  as  she
    did. Although another judge may have come to  a  different  conclusion,
    the one to which this judge came was open to her on  the  evidence  for
    the  reasons  she  gave  and,  therefore,  we  find  no  error  in  her
    assessment.

22. It follows that we find no material error in the making of the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal so the appeal of the Secretary of State must
    be dismissed.

Decision

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law such that  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

                    We do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal of the claimant remains allowed.




                    Signed




                    Mr Justice Goss

                    Dated 16 December 2019
