
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13932/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2018                  |On 28 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              ZEESHAN CHAUDHARY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i)  The  respondent's  decision,  dated  23  May  2016,  refusing  the
         appellant's application for leave to remain on family life grounds.



     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Mozolowski,  promulgated  on  8  February
         2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal, filed on 21 February 2018.

      v) The grant of permission, dated 13 June 2018.

 2. The respondent's decision is based on appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE
    of the immigration rules (family and private life), and on  finding  no
    exceptional circumstances outside the rules.  The nub is at pp. 2  -  3
    of 8:

         Section S-LTR 1.6 states that the applicant will be refused if  the
         presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to the  public
         good because their conduct (including convictions which do not fall
         within paragraphs S-LTR 1.3 -  1.5),  character,  associations,  or
         other reasons, make it unreasonable to allow them to remain in  the
         UK.

         The test you took as part of your English test  requirement  on  18
         April 2012 was withdrawn by ETS and declared invalid on the grounds
         that widespread test fraud was known to have occurred at the centre
         where you sat the test.  You  were  therefore  asked  to  attend  a
         further interview.

         At the interview on 11 May 2016 you confirmed at  question  1  that
         you sat your ... test in 2012 in Manchester ...

         Your scores from the test ... have been cancelled by  ETS.  On  the
         basis of information provided to her ETS,  the  SSHD  is  satisfied
         that your certificate was fraudulently obtained.

         In fraudulently obtaining a  certificate  in  the  manner  outlined
         above, you willingly participated in what was clearly an  organised
         and serious attempt,  given  the  complicity  of  the  test  centre
         itself, to defraud the SSHD and others. In doing so, you  displayed
         a flagrant disregard for the public interest,  according  to  which
         migrants are required to have a certain level of  English  language
         ability in order to facilitate social integration and cohesion,  as
         well as to reduce the likelihood of them  being  a  burden  on  the
         taxpayer.

         Accordingly, I am satisfied that your presence in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive  to  the  public  good  because  your  conduct  makes  it
         undesirable to allow you to remain.  Your application is  therefore
         refused ...

 3. It is not in dispute that the test result obtained by the appellant  on
    18 April 2012 was withdrawn because records  showed  it  to  have  been
    fraudulently obtained.

 4. The appellant's position was that he was  not  complicit,  but  he  was
    suspicious even at the time of the bona fides of the test he undertook,
    and that is why he never relied upon it.

 5. It is not in dispute that the appellant never did rely upon the test.

 6. The nub of the FtT's decision is that the judge at [26] did not  accept
    the appellant's explanation, and held at [28] that he involved  himself
    (knowingly) in a fraudulent  test,  using  a  proxy,  as  indicated  by
    cancellation of his test results.

 7. The appellant's ground 2  refers  to  the  interview  on  11  May  2016
    (respondent's FtT Bundle, pp. B1 -5), and says that in stating that the
    applicant accepted his test was fraudulent, the FtT  misunderstood  his
    position.  The interview record,  Q/A  1  -  21,  is  followed  by  the
    interviewer's comments:

         Were there any points ... where  the  applicant  appeared  to  lack
         credibility? - No.

         ...

         Recommendation summary

         Very credible and competent, not only  in  answering  questions  in
         very good English but also providing a lot of detail with regard to
         the test itself.

 8. The respondent's decision reads rather oddly, considering the interview
    record.

 9. The interview record perhaps did not dictate another outcome  from  the
    FtT, but  it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  judge's  decision,  and  the
    appellant, at least, was entitled to know why this did not advance  his
    credibility.

10. Mr Govan indicated that the  respondent's  practice  enabled  decision-
    makers to refuse on suitability grounds related  to  fraudulent  tests,
    even where it had been accepted at interview that a party was credible;
    but he acknowledged that the decision was defective in  not  explaining
    why an adverse outcome was reached, despite the favourable interview.

11. Mr Byrne raised a point which was not in the  grounds.   The  appellant
    said that he heard in April 2012 that his college  (Manchester  College
    of Accountancy and Management, or "Mancam") was likely to be suspended,
    and so he was in a panic to obtain a test result.  The judge at [23]  -
    [24] rejected that account because the evidence showed the  college  to
    be functioning at a later date.  However, the judgement of  Supperstone
    J in Manchester College of Accountancy and Management [2013]  EWHC  409
    narrates at [1] that the licence of the college "was  suspended  on  14
    February 2012, and revoked on 2 April 2012".  (The credit  for  tracing
    this point goes to Mr Byrne's devil.)

12. The respondent was represented in the FtT, and the fate of the  college
    was within the respondent's knowledge.  The issue, however, is not  one
    which might easily have been  anticipated.   Through  little  fault  of
    anyone at the hearing, there has been significant unfairness through  a
    mistake of fact, which cannot go uncorrected.

13. The judge's reasons for finding that  the  appellant  connived  in  the
    fraudulence of the test do not stand.  There remains no good reason for
    finding against him.  His application to  the  respondent  should  have
    been found to meet the requirements of the immigration rules, which  in
    this area are designed to be complaint with human rights.   His  appeal
    on human rights grounds therefore now succeeds.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the following
    decision is substituted: the appeal, as originally brought to the  FtT,
    is allowed.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]
            22 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
