
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/13819/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2020                  |On 10 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                               Siwar Hamdoush

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant: Ms F Shaw, instructed by Central England Law Centre

For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
announced my decision and gave oral reasons, reserving the full  reasons  to
be provided in writing, which I now give. The order  made  is described at
the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is a Syrian national born on 2.1.94, has appealed to
    the Upper Tribunal with permission against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated 2.4.20, dismissing her  human  rights  appeal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, dated  1.8.19  and
    maintained in the Entry Clearance Manager Review of 19.9.19, to  refuse
    entry clearance to the UK as the spouse of Hussein Salah  Mahmood  (the
    sponsor), a person granted  refugee  status  in  the  UK,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The application was refused because the Entry Clearance Officer was not
    satisfied that the appellant was married to the sponsor as claimed,  as
    he had allegedly made a formal  declaration  on  28.8.19  that  he  was
    single. In the circumstances,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant and the sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

 3. Paragraph 352A provides as follows:

         "Family Reunion Requirements for leave to enter or  remain  as  the
         partner of a refugee

         352A. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom as the partner of a person  granted
         refugee status are that:

             (i)  the applicant is the partner of a  person  who  currently
             has refugee status granted under the Immigration Rules in  the
             United Kingdom; and

             (ii) the marriage or civil  partnership  did  not  take  place
             after the person granted refugee status left  the  country  of
             their former habitual residence in order to seek asylum or the
             parties have been living together in a  relationship  akin  to
             marriage or a civil partnership which has  subsisted  for  two
             years or more before the person granted  refugee  status  left
             the country of their former habitual  residence  in  order  to
             seek asylum; and

             (iii)    the relationship existed before  the  person  granted
             refugee status left  the  country  of  their  former  habitual
             residence in order to seek asylum; and

             (iv) the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection  by
             virtue of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article
             1F of the Refugee Convention if they were to  seek  asylum  in
             their own right; and

             (v)  each of the parties intends to live permanently with  the
             other as their partner and the  relationship  is  genuine  and
             subsisting

             (vi) the applicant and their partner must not  be  within  the
             prohibited degree of relationship; and

             (vii)    if seeking leave to  enter,  the  applicant  holds  a
             valid  United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for  entry  in  this
             capacity."

 4. The First-tier Tribunal  made  findings  which  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

      a. The appellant and the sponsor separately fled Syria to the  IKR  of
         Iraq;

      b. They first met in Iraq  and  were  subsequently  married  there  on
         1.8.18;

      c. They lived together as husband and wife in Iraq between 1.8.18  and
         when the appellant came to the UK with his family on 11.3.19;

      d. The appellant and the sponsor  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship;

      e. The sponsor was  habitually  resident  in  Iraq,  not  Syria,  when
         registered under the UNHCR resettlement scheme on 17.9.14;

      f. The sponsor was recognised as a refugee whilst in Iraq, not the UK,
         under the VPR Scheme operated by the UNHCR;

      g. The sponsor did not make a declaration of being single on  28.8.19,
         as that post-dates the refusal decision.  The  declaration  was  in
         fact made on 28.8.16, when interviewed by the UNHCR, at which  time
         the sponsor correctly declared himself to be single;

 5. On the basis of the  above  findings,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  352A,  as  the
    sponsor could not be said to have been granted refugee status under the
    UK Immigration Rules. Further, that the marriage took place  after  the
    grant of refugee status in Iraq in 2014, and although the marriage took
    place before the sponsor left Iraq, he did not do so "in order to  seek
    asylum."

 6. The grounds argued that the judge erred in law by:

      a. Making a material error in finding that Appendix FM would be met;

      b. Making a material error in assuming that  the  appellant  would  be
         admitted to the UK under the Syrian VPRS;

      c. Making a material error as to when and in which country the sponsor
         was granted refugee status;

      d. Making a flawed or incomplete assessment as to whether  exceptional
         circumstances exist;

 7. Permission was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  McClure
    on 11.6.20, on the basis that it was arguable that the sponsor's status
    in the UK is as a refugee and that  the  judge  has  misunderstood  the
    evidence in respect thereof. "The sponsor was  habitually  resident  in
    Syria and in coming to the UK was coming to seek refugee status. It  is
    arguable that the sponsor was not recognised as a refugee in  Iraq,  it
    is arguable that the judge has failed  to  apply  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352A properly."

 8. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  I  have  also  taken  into
    account Ms Shaw's skeleton argument, dated 6.9.20.

 9. For the reasons set out below, I find that no error of law is disclosed
    by either of the first two grounds.

10. Contrary to the assertion in the first ground, the judge did not make a
    finding that Appendix FM would be met but stated that "As long  as  the
    appellant and UK sponsor are able to meet the requirements of  Appendix
    FM of the Rules, I can see no reason why the  appellant  would  not  be
    granted entry clearance." It was not required of the judge to  make  an
    assessment as  to  whether  Appendix  FM  would  be  met.  It  was  the
    respondent's contention at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing  that
    the appellant should have made an application under Appendix FM  rather
    than 352A. It was not material  whether  or  not  the  appellant  could
    succeed under Appendix FM, but it was relevant that there was  a  route
    for reunion under those provisions.  It  would  be  a  matter  for  the
    appellant and her sponsoring husband to demonstrate whether they  could
    meet the requirements. None of this discloses any error of law.

11. Similarly, no error of law is disclosed in the second ground where  the
    judge speculated that the appellant would be able to  apply  under  the
    VPRS to settle with her husband. The grounds complained that the  judge
    failed to properly  explore  this.  However,  the  judge's  remark  was
    incidental to the decision and not  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

12. In the light of my findings in relation to the third  ground,  set  out
    below, Ms Shaw did not seek  to  pursue  the  first,  second  or  third
    grounds.

13. For the reasons set out below, taking into account the  submissions  on
    behalf of the appellant, I am satisfied that the judge erred in finding
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  352A.  The
    error arises from the judge's conclusion that the sponsor  was  granted
    refugee status in Iraq and not the UK.

14. On the information now before me, it appears clear that  the  sponsor's
    registration with the UNHCR's VPRS in Iraq was not the grant of refugee
    status but merely registration as an asylum-seeker. I am satisfied that
    the sponsor was granted refugee status  only  after  entering  the  UK,
    which would be consistent the statement of the then Home  Secretary  in
    March 2017, to the effect that those arriving through the  Syrian  VPRS
    "are granted Humanitarian Protection and five years' limited  leave  to
    remain." It's not entirely clear whether the grant  of  refugee  status
    was under the Immigration Rules, but it was not argued to the  contrary
    before me. It follows that 352A(i) is met.

15. The requirement of 352A(ii) is that the marriage  did  not  take  place
    after the sponsor left the country of his former habitual residence  in
    order to seek asylum. The First-tier Tribunal Judge relied on  Nessa  v
    Chief Adjudication Officer and another [1999] UKHL 41, to consider that
    if the term 'habitual residence' is to  be  interpreted  in  accordance
    with the normal use and meaning of the words as "residence in  a  place
    with some degree of continuity and apart from accidental  or  temporary
    absences", then the appellant and the sponsor were habitually  resident
    in Iraq and not Syria.

16. Given the error as to when and where the sponsor  was  granted  refugee
    status, the judge was also wrong to conclude that 352A(ii) could not be
    met on the basis that the sponsor did not leave Iraq "in order to  seek
    asylum".  If,  however,  the  sponsor's  country  of  former   habitual
    residence is Syria, then neither 352A(ii) nor 352A(iii) can be met,  as
    the marriage took place after he left Syria and did not exist before he
    left Syria. The appellant's case was  that  Iraq  was  the  country  of
    former habitual residence and that was the finding  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

17. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to argue that refugee  status  was  granted  in
    Iraq, nor that the relevant place  of  habitual  residence  was  Syria,
    rather than Iraq.

18. It follows that the judge materially erred in law in finding  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor  could  not  meet  all  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  am  satisfied  on  the
    information now before the Tribunal that the appellant  does  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.

19. It is also to be noted that the only Rules reason for  refusal  of  the
    entry clearance application cited in the  refusal  decision  and  Entry
    Clearance Manager Review was that the relationship of marriage was  not
    accepted. The respondent did not rely on issues as to  where  and  when
    refugee status was granted. The rejection of  the  relationship  arises
    out of a misunderstanding on the part of the respondent as to when  the
    sponsor made a formal declaration that his marital status was single. I
    find it could not have been made on 28.8.19, as the  decision  refusing
    the application was made on 1.8.19. The correct  year  must  have  been
    2016.

20. Whilst the only right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is on  human
    rights grounds and the judge could  not  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Rules, it is highly relevant to  the  article  8  ECHR  proportionality
    balancing exercise that on a correct understanding of the facts of this
    case, the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 352A and did  not
    need to apply under Appendix FM. In the circumstances, there would have
    to be strong countervailing public interest considerations to find  the
    respondent's decision proportionate. On the facts of this case,  it  is
    clear and I find that the decision was disproportionate.

21. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that it must
    be set aside and remade.  On  my  findings,  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of 352A.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed;

      I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  the
      decision by allowing it;

      I make no order for costs.

      I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    8 September 2020

