
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13068/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd September 2020               |On 19th February 2021                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                Oliur Hossain
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim instructed by City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. The appellant, a citizen of India born on 10th January  1980,  appealed
    against  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Cooper
    promulgated on 2nd January 2020.  Judge Cooper found the appellant  had
    not used deception  to  obtain  his  TOEIC  certificate  in  2012,  but
    nonetheless dismissed his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 19th June 2019 to refuse the appellant leave to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of his established private life.

 2. At the appeal before the Upper Tribunal Mr  Karim  submitted  that  the
    appeal should  have  been  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds  as  the
    appellant should have been placed in the position he  would  have  been
    had the deception not been found.

 3. Following submissions made by Mr Jarvis at the hearing, directions were
    issued to the Secretary of State to consider her position and  to  make
    written submissions on the approach she adopted in such appeals.

 4. Both representatives,  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 7th December 2020 and the appellants' legal representatives
    confirmed on 1st February 2021, confirmed their agreement to the appeal
    being resolved in this particular appeal in the following terms:

      i) The appellant agrees for his appeal to be dismissed;

     ii) The Respondent accepts that the  appellant  was  cleared  of  TOEIC
         deception by the Tribunal on appeal and this  remains  a  preserved
         and binding finding of fact;

    iii) The Respondent will grant the Appellant a subsequent period of  six
         months' leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules  in  order
         for him to make a free of  charge  application  for  leave  of  his
         choice, in light of the Tribunal's findings as set out in paragraph
         (ii) above;

     iv) In terms of the Appellant's  immigration  history,  the  Respondent
         will treat the Appellant as if he has  had  continuous  section  3C
         leave to date/present as it is accepted that the decision to refuse
         his case on TOEIC deception grounds can no longer stand;

      v) The Respondent agrees that the Appellant will not be treated as  an
         overstayer between the date that this appeal is dismissed  and  the
         date that the respondent issues him  six  months  leave  to  remain
         outside of the Rules;

     vi) Finally, the Respondent's Specialist Appeals Team will write to the
         Appellant's  instructed  legal  representatives  to  provide  their
         contact details and to ensure that the above process is facilitates
         for the Appellant.




    Order

 5. In the light of the above the appeal remains dismissed.



Signed   Helen Rimington   Date 15th February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

