
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13097/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 12 August 2021                           |On: 3 September 2021          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 zahid amin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was Microsoft Teams.  A  face  to
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable or necessary and
   all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

2. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  on  1  January  1983.  He
   appeals, with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
   dismissing his human rights appeal.

3. The appellant claims to have entered the UK initially in  2005,  although
   the respondent has no record of that. He was granted a visit  visa  on  1
   October 2009, valid until 1 April 2010, and claims to have entered the UK
   again in November 2009. He overstayed his  visa.  On  26  April  2013  he
   applied for leave to remain on family and private  life  grounds  on  the
   basis  of  a  relationship  with  Ramona  Mioara  Motorgeanu,  but   that
   application was refused on 22 June 2013 without a right of appeal.  On  2
   December 2013 the appellant was stopped by the police for cycling on  the
   pavement and he was arrested on suspicion  of  immigration  offences  and
   served with removal papers as an  overstayer.  On  24  February  2014  he
   claimed  asylum  and  on  11  March  2014  his  claim  was  refused.   He
   subsequently informed the authorities that  he  wished  to  withdraw  his
   claim and buy his own return ticket  and  on  9  April  2014  he  made  a
   voluntary departure from the UK.

4. On 9 November 2018 the appellant was married in Pakistan to  his  current
   spouse, Ameena Tahreem Akram, a British citizen whom he had met  when  he
   was living in the UK in around 2014, and on 29 November 2018  he  applied
   for entry clearance to settle with her in the  UK.  His  application  was
   refused on 26 February 2019  under  the  suitability  provisions  of  the
   immigration rules, on the  ground  that  he  did  not  have  a  valid  TB
   clearance certificate from  an  approved  source.  He  then  submitted  a
   further application for entry clearance on 26  March  2019  to  join  his
   spouse, but that was also refused, on 19 June 2019.

5. The  basis  for  that  refusal  decision  was  that  the  respondent  was
   satisfied that the appellant had previously contrived  in  a  significant
   way to frustrate the intention of the immigration  rules  by  overstaying
   and using deception in an application for leave to remain. With regard to
   the latter, the  respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  had  previously
   declared a number of different identities  when  submitting  applications
   for leave to remain and had previously provided passports and  supporting
   application forms under the name of Ameen Zahid, date of birth 24  or  29
   December 1983, whereas his passport submitted for the current application
   was in the name of Amin Zahid born on 1 January 1983. The respondent  was
   not satisfied that there was satisfactory  evidence  of  the  appellant's
   identity and refused  his  application  under  paragraph  320(3)  of  the
   immigration rules. His  application  was  also  refused  under  paragraph
   320(11) of the rules and his application  failed  under  the  suitability
   provisions under section S-EC of Appendix  FM  on  the  same  basis.  The
   respondent was otherwise satisfied that the appellant met the eligibility
   requirements of the immigration rules, but  considered  there  to  be  no
   exceptional circumstances rendering refusal a breach of Article 8.

6. The appellant appealed against that decision. In his  grounds  of  appeal
   he asserted that he had not used 'a number of different identities'; that
   he had never had a passport with the  name  Zahid  Ameen  DOB  24  or  29
   December 1983; and that his previous application, which  was  refused  on
   the basis that he did not have a valid TB clearance certificate  from  an
   approved source, did not raise any issue about his identity. The  refusal
   decision was upheld by an entry clearance manager in an ECM Review on  18
   October 2019.

7. The appellant's appeal was then heard by Judge Bennett in the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 18 December 2020. At the time of the hearing the sponsor, the
   appellant's wife, was with the appellant in Pakistan and the  appeal  was
   heard remotely, via CVP.  The  respondent  was  not  represented  at  the
   hearing and the appellant had no legal representative. The appellant gave
   evidence in English as there was no interpreter available  for  him,  and
   the judge noted that his level  of  English  was  poor.  The  appellant's
   evidence, as recorded by the judge, in explanation for the different name
   and date of birth, was that the application he had made in April 2013 had
   been made by a friend on his behalf and that his friend  had  given  that
   spelling of his name and date of birth for no apparent reason. As for his
   asylum claim made in 2014, that had been made on the advice of  a  friend
   who had told him what to say. The judge also heard from the  sponsor  who
   had no problem speaking in English and whose evidence  was  substantially
   in accordance with that of the appellant. She explained that  the  notice
   of hearing had been received whilst  she  was  visiting  her  husband  in
   Pakistan and so she had extended her stay there.  She  claimed  that  she
   would be unable to live in Pakistan as she had never lived there and  had
   no family there, she would not be able to find work there, her  Urdu  was
   limited and she would not feel safe there.  As  for  the  matter  of  the
   appellant's  different  identity,  she  gave  the  same  account  as  the
   appellant and said that she did not  believe  that  he  had  ever  had  a
   passport showing his date of birth as 24 December 1983.

8. The judge accepted the immigration history  provided  by  the  appellant.
   With regard to the appellant's account  of  how  the  date  of  birth  24
   December 1983 arose, the judge considered that that demonstrated that  he
   had been content to submit claims which he did not believe  to  be  true.
   The judge found further that there was no substance  in  the  appellant's
   asylum claim and that it had been spurious and untrue.  The  judge  noted
   that the respondent had provided no evidence of a passport in the name of
   Zahid  Ameen  DOB  24  December  1983  having  been  submitted  with  the
   appellant's application in April 2013,  but  he  concluded  that  such  a
   passport must have been submitted as the application would otherwise have
   been rejected as invalid. He concluded that the application made in April
   2013 was spurious and without merit and substance. Since he was satisfied
   that the other passports produced  by  the  appellant  were  genuine  and
   included the appellant's genuine identity  details,  the  judge  did  not
   accept that  the  current  application  failed  under  paragraph  320(3).
   However, he was satisfied that the refusal under  paragraph  320(11)  was
   properly made on the basis of the appellant having  previously  contrived
   in a significant way to frustrate the intention of the immigration  rules
   by overstaying  for  just  over  4  years  and  using  deception  in  his
   application for leave to remain in April 2013 and  his  asylum  claim  in
   February 2014. For the same reasons he found that paragraph  S-EC.1.5  of
   Appendix FM applied. The judge was  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was  a
   credible witness and was not linked to  the  deception  herself  and  was
   satisfied that their relationship was genuine and subsisting. However  he
   did not accept that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  would  result  in
   unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant or  the  sponsor   and
   was therefore not satisfied that there were any exceptional circumstances
   outside the rules for the purposes of Article 8.  The  judge  accordingly
   dismissed the appellant's appeal.

9. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision on  the  following
   three grounds: firstly, that the hearing was procedurally unfair  and  in
   breach of natural justice  because  the  appellant  had  not  anticipated
   giving oral evidence and had had no prior notice that he would  be  doing
   so and that his English was not sufficient to give  evidence  without  an
   interpreter; secondly, that the judge had reached conclusions which  were
   not open to him  on  the  evidence,  such  as  the  conclusion  that  the
   appellant's asylum claim was false and that he had previously submitted a
   false passport; and thirdly that the  judge  had  materially  misdirected
   himself in his assessment of GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM when considering  the
   matter of 'unjustifiably harsh consequences'.

10. In  support  of  those  grounds,  the  appellant  provided  a  statement
   confirming that he had not been expecting to give oral  evidence  himself
   and that he did so only because the judge, when he discovered that he was
   with the sponsor in Pakistan, said that he could  speak  too.  He  stated
   that he had struggled to answer the questions because  of  his  level  of
   English. He stated further that the basis for  his  application  made  in
   April 2013 was genuine, that the basis for his asylum claim  was  genuine
   and that he had never had a passport in the identity of Zahid  Ameen  DOB
   24 or 29 December 1983.

11. Permission was initially refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
   (apparently erroneous)  basis  that  there  were  no  grounds  of  appeal
   attached  to  the  permission   application.   However   permission   was
   subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal on a renewed  application,  on
   12 April 2021, primarily on ground one, whilst not excluding  the  second
   and third grounds. The respondent provided a rule  24  response  opposing
   the appeal and the appellant, in turn, submitted a reply under rule 25.

12. The matter then came before me for a remote hearing.

13. Ms Everett indicated to me  that  the  respondent  was  neutral  in  the
   matter in regard to the first ground and she referred me to the  rule  24
   response where it was stated that it was for  the  Tribunal  to  consider
   whether it was satisfied that the proceedings had been fair. She conceded
   that if the Tribunal had concerns, then the decision had to be set aside.
   In light of Ms Everett's concession and  my  own  expression  of  concern
   about the proceedings before Judge Bennett, Ms Brown simply  relied  upon
   her rule 25 response and skeleton argument.

14.  It seems to me  that  there  are  clear  procedural  unfairness  issues
   arising from the appeal having proceeded in  the  circumstances  that  it
   did, given the appellant's limited level of English language and the lack
   of an interpreter. Whilst the respondent's Rule 24 response asserts  that
   the appellant made the decision himself to participate in the proceedings
   and did not request an adjournment for an interpreter, I accept  that  in
   the absence of a legal representative it is understandable that  he  felt
   under pressure to give evidence in the  circumstances  described  by  the
   sponsor in her statement of 11 June 2021. Furthermore, given the  judge's
   adverse findings about the nature of the appellant's previous application
   in April 2013 and his asylum claim in 2014, it cannot be  said  that  his
   difficulty in providing oral evidence is immaterial. That  is  the  point
   made in the second ground of appeal and I find merit  in  the  assertions
   made in that regard.

15. For all those reasons I accept that there are justified  concerns  about
   the fairness of the hearing before Judge Bennett and that the grounds are
   made out in that respect. In  the  circumstances  there  is  no  need  to
   consider the third ground.  Accordingly,  I  set  aside  Judge  Bennett's
   decision in its entirety. In such circumstances, given the nature of  the
   errors in the decision, the appropriate course is  for  the  case  to  be
   remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  de  novo  before  a
   different judge.

DECISION

16. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The  decision  is  set  aside.  The
   appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh,
   pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
   Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a), before any judge aside from Judge
   Bennett.


Signed:  S Kebede

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 August
2021
