
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13816/2019
                                                               HU/13823/2019
                                                               HU/13828/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 30 April 2021                     |On 13 May 2021                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                SHIRAMAN KHAN (aka SAJJAD ALI KHAN) SAJAD ALI
                                  GUL RANA
                                    [M S]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan instructed by Goldmark Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellants, a family of two adults and one child,  appeal  with
        permission a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ali  promulgated
        on 4 March 2020, in which the Judge dismissed the  appeals  on  all
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by  another  judge  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal on a renewed application, the operative part of the  grant
        being in the following terms:

           "3.   The first appellant is an Afghan national, the second is a
                national of Pakistan and the nationality of their child, the
                third appellant, is unclear. It is arguable that the  First-
                tier Tribunal failed to consider  whether  there  were  very
                significant obstacles to the integration of the  appellant's
                as a family unit in either Afghanistan or Pakistan.  Whether
                this would make a material difference to the outcome of  the
                appeal is debatable given the  absence  of  evidence  as  to
                whether either of the adult appellants would gain admittance
                to the other's country."

     3. In her Rule 24 response dated 16 July 2020 a different Senior  Home
        Office Presenting Officer wrote:

           "The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application  for
           permission to appeal and agrees that the Judge of the FTT failed
           to  give  adequate  consideration  to  whether  there  would  be
           obstacles to the  3  appellants  continuing  their  family  life
           together  in  either  Afghanistan  or  Pakistan,   given   their
           differing nationalities.


           The  respondent  invites  the  Tribunal   to   set   aside   the
           determination and remit the appeal to the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           for a fresh hearing."

     4. There is considerable sympathy for the  Judge  in  this  matter  in
        light of the paucity of evidence  provided  by  the  appellants  in
        support of their claims. The Secretary of State in the Reasons  for
        Refusal letter dated 23 July 2019 raised  the  fact  there  was  no
        evidence to support the first appellant's contention that he  would
        not be able to fulfil the requirements for residency  in  Pakistan,
        yet no such material was provided. Similarly, it  does  not  appear
        the second appellant had provided evidence that she  would  not  be
        able to  fulfil  the  requirements  to  enable  her  to  travel  to
        Afghanistan with her husband, the second appellant.
     5. The Judge was clearly aware of the core issues in the  appeal,  but
        in addition to the pleaded grounds is  criticised  for  finding  at
        [28] that neither appellant had  provided  any  evidence  that  the
        embassies of either Afghanistan or Pakistan would not allow them to
        return their to live as a family unit when  it  is  said  that  the
        second appellant was asked in examination in chief about this issue
        and gave an answer which the Judge appears to  have  overlooked  on
        the face of the document.
     6. The  appellants  clearly  placed  their  trust  in  the  solicitors
        advising them to  prepare  the  case  adequately,  but  the  bundle
        provided to the Judge of some 22 pages  fails  to  adequately  deal
        with the real issues that needed to be determined in this appeal.
     7. Proceedings before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  adversarial  in
        nature. The Judge  was  not  required  to  adopt  an  inquisitorial
        approach. It is, however, not the fault of the appellants that  the
        Judge was not given best available evidence to enable  the  matters
        to be properly determined.
     8. Out of an abundance of caution, in light of the  fact  there  is  a
        young child involved in this case and the question of  whether  the
        appellants will be admitted to either Afghanistan  or  Pakistan  to
        live as a family unit, I accept the Judge  erred  in  law  for  the
        reasons set out in the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  and  the
        concession by the Secretary of State to this effect.
     9. A useful discussion occurred thereafter in relation to what  should
        happen with the appeal. The appellant's view  is  that  the  appeal
        should be remitted to be considered afresh, an  approach  supported
        by the Secretary of State in the Rule 24  response.  Remittance  is
        governed by the relevant Practice Direction and are not the default
        position if an error of law is found.
    10. What is clear from the discussions that arose is that the nature of
        the evidence that will need to be provided, including that relating
        to the asylum applications previously  made  which  should  include
        their asylum interviews and witness statements, together  with  the
        determinations rejecting the claims made, expert evidence  relating
        to the question of whether each will be able to be admitted to  the
        other's country lawfully,  the  situation  in  Baglan  province  in
        Afghanistan if the situation there  amounts  to  an  insurmountable
        obstacle preventing reintegration, prospects of  relocation  within
        Afghanistan if this is the issue, and evidence regarding the family
        and  country  situation  in  Pakistan,  the  home  of  the   second
        appellant, will be extensive. If such evidence is provided together
        with proper witness statements containing all the relevant evidence
        relied upon by the first and second appellant it is clear that  the
        case to be considered will be materially different from that before
        the Judge.
    11. It is clear that extensive findings of fact will have to be made on
        all aspects and that the appellants have  not,  to  date,  had  the
        opportunity of a hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  which
        the merits of the claim have been properly pleaded  and  considered
        by a judge. I accept therefore that it is appropriate  in  all  the
        circumstances for this  case  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal sitting at Bradford, to be heard afresh by a  Judge  other
        than Judge Ali. There shall be no preserved findings.

Decision

    12. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Bradford to be heard afresh by Judge other than Judge Ali.

   Anonymity.

    13. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 30 April 2021
