
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13140/2019
                                                               hu/07595/2019
                                                               hu/07605/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 6 September 2021                        |On 06 October 2021              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     BBS
                                     RS
                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by MBK Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Microsoft  Teams. A  face-to-face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is  a  remade  decision  following  the  identification  of  a
         material error of law in the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Khawar who, in a decision promulgated  on  9  April  2020,
         dismissed the appeals of BBS ("1st appellant"), his wife  RS  ("2nd
         appellant"), and their daughter SS, ("3rd appellant")  against  the
         decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         ("respondent" or "SSHD") dated 9 July 2019 (in respect of  the  1st
         appellant) and 9  April  2019  (in  respect  of  the  2nd  and  3rd
         appellants), refusing their human rights claims.

      2. In an 'error of law' decision promulgated  on  13  October  2020  I
         found that judge Khawar erred in his legal approach to an All-Party
         Parliamentary Group (APPG) report on TOEIC test cheating insofar as
         it related to his finding that the 1st appellant used a proxy test-
         taker in respect of a TOEIC English language test he took  in  2012
         with  Educational  Testing  Services  (ETS).  I  additionally   and
         independently found that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  2nd
         appellant's evidence that her husband became depressed and that the
         deterioration in his proficiency in  English,  as  noted  by  Judge
         Spicer in an earlier appeal decision and by Judge Khawar  based  on
         the 1st appellant's oral evidence at the hearing before him,  could
         have been attributed to this.

      3. Prior to the 'error of law' hearing  the  appellants  provided  new
         evidence in the form of a letter from Great Ormond Street  Hospital
         for Children (GOSH) dated 11  August  2020  indicating  that  their
         youngest daughter, OS, who had been born in the UK on 11  September
         2019, was diagnosed with a Heptoblastoma, a rare form of  childhood
         malignant liver cancer, and that she was currently under  the  care
         of that hospital. The appellants'  solicitors  requested  that  the
         Upper Tribunal treat  this  as  a  'new  matter'  pursuant  to  the
         decision in Birch (Precariousness and mistake; new matters)  [2020]
         UKUT 00086 (IAC) ("Birch"). Birch was not however relevant  at  the
         'error of law' stage, a point agreed by Mr Martin, the  appellants'
         barrister at the time. I indicated at the 'error  of  law'  hearing
         that,  if  I  identified  material  legal  errors  in  the  judge's
         decision, it was open to the appellants, at that stage,  to  invite
         the Upper Tribunal  to  apply  Birch.  Mr  Melvin,  the  Presenting
         Officer, indicated that the respondent believed Birch  was  wrongly
         decided and that if the appellants sought to rely on it  she  would
         provide a detailed written argument in opposition.

      4. I found that the legal errors in Judge Khawar's  decision  required
         it to be set aside. I ring-fence however the judge's  rejection  of
         the appellants' evidence that their  respective  families  did  not
         approve of their marriage. Judge Khawar  made  clear  and  reasoned
         findings in relation to this point that were  supported  by  cogent
         evidence. As a Presidential panel of the Upper  Tribunal  would  be
         hearing an appeal in December 2020 concerning  the  APPG  Report  I
         considered it appropriate to stay the present  appeal  pending  the
         handing down of that decision.

      5. On 27 January 2021  an  Upper  Tribunal  panel  consisting  of  the
         President and the Vice-President issued an interim  decision  -  DK
         and RK (Parliamentary privilege; evidence) [2021] UKUT 00061  (IAC)
         - holding inadmissible the  APPG  report.  The  panel  did  however
         indicate [4] that it would admit a factual record of what was  said
         at the APPG hearing by, inter alia, Professor Peter Sommer  and  Dr
         Philip Harrison.

      6. At a Case Management Review hearing  conducted  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Sheridan on 29 January 2021 both parties agreed that the case
         should continue to be stayed until  the  final  APPG  decision  was
         published.

      7. In May 2021 the appellants, through  their  legal  representatives,
         requested the Upper Tribunal to list the instant appeal for hearing
         as a matter of urgency due to the financial  and  emotional  strain
         caused by OS's health problems even though the final Upper Tribunal
         decision concerning the APPG evidence was not yet promulgated.  The
         appeal hearing was consequently listed before me on 2 July 2021.  A
         further bundle of evidence running  to  152  pages  was  filed  and
         served by the appellants.

      8. On 18 June 2021 the Presidential decision in Hydar (s 120 response;
         s 85 "new matter": Birch) [2021] UKUT 00176 (IAC) was  promulgated,
         overturning Birch. At the hearing on 2 July 2021 Mr  Whitwell,  the
         respondent's Presenting Officer, indicated that the respondent gave
         her consent to the Tribunal considering the medical condition of OS
         as a "new matter" under s.85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002. The hearing was however adjourned  and  directions
         issued to enable the appellants to provide a medical report  on  OS
         and to enable either party to provide any further evidence relating
         to      the      availability      of      appropriate      medical
         treatment/support/monitoring for OS in Nepal. A further  bundle  of
         documents was provided by  the  appellants'  new  solicitors.  This
         included, inter alia, further  statements  from  the  1st  and  2nd
         appellants, a report by Giuseppe Barone, Consultant  Oncologist  in
         charge of OS's treatment at GOSH, and a report by Dr Vandana  Jain,
         Consultant Paediatric Heptologist at Kings  College  Hospital.  The
         bundle  additionally  contained  email  correspondence,   primarily
         between the 2nd appellant  and  various  hospitals  in  Nepal,  and
         background evidence in respect of medical treatment  in  Nepal.  Mr
         Turner, counsel representing the appellants,  provided  a  skeleton
         argument for the remaking hearing.

Background

      9. The appellants are  all  nationals  of  Nepal.  The  1st  appellant
         arrived in the UK on 16 February 2007 as a student. He was  granted
         further periods of leave  and,  although  there  was  previously  a
         dispute as to whether his leave had  been  extended  by  virtue  of
         section 3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  following  a  decision
         refusing a human rights claim made by him  on  29  September  2014,
         which was served on him on 18 January 2016, Judge Khawar  concluded
         that his leave did continue pursuant to section 3C and that he  had
         leave to remain in the UK up to and including  9  August  2018.  No
         issue has been raised by the respondent with this finding. The  1st
         appellant appealed the refusal of the human rights  claim  that  he
         made on 29 September 2014 but  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Spicer dismissed this appeal on 2 February 2018.

     10. The 2nd appellant arrived in the UK on or around 30  December  2010
         pursuant to a grant of entry clearance as a student.  A  subsequent
         grant of leave was curtailed so as to expire on  25  May  2012.  An
         application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student  made  on  24
         October 2013 was granted on 21 November 2013. A subsequent  in-time
         application for further leave to remain based  on  her  family  and
         private life, made on 19 January 2016, was refused  on  17  January
         2017 and an appeal dismissed on 2 February 2018. The 2nd  appellant
         became appeal rights exhausted on 9 August 2018. The 3rd  appellant
         was born in the UK on 5 December 2015.  Although  she  applied  for
         leave to remain on the basis of her family and private life  on  19
         January 2016, this application was refused and an appeal  dismissed
         on 2 February 2018. The 3rd appellant was appeal  rights  exhausted
         on 9 August 2018.

     11. On 21 August 2018 all three appellants made  human  rights  claims,
         the 1st appellant on the basis that he met the requirements  for  a
         grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) on the basis of 10  years
         continuous lawful residence and on the basis of his  family/private
         life. The 2nd and 3rd appellants' human rights claims were based on
         their private and family life. The 1st and 2nd appellants  claimed,
         inter alia, that their respective families did not approve of their
         marriage and that the appellants  would  receive  no  support  from
         their families in Nepal. OS was born in September 2019.

     12. The respondent was not satisfied that the  1st  appellant  met  the
         criteria under paragraph 276B of the immigration rules for a  grant
         of leave based on his continuous lawful long residence. Nor was the
         respondent satisfied that the 1st appellant met the criteria  under
         paragraph 276B(ii)(c) in relation to the  Suitability  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules because on 31  May  2013  he  submitted  a
         TOEIC  English-language  certificate   from   Educational   Testing
         Services (ETS) which was cancelled by ETS on the basis that he  had
         used deception by using a proxy test taker. Nor was the  respondent
         satisfied that the 1st appellant met the requirements for  a  grant
         of leave under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
         Rules. The respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  2nd  and  3rd
         appellants met the criteria of Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  of
         the Immigration Rules.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     13. Judge Khawar considered in some detail the earlier appeal  decision
         of Judge Spicer and approached that earlier  decision  pursuant  to
         the principles established in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT  00702
         ("Devaseelan").  Because  of  a  delay  in  awaiting   a   Nepalese
         interpreter the 1st appellant gave his evidence before Judge Khawar
         in English. At [28] Judge Khawar found the 1st appellant's evidence
         "highly unsatisfactory" because the 1st appellant variously did not
         understand the questions put or  his  answer  was  not  immediately
         discernible. At [29] the judge found that the manner in  which  the
         1st appellant gave his evidence was similar  to  that  observed  by
         Judge Spicer. At [31] Judge Khawar  set  out  extracts  from  Judge
         Spicer's decision detailing an adverse credibility finding relating
         to  the  1st  appellant's  claim  that  his  spoken   English   had
         deteriorated since 2012 and his explanation for that  deterioration
         (the 1st appellant claimed he had been prevented from working,  had
         spent more time with  Nepalese  speakers  and  had  therefore  been
         unable to speak English). Judge Spicer found that the 1st appellant
         would have needed to speak English whenever  he  engaged  with  the
         outside world such as going shopping or to the doctors  or  to  his
         solicitors, and Judge Spicer did not accept that it was  reasonable
         to suppose that the 1st appellant's proficiency in English,  having
         achieved a "highly intelligible" level of pronunciation in his  ETS
         test, would have deteriorated so markedly.  At  [32]  Judge  Khawar
         concurred with the views of Judge Spicer.

     14.  At  [33]  Judge  Khawar  considered  evidence  given  by  the  2nd
         appellant, who had adopted her witness statement and who  confirmed
         that she had provided evidence at the 2018 appeal hearing. The  2nd
         appellant  was  not  asked  any   further   questions   by   either
         representative. Judge Khawar however asked her  why,  in  the  2018
         hearing, Judge Spicer  recorded  her  evidence  that  she  and  her
         husband's families were happy with their marriage. Judge Khawar did
         not accept the 2nd appellant's response ("I was not  well  prepared
         and maybe at that time I forgot to tell  them")  as  credible.  The
         judge noted in any event that the appellants were  being  supported
         by family members in  the  UK  (the  1st  appellant's  brother  and
         sister).

     15. At [38] Judge Khawar concluded that  the  fresh  evidence  did  not
         justify his departure from the conclusions of Judge  Spicer.  Judge
         Khawar rejected the claim by the 1st  and  2nd  appellants  to  the
         effect  that  their  respective  families  disapproved   of   their
         marriage. At [40] the judge  considered  the  appellants'  position
         outside the immigration rules under Article 8  but  concluded  that
         there were no  features  which  required  additional  consideration
         outside the immigration rules. Judge Khawar noted that the position
         of  the  2nd  and  3rd  appellants  had  been  given  detailed  and
         intelligible consideration  in  the  decisions  relating  to  their
         application under both Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

The 'error of law' decision

     16. In the 'error of law' decision I found that Judge Khawar's approach
         to the APPG report was legally flawed. However, given the  findings
         in DK and RK that the APPG report is  not  an  admissible  document
         this aspect of my error of law decision falls away. I  was  however
         additionally and independently satisfied that Judge  Khawar  failed
         to consider the 2nd appellant's evidence that  her  husband  became
         depressed and that the alleged deterioration in his proficiency  in
         English  may  be  attributed  to  this.  Although  there   was   no
         independent medical evidence supporting the 1st appellant's claimed
         depression, and although Judge Khawar had  rejected  as  incredible
         one aspect of the 2nd appellant's evidence relating to her and  the
         1st appellant's families view of their marriage, I was satisfied it
         was possible for an individual to have  undiagnosed  depression.  I
         noted that the 1st appellant claimed in his statement  of  10  June
         2020 (at paragraph 6) that he became depressed, had reduced contact
         with people, did not really go out much, and did not seek treatment
         because of stigma attached to mental health in his culture. The 2nd
         appellant stated (at paragraph 4 of her  statement  dated  10  June
         2020) that her husband became withdrawn into himself, that  he  was
         not interested in talking and  that  his  Nepali  and  his  English
         regressed. Whilst it may have been open to the judge to reject this
         evidence it did require consideration and the  provision  of  brief
         but adequate reasons for the rejection. I found that Judge Khawar's
         failure to consider  this  explanation  anywhere  in  his  decision
         constituted a failure to take account of relevant evidence  and  to
         give adequate reasons.

     17. I was also persuaded, but only just, that Judge Khawar's assessment
         of the Article 8 claim, as it was then advanced,  was  inadequately
         considered  and  inadequately  reasoned.  Whilst  the   judge   was
         unarguably entitled, for the reasons he gave, to reject  the  claim
         by the 1st and 2nd appellant that their respective families did not
         approve of their marriage, there was a range of evidence before the
         judge relating to the economy in Nepal and the position of women in
         society, as well as the further integration of  the  appellants  in
         the UK, that had not been  advanced  in  the  appeal  before  Judge
         Spicer. I could not discount the possibility that, had Judge Khawar
         properly engaged with this evidence, he  may  have  concluded  that
         removal for this particular family, in light  of  their  length  of
         residence in the UK and the conditions in Nepal, would constitute a
         disproportionate interference with Article 8.

     18. I consequently found that  Judge  Khawar's  decision  involved  the
         making of errors on points of law requiring it to be set  aside.  I
         however  ring-fenced  Judge  Khawar's  findings  relating  to   and
         rejection  of  the  appellants'  evidence  that  their   respective
         families did not approve of their marriage.

The hearing to remake the decision

     19. Both the 1st  and  2nd  appellants  gave  evidence  at  the  remote
         hearing. Although  a  Nepalese  interpreter  was  provided  neither
         appellant required his services. LS, the 1st appellant's sister,  a
         British citizen resident in the UK, adopted her statement dated  30
         August 2021. She was asked no questions by the  representatives  or
         the Tribunal.

     20. I maintained a record of the oral evidence and submissions made  at
         the hearing. Both parties are aware of the evidence,  both  written
         and oral, that was before me. This evidence is,  in  any  event,  a
         matter of record. I shall refer to the written  and  oral  evidence
         presented at the hearing and the submissions made  at  the  hearing
         only in so far as it is necessary for me to lawfully determine this
         appeal.  In  reaching  my  decision  I  have  carefully  read   and
         considered all the documents presented to me even if they  are  not
         specifically identified later in this decision.

Findings relating to the ETS allegation

     21. In a decision dated 2 February 2018 Judge Spicer found that the 1st
         appellant had used a proxy-test taker in respect of a TOEIC English
         language test he undertook in 2012 with  ETS.  Judge  Spicer  found
         that the 1st appellants  oral  evidence  was  not  fluent  and  his
         pronunciation was neither clear nor intelligible, such that it  was
         inconsistent with the "highly intelligible" classification  of  his
         test certificate awarded by ETS.  Judge  Spicer  properly  directed
         himself according to the relevant legal test and permission was not
         granted to appeal his decision. I approach the  decision  of  Judge
         Spicer as my starting point pursuant to the principles  established
         in Devaseelan.

     22. In his statement the 1st appellant confirmed that the recording  of
         his speaking test obtained from ETS did not contain his voice.  The
         1st appellant did not know how another person's voice was  recorded
         in respect  of  his  speaking  test.  He  maintained  that  he  had
         undertaken the English speaking test himself  and  that  he  became
         depressed as a result of the allegation of  cheating  but  had  not
         seen a doctor because of social stigma in  the  Nepalese  community
         concerning mental health issues.  In  his  oral  evidence  the  1st
         appellant claimed his proficiency in English had deteriorated as he
         had no-one to talk  to  except  his  family.  the  2nd  appellant's
         evidence was consistent with that of her husband in respect of  his
         alleged depression and stigma concerning mental health issues.

     23. The appellants have  not  produced  any  independent  or  objective
         evidence that stigma is attached to mental health  issues  such  as
         depression in Nepalese culture.  Although  they  have  consistently
         maintained that this is so, there assertions are unsupported by any
         cogent evidence. There remains an absence of any  medical  evidence
         that the 1st appellant is, or has,  been  suffering  from  clinical
         depression. Nor is  there  any  evidence  that,  even  if  the  1st
         appellant was  suffering  from  depression,  this  would  affect  a
         person's language proficiency. In her statement of 10 February 2020
         the 2nd appellant  claimed  that  her  husband's  Nepali  had  also
         regressed as well as his English. There  is  no  medical  or  other
         evidence before  me  to  support  the  assertion  that  a  person's
         proficiency  in  their  own  language  can  'regress'  because   of
         depression.  I  have  taken  account  of  the   various   education
         certificates awarded to the 1st appellant, and his  description  of
         travelling to the test centre,  but  I  am  not  persuaded,  having
         considered the evidence before me 'in  the  round',  that  the  new
         evidence relating to the ETS allegation justified a departure  from
         the finding of Judge Spicer.

The legal principles relating to Article 3 medical cases

     24. In AM (Zimbabwe) (Appellant) v SSHD (Respondent) [2020] UKSC 17 the
         Supreme Court considered and endorsed the  judgment  of  the  Grand
         Chamber of the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  (the  ECtHR)  in
         Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm  AR  867  which  gave  an  expanded
         interpretation  of  Article  3  ECHR  in  the  context  of  medical
         treatment cases.

     25. The appellant in AM  (Zimbabwe)  was  settled  in  the  UK  when  a
         deportation order was made against  him  because  of  very  serious
         criminal offences. He was also HIV+ and claimed that  he  would  be
         unable to access the appropriate antiretroviral therapy in Zimbabwe
         which would cause him to become prey  to  opportunistic  infections
         and which, if untreated, would lead to his death.

     26. The Supreme Court, having analysed  Paposhvili  and  several  other
         judgments, concluded that the Grand Chamber's  pronouncement  about
         the  procedural  requirements  of  Article  3   were   not   merely
         clarificatory and that the Grand Chamber had modified  the  earlier
         approach in N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39.

     27. The formula posited in Paposhvili was that there  must  be  a  real
         risk of a person:

             "being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in
             his or her state of health resulting in intense  suffering  or
             to a significant reduction in life expectancy".

     28. At [23] the Supreme Court stated:

             "Its  new  focus  on  the  existence  and   accessibility   of
             appropriate treatment in the receiving  state  led  the  Grand
             Chamber  in  the   Paposhvili   case   to   make   significant
             pronouncements about the procedural requirements of article  3
             in that regard. It held


                a) in para 186 that it was for applicants to adduce  before
                   the returning state evidence "capable  of  demonstrating
                   that there are substantial grounds for believing"  that,
                   if removed, they would be exposed  to  a  real  risk  of
                   subjection to treatment contrary to article 3;


                b) in para 187 that, where such  evidence  was  adduced  in
                   support of an application under article 3,  it  was  for
                   the returning state to "dispel any doubts raised by it";
                   to subject the alleged risk to close  scrutiny;  and  to
                   address  reports  of   reputable   organisations   about
                   treatment in the receiving state;


                c) in para 189 that the returning state had to "verify on a
                   case-by-case basis" whether the care generally available
                   in the receiving state was  in  practice  sufficient  to
                   prevent the applicant's exposure to  treatment  contrary
                   to article 3;


                d) in para  190  that  the  returning  state  also  had  to
                   consider the  accessibility  of  the  treatment  to  the
                   particular applicant, including by reference to its cost
                   if any, to the existence of a family network and to  its
                   geographical location; and


                e) in para  191  that  if,  following  examination  of  the
                   relevant  information,  serious  doubts   continued   to
                   surround the impact of removal, the returning state  had
                   to obtain an individual  assurance  from  the  receiving
                   state that appropriate treatment would be available  and
                   accessible to the applicant."


The evidence relating to OS's medical treatment and needs

     29. The detailed medical report dated 26 July 2021 from Mr Barone,  the
         Consultant Oncologist, indicated that OS had been diagnosed with  a
         standard  risk  Heptoblastoma  in  July  2020.  Heptoblastoma   was
         described as a form of aggressive cancer which is  lethal  if  left
         untreated. OS received 6 cycles of chemotherapy and then  underwent
         a full liver transplant at Kings  College  Hospital  on  1  January
         2021. Scans conducted in May 2021 did  not  show  any  evidence  of
         tumour recurrence. OS attends regular hospital appointments at GOSH
         (3 monthly for the next  17  months,  then  four  monthly  for  the
         following 12 months and then  6  monthly  for  2  years)  which  is
         described as a surveillance period during which the  medical  staff
         will be on the lookout for signs and symptoms of relapse.  OS  will
         have Abdominal US scan as well as Chest  x-ray  and  regular  blood
         tests to measure the tumour marker AFP. OS is  currently  receiving
         no treatment for her previous cancer  although  medical  staff  are
         carrying out an intensive surveillance program. Following her liver
         transplant OS is receiving immunosuppressant  medication  to  avoid
         rejection. This treatment is monitored regularly by King's  College
         Hospital.

     30. The current medication taken regularly  by  OS  includes  magnesium
         aspartate  sachets  for  low  levels  of  magnesium,  mycophenolate
         mofetil  1g/5ml  oral  suspension  to  prevent  rejection  of   the
         transplanted liver, sodium feredetate 190mg/5ml oral suspension  as
         an  iron  supplement  to  improve  iron  storage  in   the   liver,
         prednisolone to prevent rejection of her  transplanted  liver,  and
         TACrolimus (PROGRAF)  to  prevent  rejection  of  the  transplanted
         liver.

     31. Mr Barone described OSes prognosis at the  moment  as  being  "very
         good from an oncology point of view. Her survival is over 85% at  5
         years." Dr  Barone  noted  that  OS  is  bound  to  have  intensive
         surveillance  and  that  the  main  risks  for  her  would   be   a
         Hepatoblastoma relapse, the development of Liver  Rejection,  Viral
         Infection (due to intense  immunosuppression)  and  development  of
         hearing loss. She was currently under GOSH-Oncology for the risk of
         relapse, and under the  Kings  College  Hospital  Liver  Paediatric
         Liver team for the risk of Liver Rejection and Viral Infections. If
         OS had a relapse, she would need to have further  chemotherapy  and
         possibly  surgery,  and  in  the  case  of  liver   rejection   the
         immunosuppression will have to be increased and, should that not be
         sufficient, she would have to  receive  another  liver  transplant.
         Viral infections would  be  lethal  if  not  treated  promptly  and
         appropriately by  reducing  the  immunosuppression  as  this  would
         increase the risk of rejection. Should the relevant  expertise  not
         be available for her in Nepal OS could relapse and die  of  cancer,
         or develop liver rejection and die of liver failure, or develop  an
         infection and die of disseminated viral infection. Mr Barone  noted
         that these risks  need  "constant  and  expert  attention  and  the
         interruption of the current care could have a  catastrophic  effect
         on her life expectancy." A change in OS's current  treatment  plan,
         including a potential inability to meet the  current  frequency  of
         appointments, the possibility of inexperienced hospital  staff  and
         the unavailability of medication could also have the same effect.

     32. The detailed report of 18 August  2021  from  Dr  Jain,  Consultant
         Paediatric Hepatologist at King's College Hospital  confirmed  that
         OS was taking multiple medications which suppress her immune system
         in order to protect her transplanted  liver.  It  was  noted  that,
         since her transplant, she had developed a blockage of  one  of  the
         veins supplying the liver which required a  surgical  procedure  to
         unblock the vein and needed regular monitoring to  make  sure  that
         the vein remained  unblocked.  More  recently  investigations  (low
         haemoglobin, blood in stool, EBV virus) have been pointing  towards
         a  possible  post-transplant  lymphoproliferative  disorder  (PTLD)
         which involves the overgrowth of white blood cells  and  which  can
         lead to lymph node cancer. If PTLD was confirmed then OS would need
         an intensive course  of  anti-white  blood  cell  therapy  or  even
         chemotherapy,  requiring   inpatient   stay   and   regular   blood
         monitoring. According to Dr Jain due to OS's  medical  complexities
         and ongoing investigations she will need  regular  medical  review,
         blood tests and scans (ultrasound and CT scans) and,  depending  on
         results, may need further investigations. These assessments need to
         be conducted in a specialist liver centre.

     33. Dr Jain noted that OS  will  need  ongoing  medical  treatment,  in
         particular anti-rejection medication, which puts  her  at  risk  of
         developing  infections.  If  she  develops  a  fever  or  infective
         symptoms she will need to be reviewed medically in hospital and may
         need an inpatient  stay  for  antibiotics.  Dr  Jain  outlined  the
         treatment regime if OS did have PTLD, and then indicated that  even
         if PTLD was not identified OS required minimum 3 monthly reviews of
         the portal vein and that she  remained  susceptible  to  infection,
         surgical complications and developing PTLD.

     34. Dr Jain stated that post liver transplantation medical care for any
         child  requires  specialist  medications,  in  particular   immune-
         suppressing  medication  to   help   prevent   rejection   of   the
         transplanted liver. In addition, any post-transplant child will  be
         at  risk  of   needing   additional   medications,   ranging   from
         antibiotics/antifungals/antivirals   to   more   intense    immune-
         suppressing  medications  as  well  as  PTLD  treatment.  Dr   Jain
         explained that if any of the above medications were needed and were
         not available in Nepal then  OS's  health  could  be  significantly
         affected, which included a high risk of  mortality.  In  Dr  Jain's
         opinion if OS was unable to access frequent medical appointments in
         a specialist paediatric liver centre, in  light  of  her  need  for
         regular ultrasound scans to monitor the  portal  vein  as  well  as
         rigorous investigation for PTLD, her care  would  be  significantly
         affected posing a high risk to her mortality. Dr Jain  stated  that
         it was vital that specialist assessment,  diagnosis  and  treatment
         was available for OS, and if they were not available her  mortality
         risk would be high.

     35. The 2nd appellant sent many emails to various  hospitals  in  Nepal
         outlining OS's medical circumstances. The main body of  the  emails
         accurately set out OS's medical history, noting that she  underwent
         6 courses of chemotherapy and  that  she  had  a  liver  transplant
         operation in January 2021. The emails noted that in  June  2021  OS
         underwent a PV stricture dilation  due  to  the  narrowing  of  the
         portal  vein.   The   emails   stated   that   OS   was   receiving
         immunosuppressant medication such as Tacrolimus, prednisolone,  and
         mycophenolate mofetil. The emails noted that OS was vulnerable  and
         had received infections (a point corroborated in the other  medical
         notes in the bundle of documents prepared for the hearing on 2 July
         2021). The 2nd appellant inquired about the treatment available for
         OS in Nepal in terms of check-ups, tests, and the  availability  of
         her medication as well as overall costs.  The  2nd  appellant  also
         enquired as to the treatment OS would receive in Nepal if there was
         a relapse, if she required a further PV stricture  dilation  or  if
         she suffered from liver rejection or infection.

     36. In an email reply dated 11 July 2021 Professor Nil  Mani  Upadhyay,
         Chief of Clinical Services and  Education  at  the  Nepal  Mediciti
         hospital indicated that they did not provide liver  transplantation
         for children. They did have an oncology department and provided PVC
         dilatation. A further  email  from  the  hospital  indicated  that,
         following  a  discussion  with  doctors,  treatment  for   OS   was
         unavailable in Nepal.

     37. In a reply dated 12 July 2021 Dr Jay Dev Yadav, a paediatrician  at
         the private Himal Hospital in Kathmandu, stated that there was  "no
         specialised   setup   for   liver    transplantation    and    post
         transplantation complication management centre in  Nepal  is  [sic]
         paediatric age group."

     38. An email reply dated 20 July 2021  from  Hamro  Doctor  (an  online
         healthcare service provider in Nepal) indicated that Nepal had just
         started liver transplantation (at the Tribhuwan University Teaching
         Hospital (TUTH) and  at  the  Chitwan  Medical  College)  and  gave
         details of  a  Dr  Ramesh  Bhandari  who  was  a  specialist  liver
         transplant surgeon at the TUTH. An email dated 26 July 2021 from Dr
         Ramesh Bhandari indicated that transplantation did occur  in  Nepal
         but  there  were  definite  limitations  and  that  in  complicated
         circumstances like those described by the  2nd  appellant  patients
         were referred to big centres and that they usually sent patients to
         an Indian centre.

     39. An email from the Director of Programs at  the  organisation  World
         Child Cancer indicated that post organ transplantation care was not
         available  at   the   Kanti   Children's   Hospital,   that   liver
         transplantation was a very new thing in Nepal and  that  the  total
         number of transplants done in all of the country was less than  10.
         There was very limited experience in Nepal  on  the  management  of
         children with organ transplants, and portal vein stricture dilation
         could not be done at the Kanti Children's Hospital. Although  there
         were centres  performing  kidney  transplantation  which  may  have
         experience  on  post  organ   transplantation   care,   there   was
         uncertainty about their experience with children. The  email  noted
         that if there were infections,  most  of  them  could  be  managed,
         although the treatment process would be better  in  the  UK.  If  a
         transplanted liver was rejected,  due  to  limited  facilities  and
         experience, management of the child could be difficult in Nepal. If
         there was a relapse  of  the  cancer  then  chemotherapy  could  be
         provided and there were centres that  could  provide  radiotherapy,
         however if repeat surgery was  required  then  this  again  may  be
         difficult.

     40. The bundle of documents provided by the applicant for  the  hearing
         on 6 September 2021 included several articles concerning healthcare
         in Nepal.  This included a Final  Draft  of  a  'National  List  of
         Essential Medicines Nepal' (4th Revision) issued by the  Government
         of Nepal Ministry of Health  and  Population,  Department  of  Drug
         Administration 2009. This did  not  contain  the  immunosuppressant
         medications prescribed to OS. An  article  published  in  September
         2016 in the Journal  of  Nursing  Education  and  Practice,  headed
         'Healthcare in Nepal: an observational perspective' indicated  that
         Nepal was one of  several  poor  developing  countries  that  faced
         significant challenges in providing universal health coverage. Some
         of the key barriers included a lack of regulation of  hospitals  in
         terms of quality  assurance  and  accreditation,  poor  demand  and
         supply of services such as  workforce  and  essential  medications,
         poor access to health care facilities in rural areas  and  lack  of
         funding for the poor.

     41. An article published in 2015 in Global Health Action,  referred  to
         poor infrastructure  in  Nepal's  healthcare  services,  inadequate
         supply of essential drugs and poorly regulated  private  providers.
         The free  public  healthcare  service  covered  only  basic  health
         services with 40 essential drugs.

     42. An article in the South Asian Journal of Cancer, published in 2014,
         indicated that childhood cancer care delivery in Nepal was  primary
         through two government hospitals, the Kanti Children's Hospital and
         the Bharatpur Cancer Hospital outside  the  Kathmandu  Valley.  The
         Kanti  Children's   Hospital   had   other   essential   paediatric
         specialities  including  surgery,  gastroenterology   and   general
         paediatrics with tertiary level paediatric, surgical  and  neonatal
         intensive care. The cure rate of cancer  at  the  Kanti  Children's
         Hospital was around 40%, with 35% abandonment  of  therapy  due  to
         financial burden and 25% mortality (mainly due to  infection,  drug
         toxicity and relapse). Most cytotoxin's were  expensive  and  there
         was an inconsistent supply of chemotherapy drugs and antibiotics. A
         tender system for the purchase of medicines resulted in delays of a
         few months for medicine supply.

Discussion in respect of the Article 3 medical claim

     43. The medical report prepared by Mr Barone indicates that OS has been
         successfully treated  for  her  cancer  by  means  of  chemotherapy
         followed by a full liver transplant. She is not currently receiving
         any treatment for her previous cancer although she is subject to an
         intensive surveillance program. Mr Barone described OS's  prognosis
         at the moment as being "very good from an oncology point of  view."
         Although OS is currently undergoing investigations for PTLD,  there
         is, as of the date of my decision, no clear evidence that  she  has
         this disorder. Her survival rate following her cancer is said to be
         at over 85% at 5 years. Although the consequences  for  OS,  should
         she relapse or should there be  liver  rejection,  would  be  life-
         threatening, the medical reports do not identify the likelihood  of
         such a risk occurring.

     44. OS is however receiving immunosuppressant medication to ensure that
         her  body  does  not  reject  her  transplanted  liver.  Since  the
         transplant she has  developed  a  blockage  of  one  of  the  veins
         supplying the liver which required a surgical procedure and regular
         monitoring to ensure that the vein remains unblocked.  More  recent
         investigations have disclosed low haemoglobin, blood in  her  stool
         and EBV virus which points towards a possible PTLD. Both the report
         from Mr Barone and Dr Jain  confirm  that  OS  is  taking  multiple
         medications which suppress her immune system  and  that  she  needs
         constant and  expert  attention.  There  was  no  challenge  by  Mr
         Whitwell to the evidence in both medical reports that a  change  to
         OS's  current  treatment  plan,  including  the  unavailability  of
         medication in Nepal  or  the  absence  of  specialist  care,  could
         significantly affect her health and pose a high risk of  mortality.
         Mr Barone said this could have a catastrophic effect on  OS's  life
         expectancy. Dr Jain explained that  if  OS  was  unable  to  access
         frequent medical appointments  in  a  specialist  paediatric  liver
         centre her care would be significantly affected posing a high  risk
         to her mortality, and that it was vital that specialist assessment,
         diagnosis and treatment was available as  otherwise  her  mortality
         risk would be high.

     45. The appellants rely on a Final  Draft  entitled  National  List  of
         Essential Medicines Nepal (4th Revision) issued by  the  Government
         of Nepal Ministry of Health  and  Population,  Department  of  Drug
         Administration 2009. This document is approximately 12 years old. I
         therefore approach it with some caution, mindful of the possibility
         that in the  intervening  years  the  immunosuppressant  medication
         prescribed to OS which is identified in Mr Barone's  report,  which
         the appellants maintain is not available in Nepal,  may  have  been
         made available. Although Mr Whitwell invited me to consider the age
         of the document the respondent has not sought or obtained any  more
         up-to-date information regarding the availability of  the  relevant
         immunosuppressant medication in Nepal. This is despite the issuance
         of directions specifically giving both parties  an  opportunity  to
         investigate the availability of the appropriate  medical  treatment
         for OS in Nepal.

     46. I have considered with care the email sent by the 2nd appellant  to
         various hospitals in  Nepal  relating  to  her  daughter's  medical
         circumstances. Although I take into account that the 2nd  appellant
         was found incredible in respect of evidence she  gave  relating  to
         the view of her marriage by her relatives  in  Nepal  and  the  1st
         appellant's relatives in Nepal, I find that her email was sent with
         the genuine intention of obtaining information  as  to  whether  OS
         could  receive  the  necessary  specialist  care,  medication   and
         specialist monitoring in Nepal. Her email accurately reflected  the
         contents of the medical notes  and  the  medical  reports  and  she
         accurately reflected the  timeline  of  events  and  the  principal
         medications prescribed to OS.

     47. I have additionally considered with care the  email  correspondence
         between the 2nd appellant  and  various  hospitals  in  Nepal.  The
         evidence indicated that post transplantation care was not available
         at the Kanti Children's Hospital, the principal government hospital
         for children in Nepal. The email replies, holistically  considered,
         indicated that liver transplantation is very new in Nepal and  that
         there is very limited experience  in  this  area,  particularly  in
         relation  to  the  management  of  children   who   undergo   organ
         transplants.  Most   of   the   hospitals   indicated   that   post
         transplantation  care  management  was  not  available   for   OS's
         paediatric age group. The one specialist liver  transplant  surgeon
         who operated from TUTH indicated that in complicated  circumstances
         such as those described by the 2nd appellant patients were  usually
         sent to an Indian centre. The evidence presented suggested that the
         relevant  immunosuppressant  medication  was  not  available.   The
         general articles concerning  healthcare  in  Nepal  indicated  that
         there is poor regulation of private hospitals, and that  there  are
         inadequacies and delays in the supply of drugs.

     48. In light of my assessment of the  evidence  presented  to  me,  and
         applying the Paposhvili  test  endorsed  in  AM  (Zimbabwe),  I  am
         satisfied that the appellants have  presented  sufficient  evidence
         capable of demonstrating that there  are  substantial  grounds  for
         believing that OS could face a real risk  of  being  exposed  to  a
         serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in  her  state  of  health
         resulting in intense suffering or to  a  significant  reduction  in
         life  expectancy,  on  account  of  the   unavailability   of   the
         appropriate immunosuppressant medication and specialist  treatment,
         monitoring and specialist care management needed for her particular
         care. OS's medical needs have been  described  as  complex  by  the
         medical experts. Mr Barone indicated that  OS  needs  constant  and
         expert attention, and that the interruption  of  her  current  care
         could have a catastrophic effect on  her  life  expectancy.  In  Mr
         Barone's view a change in OS's current treatment plan, including  a
         potential inability to meet the current frequency of  appointments,
         the  possibility  of   inexperienced   hospital   staff   and   the
         unavailability of medication could  also  lead  to  a  catastrophic
         effect on her life expectancy. Dr Jain indicated that OS will  need
         regular medical review, blood tests and scans due  to  her  medical
         complexities and ongoing investigations and tat this must occur  in
         a specialist liver unit. The evidence  upon  which  the  appellants
         rely, considered above, indicate  that  the  necessary  medications
         and/or  the  necessary  specialist  expertise  and  monitoring  and
         support for children with liver transplants  is  not  available  in
         Nepal. The medical experts agree that if this is not  available  in
         Nepal then there was a high risk to OS's mortality.

     49. In considering whether the  respondent  has  dispensed  any  doubts
         raised by the  evidence  adduced  by  the  appellants  I  note  the
         respondent has chosen not to adduce  any  evidence  in  respect  of
         inquiries   she   may   have   made   on   the   availability    of
         immunosuppressant medication for children of  OS's  age  in  Nepal.
         Whilst  Mr  Whitwell  challenged  the  evidence  adduced   by   the
         appellants no effort has been made  to  counter  that  evidence  by
         means of separate inquiries,  despite  the  respondent  having  the
         opportunity to do so following the  directions  issued  on  2  July
         2021. I note the observation by the Supreme Court in AM  (Zimbabwe)
         that the returning state is better able to collect  evidence  about
         the availability and accessibility of  suitable  treatment  in  the
         receiving state (at [33]). I note that no individual assurance  has
         been obtained by the respondent that appropriate treatment would be
         available and accessible to OS in Nepal.

     50. I am satisfied, for the reasons given  and  on  the  evidence  made
         available to me, that the care available in Nepal for  OS,  in  her
         particular circumstances and with her particular needs, is  not  in
         practice sufficient to prevent her exposure to  treatment  contrary
         to Article 3.

Determination of the appeals

     51. OS is not an appellant in these appeals, but she  is  only  just  2
         years old and is entirely dependent on her parents for her care and
         welfare. In order to prevent her expose to a real risk of Article 3
         ill-treatment if she accompanies her family to Nepal she will  need
         to remain in the UK. There has been no suggestion  that  she  could
         remain in the UK without  her  parents.  Nor  has  there  been  any
         suggestion that she could remain in the UK with  just  one  of  her
         parents. There is unchallenged evidence in the  various  statements
         before me of the strong Article 8 parental relationship between  OS
         and both her parents.

     52. In assessing the appeals I  have  taken  into  account  the  public
         interest in the 1st appellant's removal on the basis that  he  does
         not meet the Suitability requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  I
         have additionally taken into account the significant NHS debt  owed
         by the appellants relating to OS's hospitalisation.  I  have  taken
         account of the material  factors  in  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  Their  failure  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Immigration  Rules  is  a  strong  factor  when
         considering the public interest in  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls. I note that both the 1st and  2nd  appellants
         gave their evidence in  English  and  that  they  are  sufficiently
         proficient in the language, but this is a neutral  factor.  I  note
         that the private lives of all three appellants was established when
         their immigration status was precarious. I additionally  note  that
         the appellants are likely to receive some family support from their
         relatives in Nepal,  although  this  support  does  not  affect  my
         primary findings in respect of  the  real  risk  to  OS  considered
         above.

     53. Having weighed up the competing interests in this particular appeal
         I am persuaded that the decision to refuse the appellants'  article
         8 human rights claims, in circumstances where, if the  family  were
         removed as a single unit, OS would be exposed to a real risk  of  a
         breach Article 3, would result in a breach of the UK's  obligations
         under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. I consequently  allow
         the appeals on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

The human rights appeals are allowed


Signed D.Blum          Date: 27 September 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


