
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13918/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               Abdelhakim [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, Counsel, instructed by David Tang & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco.  His date of birth is 1  January
    1979.   He  was  granted  leave  to  enter  on  5  December  2010.   He
    overstayed. On 15 December 2017 he  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
    possessing false identity documents.  The offences concerned  a  forged
    Belgian passport and a false driving licence which he used  to  try  to
    open a bank account.  He was sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment.
     The Secretary of State made a deportation order on 19 June  2018.  The
    Appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by Section 32(1) of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007. Under Section 32(5) the Respondent is obliged to make
    a deportation order pursuant to Section 3(5) of the 1971 Act.

 2. The Appellant appealed against deportation  on  human  rights  grounds.
    His appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan
    following a hearing on 21 March 2019.  Following  a  hearing  at  Field
    House on 22 October 2019, I set aside the  decision  of  the  FtT.  The
    salient parts of my decision read as follows: -

         "Error of law

         10. I shall engage firstly with ground  3.   This  ground  asserts
             that the judge did not make a finding  whether  the  Appellant
             and his partner have a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.
             The judge found that the Appellant and his  partner  were  not
             credible and that their evidence was not consistent.  However,
             I do not accept that this equates in this case  to  the  judge
             having  found  that  the  relationship  is  not  genuine   and
             subsisting.  Whilst  it  is  clear  that  their  evidence  was
             problematic and the judge rationally found that they  had  not
             been living together since  2013  as  they  claimed  in  their
             witness statements, their evidence was that they  were  living
             together at least a number of  days  a  week.   It  cannot  be
             reasonably inferred that the judge found there was  no  lawful
             and subsisting relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
             partner because he found them not to  be  credible  about  the
             length of time they had been living together or the extent  of
             his role as a father.   It  was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
             resolve the issue of the  relationship  at  the  time  of  the
             hearing  notwithstanding   that   the   witnesses   may   have
             exaggerated about the intensity of  the  relationship  between
             the Appellant and Ms [K] or the extent of his parental role.

         11. Ground 2 asserts that the finding of the judge at paragraph 45
             is perverse because it was based on minor discrepancies in the
             evidence.  I have some sympathy with this argument.  The judge
             failed  to  make  a  proper  assessment  of  the   Appellant's
             relationship with his child.  Whilst the judge's criticism  of
             the evidence is lawful (I specifically refer to  paragraph  38
             of the decision and the judge was entitled  to  conclude  from
             the evidence that the relationship between the  Appellant  and
             his  son  had  been  exaggerated),  it  cannot  reasonably  be
             inferred from this  that  the  parental  relationship  is  not
             genuine and subsisting. At paragraph 39 that the  judge  found
             that  the  Appellant's  role  as  a  father  was   peripheral.
             However, if the family is living together part  of  the  week,
             even if it is the case that  he  does  not  take  his  son  to
             nursery or he has not lived in the  family  home  as  long  as
             claimed, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  his  role  could  be
             described as simply peripheral. There is no proper  engagement
             with the evidence of family life and inadequate findings  made
             on the issue.

         12. That the judge considers "unduly harsh" is inexplicable if  he
             found that the relationship between the Appellant and  is  son
             is not genuine and subsisting. In any event, he did not make a
             lawful assessment of unduly harsh having directed  himself  on
             what the Court of Appeal said in LC China [2014] EWCA Civ 130.
              Whereas we now know that when considering  unduly  harsh  the
             Appellant's criminality is not a material factor, see KO. Thus
             ground 4 is made out.

         13. For the above reasons  the  judge  materially  erred  and  the
             decision should be set aside.

         14. There are no reasons properly identified in  the  grounds  for
             going behind the findings at paragraph 38 or the  evidence  as
             set out by the judge.  However, there will need to be a proper
             assessment of Article 8.

         15. There is substance in grounds 2, 3 and 4 of  the  grounds  for
             the reasons that I have given.  As far as ground 1  concerned,
             I do not find that there is substance  in  this  ground  which
             states that the judge "has failed to state  what  standard  of
             proof he was applying".  However, there is no legal obligation
             on the judge to set out  in  his  decision  the  standard  and
             burden of proof.  There is no support  for  the  judge  having
             applied  the  wrong  standard  and  burden  of  proof  in  the
             decision. However, this is not material because  the  decision
             cannot stand. Although this was not raised in the grounds  and
             it is not material, I also note that the judge,  at  paragraph
             48, wrongly identifies the decision  of  the  Respondent.   He
             states that it is not an automatic deport. The decision is  an
             automatic deportation under the 2007  Act.  There  is  also  a
             further problem that the judge sets out  the  old  Immigration
             Rules. Moreover, although reference is made  to  Section  117A
             and B there is no reference to  Section  117C  which  concerns
             deportations.

         16. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
             the appeal.  The matter was adjourned to be remade by  the  UT
             at a future hearing."

The law

 3. The Immigration Rules set out  how  the  Secretary  of  State  and  her
    officials will exercise the powers  conferred  by  the  2007  Act.  The
    relevant paragraphs read as follows:-

         '398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
                Human Rights Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that  claim
                    will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
                    if it does not, the public interest in deportation  will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
                if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or

                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen
                    or settled in the UK, and

                    (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                        person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their
                        immigration status was not precarious; and

                    (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
                        in the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                        deported, because of compelling circumstances  over
                        and above those described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                        Appendix FM; and

                    (iii)  it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                        remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be
                        deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                    most of his life; and

                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                    and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he
                    is deported.'

 4. On 28 July 2014 the Immigration Act 2014 came into force.  It  provided
    that a new part 5 should be inserted into the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  That part provides so far as material:-

         '117A    Application of this Part

                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under  the
                    Immigration Acts-

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                    court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in  section
                        117C.

                (3)    In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                    means the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
                cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English-

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons-

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                    that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where-

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
                foreign criminals

                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                    criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public   interest   in
                    deportation of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest  requires  C's  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                (4)    Exception 1 applies where-

                    (a)    C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a
                    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four
                    years, the public interest requires  deportation  unless
                    there are very compelling circumstances, over and  above
                    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to
                    be taken into account  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                    to the extent that the reason for the decision  was  the
                    offence or offences for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                    convicted.'

 5. In KO Nigeria v the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53 at paragraph 22 Lord Carnwath  with  whom  the  other  justices
    agreed, said that on the face of it, exception 2 in Section 117C of the
    2002 Act raises a factual issue seen from the  point  of  view  of  the
    partner or child and at paragraph 23 he said:

         "On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons". That would  be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

 6. A Tribunal or court considering Section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act  must
    focus not on the comparative seriousness of  the  offence  or  offences
    committed by the foreign criminal who faces deportation, but rather  on
    whether the effects of deportation on  a  child  or  partner  would  go
    beyond the degree of harshness which would necessarily be involved  for
    any child or partner of a foreign criminal faced with deportation.  The
    Tribunal must consider whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  child
    and/or partner to live in the country to which the foreign criminal  is
    to be deported and whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child
    and/or partner to remain in the UK without him.

 7. There have been two recent Court of Appeal decisions  of  significance.
    In PG (Jamaica) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 the  court  considered  the
    unduly harsh test and said as follows;

         38.  The decision in KO (Nigeria) requires this court to  adopt  an
             approach which differs from that taken by Judge  Griffith  and
             Judge Finch. In the circumstances of this  appeal,  I  do  not
             think  it  necessary  to  refer  to  decisions  predating   KO
             (Nigeria),  because  it  is  no   longer   appropriate,   when
             considering section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act,  to  balance  the
             severity of the consequences for SAT and the children of  PG's
             deportation against the  seriousness  of  his  offending.  The
             issue is whether there was evidence on which it  was  properly
             open to Judge Griffith to find that deportation  of  PG  would
             result for SAT and/or the children in a  degree  of  harshness
             going beyond  what  would  necessarily  be  involved  for  any
             partner or child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.

         39.  Formulating the issue in that way, there is in  my  view  only
             one answer to the question. I recognise of  course  the  human
             realities of the situation, and I do not doubt  that  SAT  and
             the three  children  will  suffer  great  distress  if  PG  is
             deported. Nor do I doubt that their lives will in a number  of
             ways be made more difficult than  they  are  at  present.  But
             those, sadly, are the likely consequences of  the  deportation
             of any foreign criminal  who  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a partner and/or child in  this  country.  I
             accept Mr Lewis's submission  that  if  PG  is  deported,  the
             effect on SAT and/or their three children will not  go  beyond
             the degree of harshness which is necessarily involved for  the
             partner or child of a foreign criminal who is  deported.  That
             is so, notwithstanding that the passage of time  has  provided
             an opportunity for the family ties between PG, SAT  and  their
             three children to become stronger than they were at an earlier
             stage. Although no detail was provided to this  court  of  the
             circumstances  of  what  I  have  referred  to  as  the  knife
             incident, there seems no reason to doubt that it  was  both  a
             comfort and an advantage for SAT and the children that PG  was
             available to intervene when his son was a victim of  crime.  I
             agree, however, with Mr  Lewis's  submission  that  the  knife
             incident, serious though it may have been,  cannot  of  itself
             elevate this case above the  norm.  Many  parents  of  teenage
             children are confronted with difficulties and upsetting events
             of one sort or another, and have to face one or more of  their
             children going through "a difficult period" for one reason  or
             another, and the fact that a parent who is a foreign  criminal
             will  no  longer  be  in  a  position  to   assist   in   such
             circumstances cannot of itself mean that the  effects  of  his
             deportation are unduly harsh for his partner and/or  children.
             Nor can the  difficulties  which  SAT  will  inevitably  face,
             increased as they are  by  her  laudable  ongoing  efforts  to
             further her education and so to improve her earning  capacity,
             elevate the case above the commonplace so far as  the  effects
             of PG's deportation on her are concerned. In  this  regard,  I
             think it significant that Judge Griffith at  paragraph  67  of
             her  judgment  referred  to  the  "emotional  and  behavioural
             fallout" with which SAT would have to deal: a phrase which, to
             my mind, accurately summarises  the  effect  on  SAT  of  PG's
             deportation, but at the same  time  reflects  its  commonplace
             nature.

 8. In SSHD v KF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2015, the Court of Appeal  again
    considered the proper interpretation of the unduly harsh test and  said
    as follows;

         "30. Furthermore, and  with  respect  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge, I consider that his conclusion on  the  evidence  about  the
         respondent's family that his deportation would be unduly  harsh  is
         unsustainable in the light  of  Lord  Carnwath's  analysis  of  the
         proper interpretation of Exception 2 in s.117C(5), namely that:

             "One is looking for a degree of harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent."

         Looking at the facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal  that  led
         to the conclusion that family would suffer adverse consequences  as
         a result of the deportation, and in particular the consequences for
         the respondent's son separated from his father, it is difficult  to
         identify anything which distinguishes this case  from  other  cases
         where a family is separated. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found
         that the respondent's son would be deprived  of  his  father  at  a
         crucial time in his life. His view that "there is no substitute for
         the emotional and developmental benefits for a three-year-old child
         that are associated with being brought up by  both  parents  during
         its formative  years"  is  indisputable.  But  those  benefits  are
         enjoyed by all three-year-old children in the care of both parents.
         The judge observed that it was a "fact that  being  deprived  of  a
         parent is something a child is likely to find  traumatic  and  that
         will potentially have long-lasting adverse  consequences  for  that
         child" and that he was entitled to take  judicial  notice  of  that
         fact. But the "fact" of which he was taking  "judicial  notice"  is
         likely to arise in every case  where  a  child  is  deprived  of  a
         parent. All children should, where possible, be brought up  with  a
         close relationship with both parents. All children  deprived  of  a
         parent's company during their formative years will be  at  risk  of
         suffering harm. Given the changes to  the  law  introduced  by  the
         amendments to 2002 Act, as interpreted by the Supreme Court, it  is
         necessary to look for consequences characterised  by  a  degree  of
         harshness over and beyond what every child would experience in such
         circumstances.

         31.  For those lawyers, like my Lord and  myself,  who  have  spent
         many years practising in the family jurisdiction,  this  is  not  a
         comfortable interpretation to apply. But that  is  what  Parliament
         has decided, and it is important to bear in mind  the  observations
         of Hickinbottom LJ in PG (Jamaica) at paragraph 46:

             "When a parent is deported, one can only have  great  sympathy
             for  the  entirely  innocent  children   involved.   Even   in
             circumstances in which they can remain in the  United  Kingdom
             with the other parent, they  will  inevitably  be  distressed.
             However, in section 117C (5) of the 2002 Act,  Parliament  has
             made clear its  will  that,  for  foreign  offenders  who  are
             sentenced to one to four years, only  where  the  consequences
             for the  children  are  'unduly  harsh'  will  deportation  be
             constrained. That is entirely consistent  with  Article  8  of
             ECHR. It is  important  that  decision-makers  and,  when  the
             decisions are challenged, tribunals  and  courts  honour  that
             expression of Parliamentary will.""

 9. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662, the Court of
    Appeal gave guidance to decision makers about the approach  of  appeals
    under the 2002 legislation and Article  8  generally.  In  RA  (s.117C:
    "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT  00123,  the  UT
    decided that the way that the Tribunal  should  approach  section  117C
    remains as set out in NA.  In so far as the judgement  is  relevant  to
    the issue in this appeal, Jackson LJ said: -

         27.  For all these reasons we shall proceed on the basis that  fall
             back protection of the kind stated in section  117C(6)  avails
             both (a) serious offenders and (b) medium offenders  who  fall
             outside Exceptions 1  and  2.  On  a  proper  construction  of
             section 117C(3), it provides that for  medium  offenders  "the
             public interest requires C's deportation  unless  Exception  1
             or Exception 2 applies or unless  there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2."

         28.  The next question which arises concerns the meaning  of  "very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2". The new para. 398 uses the same  language
             as  section   117C(6).   It   refers   to   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those  described  in  paragraphs
             399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the 2014 rules refer
             to the same subject matter as Exceptions 1 and  2  in  section
             117C, but they do so in greater detail.

         29.  In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to  those  provisions.  The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". As we have indicated  above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         ...

         32.  Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  "near  miss"
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". He would need to have a far stronger case than that by
             reference to the interests protected by  Article  8  to  bring
             himself within  that  fall  back  protection.  But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it the
             Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters
             relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether  they
             are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public
             interest in deportation.

         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

         34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian Republic  [2012]  UKSC  25;  [2013]  1  AC  at  [145].
             Nevertheless, it is a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that
             offenders may be separated from their children for many years,
             contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  those  children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace of family life. That is not usually a sufficiently
             compelling circumstance to outweigh the high  public  interest
             in deporting foreign criminals. As  Rafferty  LJ  observed  in
             Secretary  of   State   for   the   Home   Department   v   CT
             (Vietnam)[2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:

                  "Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation."

         35.  The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) that  paras.  398  to
             399A of the 2012 rules constituted a complete code.  The  same
             is true of the sections 117A-117D of the  2002  Act,  read  in
             conjunction with paras. 398 to 399A of  the  2014  rules.  The
             scheme of the Act and the rules together provide the following
             structure for deciding whether a foreign criminal  can  resist
             deportation on Article 8 grounds.

         36.  In relation to a medium offender, first see whether  he  falls
             within Exception 1 or  Exception  2.  If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". If there are, then the Article 8  claim  succeeds.  If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim fails. As was the case
             under the 2012 rules (as explained in MF (Nigeria)), there  is
             no room for a general Article 8 evaluation  outside  the  2014
             rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

         ...

         38.  Against that background, one may ask what is the role  of  the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence? In particular,  how  does  one  take
             into  account  important  decisions  such  as  &  UUML;ner   v
             Netherlands (2007) 45 EHRR 14 and Maslov v Austria? Mr Southey
             QC, who  represents  KJ  and  WM,  rightly  submits  that  the
             Strasbourg authorities have an important role to play. Mr  Tam
             rightly accepted that this is correct. The answer is that  the
             Secretary of State and the  tribunals  and  courts  will  have
             regard to the Strasbourg jurisprudence when applying the tests
             set out in our domestic legislation. For example,  a  tribunal
             may be considering whether it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  a
             child to remain in England without the deportation or  it  may
             be considering whether certain circumstances are  sufficiently
             "compelling"  to  outweigh  the  high   public   interest   in
             deportation of foreign criminals. Anyone applying these  tests
             (as required by our own rules and legislation) should heed the
             guidance contained in the Strasbourg authorities. As  we  have
             stated above, the scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and paras.
             398-399A of the 2014 rules is to ensure  compliance  with  the
             requirements of Article 8 through a structured approach, which
             is intended to ensure that  proper  weight  is  given  to  the
             public interest in deportation whilst also  having  regard  to
             other relevant factors as identified  in  the  Strasbourg  and
             domestic caselaw. The new regime is not  intended  to  produce
             violations of Article 8.

The evidence

10. In accordance with directions of the Tribunal the  Appellant  served  a
    supplementary   bundle (AB/B) dated 19 December 2019. He also relied on
    the bundle before he FtT (AB/A).

The evidence of the Appellant

11. The Appellant relied on his  witness  statements  of  7  March  and  19
    December 2019. He gave oral evidence  and  adopted  his  statements  as
    evidence-in -chief.  His evidence can  be  summarised.   The  Appellant
    came here in 2010 as a visitor and overstayed. He cannot  remember  the
    date he came here. The Home Office has his passport. He met his partner
    in 2013. She has ILR.  Their relationship is  genuine  and  subsisting.
    They started to cohabit in May 2013. He worked using  a  false  Belgian
    passport. The purpose of obtaining the false document was to enable him
    to work and it was not used for any other purpose.  When  the  passport
    was about to expire, he acquired a false driving  licence  because  the
    bank was threatening to close his  account  without  proof  of  ID  and
    lawful residence. He did not use the documents  to  commit  a  criminal
    offence. He used them to secure employment and to open a  bank  account
    so that he could pay  bills.    He  successfully  attended  courses  in
    prison which would enable him to find work here. At  times  he  had  to
    work outside of London and would stay with friends. He returned to  the
    family home 2-4 days a week. When his son was born  and  the  Appellant
    was working, he would give his partner money.

12. EA attends nursery here. He speaks only a few words of Arabic. He is  a
    British citizen. The  Appellant  was  released  from  detention  on  10
    October 2018 and has since devoted his time to caring for his son.  The
    Appellant is very close to his son. It would be very harsh for them  to
    stay here without him.   The  Appellant  wants  his  son  to  have  one
    culture. He wants him to be educated and go to university in the UK. In
    Morocco the Appellant has an elderly mother. His father is deceased. He
    has no contact with his siblings.  The Appellant has lost contact  with
    family in Morocco.  He would have no support on return.  Before  coming
    to the UK, he studied  in  Morocco  and  obtained  a  qualification  in
    hospitality in 2001. It was a two-year course.  His  partner  has  been
    here for 18 years. She came as a refugee. Neither she (nor  their  son)
    has ever been to Morocco.   His partner is studying  in  the  UK.   She
    intends to study for a degree in tourism and leisure.  She cannot speak
    French and would not be able to find work in Morocco. Language would be
    a barrier.  She has worked in the UK, but she is now dependent on state
    benefits.

The evidence of Ms [K]

13. Ms [K], the Appellant's partner, relied on her witness statements of  7
    March and 19 December 2019. In addition, she gave oral evidence and she
    adopted her statements as evidence-in-chief.  Her evidence is that  the
    Appellant has shown remorse for his crimes. He committed  the  offences
    so that he could work here.   He is hard-working. He is not a  risk  to
    society. He's an excellent father. He and their son are very close.  EA
    is very attached to his father. When he visited him in prison he  would
    cry when leaving. He would call other men "Dad" on the bus on  the  way
    home. He needs his father. Children suffer in broken homes.  She  wants
    to provide her son with a stable environment.  The Appellant attends to
    their son's needs. EA is closer to his father.  He  takes  him  to  and
    collects him from nursery.  EA had a speech delay and the Appellant has
    helped him overcome this.  When the Appellant was in prison for  eleven
    months it was very difficult  for  her  to  cope.  She  struggled.  Her
    friends would help her with childcare if she  needed  it,  but  it  was
    difficult for them because they work. She has never  been  to  Morocco.
    It would not be possible for them to move  there  and  continue  family
    life. Ms [K] has been here for the last 18 years. She was aged 16  when
    she came to the UK.  She grew up here. She is  Eritrean;  however,  she
    only lived there for a year. She lived in Saudi  Arabia  before  coming
    here. She speaks Arabic; however, she can barely understand the French/
    Arabic language which is spoken in Morocco.  She has worked as a travel
    operator. She is settled here. Her parents are  here.   She  has  local
    authority accommodation. Her rent is paid  for  her.  She  has  friends
    here. She does not know what she would face in Morocco. The uncertainty
    is very stressful. She would not be able to adapt to a move to  another
    country.  She was younger when she came to the UK.  She  did  not  know
    when she met the Appellant that he was an overstayer. Once she realised
    this about seven of eight months into living together, she intended  to
    help him to regularise his status, but she was  not  able  to  do  this
    until she was granted ILR in 2018. She did not realise  that  it  would
    take so long.

Submissions

14.   Mr  Whitwell  conceded  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  and  between  the
    Appellant and his son. Both representatives agreed that  the  issue  in
    this appeal was whether  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
    children and/or the Appellant's partner and if not  whether  there  are
    very compelling circumstances within the meaning  of  s.117C  (6).   Mr
    Whitwell reminded me that the UT on the last occasion did not find  any
    reason to go behind the findings of the judge at [38]; namely, that the
    Appellant has exaggerated his role as a father and that his partner was
    the main carer for EA. However, he accepted that I  must  consider  the
    evidence at the date of the hearing.   Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  it
    was not entirely clear when the  Appellant  came  to  the  UK.  In  his
    evidence he said that he came in May 2010; however, he did not at  that
    time have a visa.  In  his  view  the  Appellant  may  have  come  here
    unlawfully. The focus of the evidence in the witness statements was the
    situation for the family should it have to  return  to  Morocco  rather
    than separation. The Appellant's partner has social housing and friends
    here. EA will be attending nursery  soon.  None  of  this  will  change
    should  the  Appellant  be  deported.  Whilst  the  situation  may   be
    difficult, it does not  reach  the  elevated  standard  necessary.   In
    respect of the fears that the family has  about  EA  growing  up  in  a
    single parent household, Mr Whitwell draw my attention to the  case  of
    PG at [38] and [39] and KF at [30].  Mr Whitwell said that there is  no
    doubt that relocation would be  difficult,  but  again  the  impact  on
    either EA or his mother does not meet the elevated  standard  required.
    The Appellant does not meet any limb of para 399A or  Exception  1.  He
    has stayed unlawfully. He is not socially and culturally integrated and
    there are no very significant obstacles to integration. In  so  far  as
    section 117C (6) is concerned Mr Whitwell submitted  that  the  parties
    were aware that the Appellant did not have leave  when  they  formed  a
    relationship and decided to  have  a  family.  There  are  no  properly
    identified very compelling circumstances.

15. Mr Lam started  by  addressing  me  on  the  public  interest  and  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's criminality. He sought to  distinguish
    the cases of PG and KF. I asked him to focus initially on unduly  harsh
    reminding him that the Appellant's criminality plays  no  part  in  the
    assessment.   However,  he  then  submitted  that  the  offences   were
    committed in order that the Appellant could work, and he referred me to
    ZH (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ 8 2009 and  what  was  said  about  the
    Appellant's criminality in the OASys report. He reminded  me  that  the
    assessment of unduly harsh is fact sensitive. The emotional  trauma  to
    the family would be harsh.  The Appellant plays an  important  role  in
    the life of his son who needs a father.  He said that he was  not  sure
    that the  Appellant's  wife  would  cope.  The  harm  is  difficult  to
    quantify. There are  language  barriers.   There  would  be  no  family
    support. It is harsh to expect the Appellant's wife and child  to  live
    in a country that they have never visited.  There are no job  prospects
    there.  They would have nowhere to live. The  Appellant's  wife  has  a
    dream to study and work here. She is a refugee and  has  established  a
    stable  life  here.   She  wants  to  better  herself.  This  would  be
    impossible in Morocco because of the language barrier.   Her  ambitions
    would  be  dashed.   In  the  alternative,   all   matters   considered
    cumulatively amount to very compelling circumstances. The Appellant  is
    not presently able to work, but he has done so previously. He  is  hard
    working. He has worked here and paid taxes. It is  not  in  the  public
    interest to make EA fatherless and for the family  to  remain  here  on
    benefit without the Appellant.   It  is  irrational  to  say  that  the
    Appellant is no culturally  or  socially  integrated  here.  He  speaks
    English and has friends here.

Conclusions

16. The Appellant is a medium offender. I accept that he is at low risk  of
    re-offending. I have considered the OASys assessment.   I  accept  that
    the offences were committed in order that he could  work  here  and  to
    open a bank account. I accept that he did not commit  further  criminal
    offences with the false documents. His criminality is not  material  to
    the assessment of unduly harsh.  It is relevant when assessing  Article
    8 generally.

17. EA is aged four. He attends nursery here.  I have no  reason  to  doubt
    that the family is close and loving and that the Appellant  is  a  good
    father. It is without doubt very much in EA's best interests to grow up
    with his father in his life, preferably here in the UK rather  than  in
    Morocco.

18. The Appellant says that he has lost contact with the people he knew  in
    Morocco including his family. The Appellant came here 8 � years ago.  I
    find that there is no  reason why he cannot re-establish links with his
    family, friends and acquaintances in Morocco. The Appellant has  worked
    here in the UK. He completed a course in Morocco before he  came  here.
    There is no cogent evidence before me that the Appellant would  not  be
    able to make a life for himself and his family in Morocco. EA is  young
    and in good health. I do not find that he would suffer as a result of a
    language barrier. I understand from his  mother's  oral  evidence  that
    there was a speech delay.  There  is  no  evidence  that  this  was  of
    significance or that he needed specialist treatment. EA would have  the
    option to come and study here when he is older. The Appellant's partner
    would be able to overcome any language barrier. She already has a  head
    start in that she speaks Arabic.  There is no evidence before  me  that
    she would have to abandon her ambitions although she may have to modify
    her plans. I have considered her position as a refugee here. However, I
    do not find that having to relocate  would  necessarily  be  better  or
    worse for her than it would be for a spouse who has lived here all  her
    life.  I appreciate that she feels anxious  about  the  uncertainty  of
    what would happen to the family in Morocco. This is entirely reasonable
    in the circumstances. She is happy and settled here. She would have  to
    give up things such as her flat and friends  and  proximity  to  family
    members. I acknowledge that it will  be  disruptive  to  relocate.  The
    family would prefer to stay here together. Of course, EA and his mother
    could remain here, but this would lead to  separation  of  the  family.
    There was little evidence of practical  difficulties  that  this  would
    present to the family save the  normal  problems  that  single  parents
    face; however, I accept that separation would be very upsetting for all
    members of the family and not in the best interests of EA.

19. Whilst the assessment is fact sensitive, the cases of  PG  and  KF  are
    binding on me. In respect of the wishes and hopes  of  the  Appellant's
    spouse, together with the distress caused to the family  on  relocation
    or separation and the prospect of EA growing  up  in  a  single  parent
    household, these are all factors that are capable alone or cumulatively
    of  reaching  the  elevated  threshold  required.  They  are  all   the
    consequences that naturally flow from deportation of  a  parent/father.
    Mr Lam was not able to identify any features of  the  case  that  could
    support a finding on a proper application of the law  that  deportation
    would be unduly harsh. There is no properly identified feature of  this
    case which would enable me to conclude  that  there  was  a  degree  of
    harshness going beyond what  would  necessarily  be  involved  for  any
    child/ partner faced with the deportation of a parent/partner.   Whilst
    para 339A  of  the  rules  is  set  out  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument, there are no written submissions relating it.   I  asked  the
    parties to clarify their position. It was  agreed  that  the  Appellant
    cannot satisfy the first limb. There was no evidence that  there  would
    be very significant obstacles.   Mr Lam did not address me on  this.  I
    was not referred to any case law to support Mr Lam's  submission  about
    social  and  cultural  integration  and  any  adverse  decision   being
    irrational, but it is totally at odds with what  the  Court  of  Appeal
    said in Binbuga [2019] EWCA Civ 551. I find that the Appellant does not
    satisfy any limb of para 339A. However, if he  did  satisfy  339A  (c),
    this would make no difference to the outcome of his appeal.   Exception
    1 does not apply in the Appellant's case.

20. Mr Lam was not able to identify any features of the case which could be
    very compelling within the meaning of s117C (6).  I remind myself  that
    the test is extremely demanding and that I must have regard to s.  117B
    factors.   I have taken on board what Mr  Lam  said  about  the  public
    interest. The Appellant is a medium offender.  I  have  considered  the
    judge's sentencing remarks. The Appellant sought to use false documents
    because he had no status and had overstayed.  He  had  a  sophisticated
    forged Belgium passport which potentially gave him a right of residence
    here and a false driving licence which he used to try to  open  a  bank
    account. Whilst I accept  what  Mr  Lam  said  about  the  reasons  for
    offending, and the level of risk presented by the Appellant, it  is  my
    view that he is seeking to downplay the seriousness  of  the  offences.
    Whilst the offences do not involve  violence  or  drugs,  I  take  into
    account the judge's sentencing remarks that the offences are  extremely
    serious for which the court imposes deterrent sentences.    I find that
    there  is  an  element  of  remorse.  Whilst  he  is  at  low  risk  of
    reoffending, rehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material weight in
    favour of a foreign criminal. The public  interest  in  deportation  of
    those who commit serious crimes goes well beyond depriving the offender
    in question of the chance to re-offend in this country: it  extends  to
    deterring and preventing  serious  crime  generally  and  to  upholding
    public abhorrence of such offending (see DS (India) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 544).  Risk of offending is one facet only of the public  interest.
    The public interest in deporting foreign criminals is high.   I  accept
    that the Appellant entered the UK lawfully; however, he overstayed  and
    formed a relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  when  he  was  here
    unlawfully. It is in the best interests of the child to remain with his
    family intact in the UK and deportation will be  very  distressing  for
    the family.  However, considering all material  matters  there  are  no
    very  compelling  circumstances.  The  decision  does  not  breach  the
    Appellant's rights under Article 8.

21. The Appellant is not able to come within Exceptions 1 or 2. He has  not
    identified "sufficiently compelling circumstances, over and above those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  Having  conducted  a  fact  sensitive
    assessment, on the evidence before  me  applying  the  legislation  and
    relevant case law, the balance falls in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State in this case.

22. The appeal is dismissed under Article 8

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 11 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

