
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13739/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 January 2018                  |On 22nd January 2018                  |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KN
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Greer, Counsel
For the respondent:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to her medical condition and the medical  evidence  adduced
          in relation to it.

       2. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal dated 27 January 2017  dismissing  her  appeal  on  human
          rights grounds.

Summary of claim

       3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who entered  the  UK  as  a
          visitor in 2012.  Her application for indefinite leave  to  remain
          as a dependent relative was refused  by  the  respondent  and  her
          appeal against this was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
          2013.  A further fresh application  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
          Article 8 was made and ultimately refused  by  the  respondent  in
          2015.


       4. The appellant is 65 years old and  suffers  from  dementia  having
          always had learning difficulties.  The appellant claims  that  her
          medical condition is  such  that  she  depends  heavily  upon  her
          brother in the UK ('the  sponsor')  and  his  wife,  and  that  if
          returned to Pakistan she would not be  able  to  access  the  care
          that is necessary to meet her needs.

First-tier Tribunal decision

       5. The First-tier Tribunal heard from the sponsor and  his  wife  but
          considered their evidence to be unreliable and  inconsistent  with
          the documentary evidence available.


       6. The First-tier Tribunal made the following relevant findings:

              i) There are close family  members  in  Pakistan,  namely  the
                 appellant's sisters  who  should  share  responsibility  in
                 caring for her - see [33] and [34].


             ii) The sponsor's claim as to the level of care that is  needed
                 and  provided  to  the  appellant  has  been  substantially
                 exaggerated and is inconsistent with the medical evidence -
                 see [35], [36] and [38].

            iii) The appellant has significant  care  and  possibly  nursing
                 needs but these  can  be  met  in  Pakistan  by  relatives,
                 alternatively a  nursing  home,  or  alternatively  by  the
                 family paying for carers - see [37] and [40].

             iv) When the appellant entered the UK as a visitor,  there  was
                 an attempt to circumvent immigration control by the sponsor
                 - see [42] and [45]  and  the  findings  at  [26]  to  [30]
                 rejecting the sponsor's evidence that the decision to  make
                 arrangements for the appellant to remain in the UK with him
                 were only made after her arrival.

              v) The economic  well-being  of  the  UK  would  be  adversely
                 impacted as the appellant cannot speak English - see [43].

             vi) Family life between the appellants and the relatives in the
                 UK can be exercised by regular visits  to  Pakistan  -  see
                 [45].

            vii) When all the circumstances  are  considered  including  the
                 relevant public interest considerations it would not  be  a
                 breach of Article 8 to remove the appellant from the UK.

Grounds of appeal

       7. The grounds of appeal prepared  by  solicitors  do  no  more  than
          disagree with the First-tier Tribunal factual findings and  repeat
          the contention that the appellant's  care  needs  and  absence  of
          family members in Pakistan is such that  the  appeal  should  have
          been allowed on Article 8 grounds.


       8. In a decision dated 9 October  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch
          identified the following arguable  legal  errors:  the  First-tier
          Tribunal failed to take into account (i)  the  country  background
          evidence  relating  to  the  lack  of  treatment  for  those  with
          dementia in Pakistan; (ii) the  appellant's  history  of  learning
          difficulties or that her dementia had developed to  a  stage  that
          she was now  angry,  incontinent  and  did  not  want  to  eat  or
          communicate;  (iii)  whether  the  appellant's  private  life   in
          Pakistan would be so limited as amount to a breach of Article 8.

       9. The respondent relied upon a rule 24 notice dated 1 November  2017
          in which it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's  findings
          were open to  it.   The  respondent  highlighted  the  substantial
          concerns the First-tier Tribunal had with the credibility  of  the
          evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant.

Hearing

      10. At the  beginning  of  the  hearing  Mr  Greer  acknowledged  that
          grounds of appeal have  been  consolidated  and  recast  by  Judge
          Finch and he only relied upon  the  three  grounds  summarised  by
          Judge Finch when granting permission.  He made it  clear  that  he
          did  not  rely  upon  the  grounds  prepared  by  the  appellant's
          solicitors.  I  indicated  that  he  was  correct  to  adopt  this
          approach  as  the  pleaded  grounds  vaguely  disagreed  with  the
          findings of fact and did not come close to even alleging an  error
          of law.  I address each of the three grounds relied upon below.


      11. Ms Aboni relied upon the rule 24 notice  and  submitted  that  the
          First-tier Tribunal made findings of fact open to  it,  which  are
          such that the appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
          Rules or Article 8 of the ECHR


      12. At the end of the hearing I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

   1) Country background evidence

      13. The country background  evidence  relevant  to  the  treatment  of
          those with dementia in Pakistan  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          was very limited.  Mr Greer directed my attention  to  one  aspect
          of this evidence only.  The sponsor gave  evidence  that  he  made
          enquiries regarding the availability of care for the appellant  in
          Pakistan and obtained a  letter  dated  5  December  2016  from  a
          hospital  in  the  appellant's  home  area  of  Kallar  Syedan  in
          Rawalpindi.  This  letter  includes  a  single  sentence:  "It  is
          certified that  the  facility  of  Psychiatry  Department  is  not
          available in Tehsil Headquarter  Hospital,  Kallar  Syedan."  This
          does not support the submission  that  there  was  an  absence  of
          facilities  to  care  for  those  with   dementia   and   learning
          difficulties in Pakistan.  The letter is very  vague  and  limited
          to a particular  geographical  area  in  Pakistan.   Although  the
          First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  specific  reference  to  this
          letter, it would have made no material difference to its  findings
          of fact.


      14. I note that the appellant's solicitors also submitted  an  article
          with the following heading 'Dementia: Challenges  of  practice  in
          Pakistan' and  dated  November  2014.   This  sets  out  the  very
          limited provision for dementia sufferers in Pakistan and  includes
          the following:


                 "There is no long  term  care  unit  or  nursing  home  for
                 patients with dementia and almost all of these  people  are
                 cared for at home  by  their  families.   These  caregivers
                 provide full assistance from the  advanced  stages  of  the
                 disease   until   death   without   benefit   of   dementia
                 counsellors,  social  workers,  case  managers  or  support
                 groups."


      15. The First-tier Tribunal  finding  at  [40]  that  the  appellant's
          needs could be fulfilled through a nursing  home  is  inconsistent
          with this evidence.  This is not  a  material  error  because  the
          First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find that in  any  event,  the
          appellant could be cared for by members of the  family  and  /  or
          paid carers.


      16. Mr Greer emphasised that there was evidence  from  various  family
          members that pointed in  the  same  direction:  the  relatives  in
          Pakistan would not be able to assist the  appellant.   The  First-
          tier Tribunal took this evidence into  account  but  rejected  it.
          Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  may   have   been
          clearer, when the decision is read as  a  whole,  I  am  satisfied
          that the  First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the  evidence  that  the
          relatives in Pakistan would not be able to  assist  the  appellant
          and in effect found that they would step in and if necessary  with
          the  assistance  of  paid  carers,  provide  the  care  necessary.
          Although there are no  formal  care  facilities  or  support  from
          social services  for  those  with  dementia  in  Pakistan,  it  is
          important to note that the appellant has been provided  with  care
          and support by her own family, within the  home  and  without  any
          meaningful assistance from social services, in the UK.  The First-
          tier Tribunal was entitled to find that this could  be  replicated
          to a sufficient degree, in Pakistan. Albeit  by  different  family
          members.

   2) Impact of the appellant's learning disability and dementia

      17. Mr Greer submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make
          clear findings of  fact  as  to  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
          learning disability and dementia upon her day to  day  functioning
          and needs and therefore failed to assess what  she  will  face  in
          Pakistan if returned.  Mr Greer took me to  the  reports  prepared
          by Dr Waghray and invited me to find that no clear  findings  were
          made regarding this evidence.

      18. The First-tier Tribunal clearly took  into  account  Dr  Waghray's
          evidence and found that the  reports  suffered  from  an  inherent
          weakness  at  [9]:  the  appellant's  language  difficulties   and
          learning difficulties were such  that  the  psychiatrist  gathered
          most  of  the  information  from  the  sponsor.   The   First-tier
          Tribunal regarded the sponsor's  evidence  to  be  unreliable  and
          specifically rejected his history of the onset of the  appellant's
          dementia at [31] and found that  he  and  his  wife  substantially
          exaggerated the impact of the appellant's condition  at  [36]  and
          [38].   The  First-tier  Tribunal  expressly  found  the   medical
          reports to lack  independence,  based  as  they  were  on  sources
          considered to be unreliable.   The  more  recent  report  from  Dr
          Waghray dated 2 December 2016 suffers from  similar  deficiencies.
          The significant deterioration in the appellant  described  at  2.1
          is based upon what he was told by the sponsor's wife.

      19. I  do  not  accept  Mr  Greer's  submission  that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal made contradictory findings at [36] and [40].  The First-
          tier Tribunal clearly accepted that  the  appellant  suffers  from
          dementia that  is  moderately  severe  and  will  deteriorate  but
          rejected the evidence that her condition is of such severity  that
          her needs can only be met by remaining in the UK with the  sponsor
          and his wife.

   3) Private life / 276ADE

      20. I accept that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  failing  to
          consider and  apply  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
          private life aspect of Article 8 of the  ECHR.    This  is  not  a
          material error of law.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  of
          fact are such that submissions based upon these  provisions  would
          be bound  to  fail.   In  any  event,  it  does  not  appear  that
          submissions were made  on  these  aspects  before  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.   The  grounds  of  appeal  against   the   respondent's
          decision and the grounds of appeal seeking permission against  the
          First-tier Tribunal's decision make no mention of  276ADE  or  the
          appellant's private life.

Decision


      21. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
          making of a material error of law and is not set aside.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
18 January 2018

