
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13666/2018
                                                               HU/14435/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th July 2019                    |On 13th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                    (1) Chandima Dilhani Bandara Wickrama
               (2) Kuruppu Arachige Vishmitha Dampath Rodrigo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss T Aziz, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is a Sri Lankan  national  who  was  born  on  16th
    October 1970.  She appeals with permission granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Smith against a decision which was issued by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Oliver on 12th March 2019,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of leave to remain as a spouse.

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom in September  2010  with
    leave to remain as a  student  which  was  valid  until  October  2014.
    Following failed attempts  to  regularise  her  status  she  became  an
    overstayer in the UK.  She is said to have formed during that period  a
    relationship with a dual national of  Greece  and  the  United  Kingdom
    called [PI], who was born on 29th April 1941.  I should  say  that  the
    second appellant is the first appellant's son  who  was  born  on  10th
    January 2000.

 3. In the letter of application to the Secretary of State the  appellants'
    former representatives, Lupins Solicitors, asked for  leave  to  remain
    under Appendix FM for the first appellant and her dependent  son.   The
    application letter is dated 30th May 2017 and is exceedingly  detailed.
    That is not a criticism of the author of that letter, it is  plainly  a
    document which is of assistance.

 4. The case as presented to the Secretary of State was primarily presented
    on the basis that the first appellant satisfied the requirements of the
    Ten Year Route in Appendix FM, that is to say that she  had  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a British national and that there were
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  relationship  between   the   first
    appellant and Mr [I] continuing in Sri Lanka.  Those  submissions  were
    predicated on Mr [I]'s state of health, which  was  described  at  some
    length in the letter from Lupins Solicitors.  The  Secretary  of  State
    was not satisfied as to the relationship and in the alternative was not
    satisfied that the relationship could not continue in Sri  Lanka.   The
    first appellant gave notice of appeal and the appeal came before  Judge
    Oliver on 13th February 2019.

 5. A substantial  bundle  of  documents  was  presented  to  Judge  Oliver
    directed to the questions  of  whether  or  not  the  relationship  was
    genuine and subsisting and whether there were insurmountable  obstacles
    to the relationship continuing elsewhere.

 6. Having heard oral evidence and reviewed that documentary evidence Judge
    Oliver came  to  conclusions  in  relation  to  those  two  issues,  in
    particular at [30] and [33] of his decision.  His  conclusion  at  [30]
    rehearses the difference in age between first appellant and sponsor and
    considers the submission that the relationship was more akin to one  of
    carer and patient as opposed to being partners.  Unfortunately,  having
    rehearsed those objections, the judge failed to reach a clear  decision
    on whether or not there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the parties.  Mr Bramble  accepted  that  there  was  no  clear
    finding in that respect.  Unfortunately,  the  conclusion  at  [33]  in
    relation to paragraph EX.1.(b)  of  Appendix  FM  is  equally  unclear.
    Again, that much is accepted by Mr Bramble before  me.   The  paragraph
    begins with the statement "Mr [I] cannot leave for medical reasons  and
    does not have to leave", but  the  remaining  part  of  that  paragraph
    reaches no clear finding whatsoever on the straightforward question  of
    whether or not there would be serious hardship experienced by Mr [I] in
    the event that he was required to live with the first appellant in  Sri
    Lanka.

 7. It follows as a result of these  errors  that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Oliver cannot stand.  There is no clear resolution of the issues  which
    arise under Appendix FM, as a result of  which  there  is  no  adequate
    consideration - in light of  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 - of  whether  the  appeal  was  to  be
    allowed on human rights grounds because the  requirements  of  the  Ten
    Year Route were  satisfied.   I  therefore  set  aside  Judge  Oliver's
    decision and have concluded that the  appropriate  course  is  for  the
    decision to be remade de novo.

 8. The question then arises under Section 12 of the Tribunal,  Courts  and
    Enforcements Act 2007 whether the correct course is for the  appeal  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard de novo at  Hatton
    Cross or whether it should be retained here in the Upper  Tribunal.   I
    come to the conclusion with the  concurrence  of  both  representatives
    that the correct course is the former option.   I  do  so  because  the
    hearing in  front  of  Judge  Oliver  did  not  lead  to  any  adequate
    resolution of the issues; because fresh findings of  fact  need  to  be
    made on all relevant issues; and in  particular  because  I  have  been
    presented with a letter from the Home Office  to  the  first  appellant
    dated 23rd July 2019.  This  letter  was  issued  in  response  to  the
    appellant and the sponsor giving an indication to  the  Registrar  that
    they propose to marry in this country.  The letter states that there is
    to be an investigation under Section 48 of the Immigration Act 2014  as
    to whether the relationship is genuine.  Both Miss Aziz and Mr  Bramble
    before me today have submitted that the appropriate course, in light of
    that letter, is to permit those enquiries  to  take  place  before  any
    further decision is made on this appeal.  Miss Aziz has told me that in
    her experience a decision should follow three to four weeks  after  the
    date of the interview and the date of the interview in this  particular
    case is 30th July 2019.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of Judge Oliver is set aside.  I order that the appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard de  novo  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Oliver.  That hearing is not to be listed  before  the
    second week in September 2019.

10. No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]

                      Upper Tribunal Judge M J Blundell

                                6 August 2019

