
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1A

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13321/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2020                 |On 29 September 2020                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               LINDELIHLE [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal is being decided without a hearing.

      2. In directions dated 23 June 2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley
         invited the parties to express  a  view  on  whether  it  would  be
         appropriate to determine the error of  law  issue  in  this  appeal
         without a hearing. Neither party expressed  any  objection  to,  or
         reservations about, the error of law issue being determined without
         a hearing and I am satisfied  that  I  can  determine  this  appeal
         fairly and justly without a hearing.

      3. The respondent (hereafter "the claimant") is  a  citizen  of  South
         Africa who claims that his removal from the UK would breach article
         8 ECHR. In a decision promulgated on 4 March  2020,  Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal  Ali  ("the  judge")  agreed  and  allowed  the
         claimant's appeal against a decision of  the  respondent  dated  26
         July 2019 refusing his human rights claim.

      4. The judge found that the claimant met the requirements of Paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules, as  there  would  be  "very
         significant obstacles" to the claimant integrating in South Africa.
         The judge reached this conclusion on the basis that the  claimant's
         mental health problems and lack of support network in South  Africa
         would render him homeless and destitute.

      5. At paragraph 8 of the decision the judge noted  that  between  2008
         and 2016 the claimant committed several offences, and that  he  has
         been imprisoned for a period of 8 months. The judge also noted that
         the Secretary of State refused the  claimant's  application,  inter
         alia, on  the  basis  that  he  did  not  satisfy  the  suitability
         requirement specified in S-LTR 1.5 ("The presence of the  applicant
         in the UK is not conducive to the public good because, in the  view
         of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious  harm
         or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard
         for the law").

      6. Relying on TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v The  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, the  judge  found  at
         para. 34 that because the claimant satisfied  the  requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules (paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)) there would be  "no
         compromise to the maintenance of effective immigration control"  in
         allowing the appeal.

      7. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred by failing to have
         regard to the Secretary of  State's  suitability  findings  and  by
         relying on  outdated  evidence  concerning  the  claimant's  mental
         health.

      8. The claimant, in his submissions dated 8 July 2020, raises a number
         of points relevant to the proportionality of his removal.  However,
         these do not address  the  error  of  law  arguments  made  by  the
         Secretary of State.

      9. I agree with the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  judge  made  two
         material errors of law.

     10. The first error concerns the  judge's  finding  that  the  claimant
         satisfied the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  concerning
         leave to remain on grounds of private life  pursuant  to  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi).

     11. Paragraph 276ADE(1) provides:

             276ADE (1). The requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  for
             leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK  are
             that at the date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
                  Section S-LTR 1.1 to  S-LTR  2.2.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-
                  LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
                  grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
                  years (discounting all any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
                  in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period  of
                  imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
                  applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and  under  25  years  and  has
                  spent at least half of his life living continuously in the
                  UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
                  has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20  years
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would
                  be  very  significant   obstacles   to   the   applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK.

     12. To meet the requirements of  276ADE(1)  it  is  not  sufficient  to
         satisfy sub-paragraph (vi): an applicant  must  also  satisfy  sub-
         paragraphs (i) and (ii). The claimant, however, did not satisfy sub-
         paragraph (i), because he plainly fell for refusal under S-LTR  1.5
         of Appendix FM.

     13. The judge erred, therefore, by finding that the  claimant  met  the
         Immigration  Rules  solely  by  reference  to  sub-paragraph  (vi),
         without recognising that 276ADE(1) could not be  satisfied  without
         sub-paragraph (i) also being met.

     14. If the claimant met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  that
         would,  as  the   judge   correctly   recognised,   be   positively
         determinative of his  Article  8  ECHR  appeal:  see  TZ  at  [34].
         However, he did not meet the requirements and therefore it  was  an
         error to treat the  finding  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  as
         determinative of the Article 8 claim.

     15. The second error of law concerns  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
         claimant's mental health. The judge found at paragraph  30  of  the
         decision that the claimant's mental health problems  mean  that  he
         would be unable to work in South  Africa  which  would  "inevitably
         render him homeless and destitute".  However, the  evidence  before
         the First-tier Tribunal did not support this  conclusion.  Firstly,
         there was not any up to date medical evidence from which to draw  a
         conclusion about the claimant's current  mental  health  condition.
         Secondly, the most recent evidence that was available - the  letter
         from Emily Price, mental health nurse specialist, dated 4 May 2018,
         which the judge referred to in paragraphs 27 and 28 of the decision
         - could not rationally be said to support the contention  that  the
         claimant has a serious mental health problem that would prevent him
         working, as Ms Price stated that the claimant "has had a number  of
         assessments which have concluded that [he] does not have  a  severe
         or  enduring  mental  illness  that  would   necessitate   hospital
         admission or specialist community services." Thirdly, there was  no
         evidence to support the conclusion that a person in the  claimant's
         circumstances would be unable to receive  adequate  care  in  South
         Africa and would face destitution. The burden of proof lay with the
         claimant and the judge has not adequately  explained  how,  on  the
         basis of the (very limited)  evidence  before  him  concerning  the
         claimant's mental health and the provision  of  services  in  South
         Africa, the conclusion was (or could be) reached that the  claimant
         was able to discharge this burden.

     16. The errors of law described above were material to the  outcome  of
         the appeal. I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

     17. I have carefully considered whether the appeal should remain in the
         Upper Tribunal or be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
         heard afresh. I have formed the view  that  the  appeal  should  be
         remitted. I reach this conclusion because in order to  remake  this
         decision a Tribunal will need to consider afresh, and make findings
         in respect of, the claimant's mental health. Given  the  extent  of
         the fact finding that will be required, and that  no  findings  can
         realistically be preserved, having regard to para.  7.2(b)  of  the
         Practice Statements of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, I  have  decided  that  the
         appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 a. The appeal is allowed.

 b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by  a  different
    judge.


|Signed                                |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |
|D. Sheridan                           |                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |                             Dated:   |
|                                      |23 September 2020                     |

