
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13137/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 5th April 2018                   |On 23rd April 2018                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mr ujwal rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Nepal  born  on  6th  April  1986.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in the  United  Kingdom
    as the dependent son of Krishna Rai,  a  former  Gurkha  soldier.   The
    Appellant's application was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer  on
    6th November 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Green sitting at Taylor House on 26th  May  2017.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  9th  June  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on 14th July 2017.  On 16th January 2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Doyle granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Doyle
    noted that the Grounds asserted that the judge had misdirected  himself
    in law and failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings.   The
    Grounds challenge the judge's findings that family  life  (involving  a
    familial relationship of dependency) existed between  adult  relatives.
    The Grounds also argue  that  the  judge's  Article  8  proportionality
    assessment was flawed.  Judge Doyle noted that at paragraph 11  of  the
    decision the judge  had  found  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    Respondent's policy and that the  Appellant  was  not  financially  and
    emotionally dependent on the Sponsor at the time of  application.   The
    judge's proportionality assessment is to be found at  paragraph  13  of
    the decision.  The Grounds of Appeal go on to argue that the judge  did
    not take into account Section 117B of the 2002  Act  and  that  it  was
    arguable that there is  a  tension  between  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 13 and his finding at paragraph 11 that  dependency  did  not
    exist at the date of application.  There is no Rule 24 response.  It is
    on that basis that the appeal comes before me to determine  whether  or
    not there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 4. I start by reminding myself  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer and  consequently,  for  the  purpose  of  continuity
    throughout the appeal process Mr Rai is  referred  to  herein  as  "the
    Appellant" and the Entry Clearance Officer as  "the  Respondent".   The
    Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel,  Mr  Jafar.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer appears by his Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submits on the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  behalf
    that there are inconsistent findings of an alleged dependency and takes
    me to the Grounds of Appeal.  She submits that the Tribunal allowed the
    appeal in part because it found the Appellant  to  be  financially  and
    emotionally dependent upon the Sponsor, and whilst the evidence  served
    supported the finding on the former, it was respectfully submitted that
    that was not the case for the latter.  The Grounds go on to  point  out
    that the Appellant is an educated adult who lives alone in  the  family
    home and that the Sponsor claims to speak to the Appellant two to  four
    times a week and that his wife does so on a daily basis.  However,  the
    Sponsor and the Appellant  have  lived  apart  for  eleven  years,  the
    Sponsor's wife has lived apart from the  Appellant  for  ten,  and  the
    Sponsor last visited the Appellant some seven years ago,  although  the
    Sponsor's wife has visited her son more recently.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    submits that on this evidence the Tribunal found that the Appellant was
    emotionally dependent on  his  parents  and  that  whilst  it  was  not
    disputed there is family life it was submitted that that is not at  the
    level to breach Article 8.

 6. Ms Willocks-Briscoe refers me to the  two  principal  paragraphs  where
    there are contradictions.  It is appropriate to engage  with  what  has
    been said and to analyse it.  Whilst it is not always  appropriate  for
    an Upper Tribunal to  recite  verbatim  the  words  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, in this instance there is some merit in  doing  so,  so
    far as the two paragraphs are concerned.

 7. At paragraph 11 Judge Green states:-

         "...

         I do not accept that the Appellant had provided sufficient evidence
         to show that he was financially and emotionally  dependent  on  the
         Sponsor as at the time he made his application.   The  Sponsor  was
         too sparse to show financial dependency  from  the  time  that  the
         Sponsor settled in the United Kingdom  down  to  the  date  of  the
         application."

 8. At paragraph 13 the judge states:-

         "...

         The Sponsor continued to  support  the  Appellant  financially  and
         emotionally.  His wife came to this country to join him and it  was
         entirely understandable that he wanted  to  be  reunited  with  the
         Appellant to fulfil his original  retirement  plans.   By  February
         2009, his wife and two daughters were settled here.  The  Appellant
         could not have settled in the United Kingdom even if the rules  had
         benefited the Sponsor in 2004 because of his age.  It was only when
         the rules changed in 2015 that he came within the ambit of the more
         generous age policy that he made his application.  It seems  to  me
         that the principal objection that the Respondent has in denying the
         Appellant entry is the maintenance of a firm immigration policy."

 9. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submits that in those two paragraphs the judge  has
    made   contradictory   findings,   firstly   of    there    being    no
    financial/emotional dependency, and then latterly making findings  that
    there are.  As a result she submits that there is a material  error  of
    law in the analysis made by the judge and this has to be a question  to
    be   considered   when   deciding   whether   or   not   there   is   a
    financial/emotional dependency.

10. In response Mr Jafar submits that it is necessary to read paragraph  11
    of the First-tier Judge's decision in its entirety and that  the  judge
    is not making a finding at that time other than saying that  the  judge
    was correct to  refuse  the  application  under  the  policy  and  then
    thereinafter he goes on at paragraph 13 to give  due  consideration  to
    the question of whether or not this appeal should  be  allowed  outside
    the Rules and as to  whether  the  level  of  emotional  and  financial
    dependency is met.  He points out that it is  not  suggested  that  the
    findings made by the judge at paragraph 13 are in error  and  that  any
    suggestion that the judge has come to  a  contradictory  conclusion  is
    perverse.

11. He also goes on to briefly address the  point  raised  with  regard  to
    Section 117B and points out that  that  only  addresses  the  issue  of
    public interest and that there is no public  interest  issue  here  and
    that the Appellant must succeed.  In brief response Ms Willocks-Briscoe
    submits that the judge had failed to carry out a proper proportionality
    assessment.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The principal thrust of the appeal made by the Secretary  of  State  is
    that the judge has made contradictory findings at paragraphs 11 and 13.
     I find that that is  not  the  case.   Firstly,  the  judge  has  made
    substantial notes as to the historical basis of this matter set out  at
    paragraph 8 and in particular has noted the position that the Appellant
    found himself in at paragraphs 8(iv), (vi) and (vii).  He  further  has
    noted that the Appellant at (viii) does not have many close friends  in
    Nepal.  What the judge has thereinafter gone on to do  is  to  consider
    the policies in  relation  to  Gurkhas  and  to  consider  the  current
    guidelines containing a list of bullet points that should be taken into
    consideration when conducting the proportionality exercise.  The  judge
    has made a finding that at the date of application  the  Appellant  had
    been living apart from the Sponsor for more than two years and that the
    evidence was too sparse to show financial dependency from the time that
    the Sponsor settled in the United Kingdom.  All he has done is  make  a
    finding analysing the Immigration Rules  to  show  that  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed at the time of application under the Rules.   Thereafter
    the judge has quite  properly  gone  on  to  consider  the  application
    outside the Rules.

15. At paragraph 12 he has analysed thoroughly the most recent  authorities
    and has gone on  to  consider  the  engagement  of  family  life  under
    Articles 8(1) and 8(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

16. Thereinafter at paragraph 13, which is a lengthy paragraph, he has made
    findings with regard to family life and with regard to the continuation
    of the support made by the Sponsor, both financially  and  emotionally,
    and has set these out in  some  detail  in  the  second  half  of  that
    paragraph.  Succinctly towards the end of that paragraph the judge  has
    stated:-

         "...  what  is  fundamentally  at  issue  in  this  case   is   the
         proportionality of the disruption to his family life and the  level
         of emotional and financial dependency that he has with his  father.
         The evidence suggests a level of  dependency  is  higher  than  the
         normal emotional ties that exist between adult relatives.  I am not
         satisfied that the Respondent has established that her decision was
         proportionate.   There  are  very  compelling  circumstances   that
         justify allowing this appeal outside the Immigration Rules."

17. That reflects a detailed and thorough analysis by the  judge  which  is
    preceded within paragraph 13 by detailed reasons as to  why  the  judge
    considers that there are  compelling  circumstances  that  this  appeal
    should be allowed outside the Immigration Rules.  If the whole decision
    is read as one it is clear that there is no conflict between the  final
    conclusions made by the judge and the sentence  upon  which  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer seeks to rely to be found within paragraph 11.  It is
    a misconceived view to take that sentence  out  of  context,  something
    which Mr Jafar has emphasised.

18. In all the circumstances this is a well-constructed  and  well-reasoned
    decision.  Whilst  accepting  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    entitled to raise the question of ambiguity  and  perhaps  that  it  is
    appropriate that the matter be given due  consideration  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  that  the  decision  is,
    when looked at in the round, self-explanatory and reflects  a  decision
    that the Judge was entitled to, on hearing the evidence,  to  come  to.
    There is thus no material error of law and the decision is  upheld  and
    the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer is dismissed.

19. No anonymity direction is made.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of  State  is  dismissed  and  the  decision
upheld.


Signed                              Date 16th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 16th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris







