
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: HU /13832/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                       | Decision & Reason Promulgated    |
|On    16.10.2017 & 05.12.2017            |On  08.12.2017                    |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                sumaira Bibi
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr EK Mahmood (working under the supervision of
                    NationWide Law Associates)
For the respondent: Mr Paul Duffy


                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mohd. Asif Khan), sitting at Hatton Cross on  14  July,
    to  an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan, born  there  in  1977,  against
    refusal of a visa for her to join Arshad Mahmood (the sponsor) here  as
    his wife. The sponsor, who became a British citizen  by  naturalization
    on 22 December 1999, had been married before; but on  18  May  2001  he
    pronounced talaq against his first wife before a lawyer in Pakistan. He
    married the appellant in Pakistan on 10 December that year, but did not
    get a decree absolute of divorce from his first wife (in the  Sheffield
    County Court) till 22 January 2004.


 2. At paragraph 16 the judge concluded, without going into details  as  to
    why, that the talaq would not be recognized under the  law  of  England
    and Wales. However he went on at 17 to find that the  marriage  between
    the sponsor and the appellant would even so be recognized under English
    law "... because it is recognized in Pakistan", taking  the  view  that
    there was nothing to stop the sponsor from entering into  a  polygamous
    marriage under Pakistani law.

 3. That conclusion may well have been right, so far as it  went;  but  the
    judge was clearly aware that something more needed to be said. He  went
    on at 18 to say this:

       There is the issue as to where the sponsor was domiciled at the  time
       of his second marriage. The fact  that  the  sponsor  had  a  British
       passport in 2001 does not necessarily mean that he was  domiciled  in
       the UK [sic], having a British  passport  ...  is  not  a  conclusive
       factor in ones place of Again that was right, so far as it went;  but
       the judge went no further. The basic law on the  subject  is  clearly
       summarized in the judicial head-note to Abdin  (domicile  -  actually
       polygamous marriages) Bangladesh [2012] UKUT 309 (IAC):

       Whilst the Private International Law (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act
       1995 amended section 11(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 so that
       a potentially polygamous marriage would not be void if  either  party
       was at the time of the marriage domiciled in England  and  Wales,  it
       did not alter the position regarding actually  polygamous  marriages.
       Under section 11(d) of the 1973 Act  a  polygamous  marriage  entered
       into outside England and Wales shall still be void if either party at
       the time of the marriage was domiciled in England and Wales.

 4. The judge had found that the talaq itself was not  valid;  so  on  that
    basis he unarguably needed to  make  an  express  finding   as  to  the
    sponsor's domicile at the time of his marriage to the appellant  before
    finding that that  was  valid.  Recognition  of  overseas  divorces  is
    governed by the Family Law Act 1986; in this case there is no  evidence
    that the talaq  was obtained 'by means of proceedings', and it might be
    described as a bare talaq. Mr Mahmood sought to support it as valid  by
    the law of Jammu and Kashmir, still applying in Azad Kashmir, the  part
    claimed by Pakistan, and the homeland of the relevant parties.

 5. However, the terms of the 1986 Act are quite clear: by s. 46 (2)

       The validity of an overseas divorce ... obtained  otherwise  than  by
       means of proceedings shall be recognised if-

       (a)    the divorce, annulment or legal separation is effective  under
       the law of the country in which it was obtained;

       (b)    at the relevant date-

             (i)    each party  to  the  marriage  was  domiciled  in  that
       country; or

             (ii)   either party to the  marriage  was  domiciled  in  that
                    country and the other party was domiciled in  a  country
                    under  whose  law  the  divorce,  annulment   or   legal
                    separation is recognised as valid; and

       (c)    neither party to the marriage was habitually resident  in  the
             United Kingdom throughout the period of one  year  immediately
             preceding that date.

 6. Under s.  46  (a),  the  talaq  's  intrinsic  validity  needed  to  be
    established according to the law of  Jammu  and  Kashmir.  As  for  the
    status of the parties, the talaq could clearly not be recognized  under
    s. 46 (2) (b) (i), unless also both the sponsor and his first wife  had
    been domiciled at the time in that state; or under (ii), unless one was
    domiciled there, and the other in some other country  which  recognized
    the talaq. Under s. 46 (2) (c), it also had to be shown that neither of
    them were habitually resident in this country for the  year  before  it
    was pronounced. It follows that, for the  appeal  to  be  allowed,  the
    questions of the sponsor's and his first wife's domicile  and  habitual
    residence at the time of the talaq needed to be  answered  by  specific
    findings on the part of the judge, of which there is  no  sign  in  his
    decision.

 7. In the circumstances the judge's decision is set aside, and I shall  go
    on to  make  the  necessary  findings  for  myself,  having  heard  the
    sponsor's evidence (in English, with an Urdu interpreter standing by to
    help if needed, which she was not) on 5 December.  On  the  s.  46  (a)
    question, the talaq  appears to  have  been  pronounced  in  Jammu  and
    Kashmir, and Mr Duffy was content for me to take the family law of that
    state as it was accepted in Baig (Immigration - Validity  of  Pakistani
    Divorce) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 04229, to which  Mr  Mahmood  referred
    me.

 8. The Tribunal in Baig noted that the Pakistan Family Law Ordinance 1961,
    and particularly the procedural requirements for a talaq  under  s.  7,
    were generally accepted not to apply in Jammu and Kashmir.  The  expert
    evidence before the Tribunal showed that a  'bare  talaq  '  (in  other
    words, one pronounced, as in this case, without the registration or 90-
    day 'cooling-off period' required by s. 7) was valid under the  law  of
    that state, and so that can also be assumed in this case.

 9. The sponsor had signed a document headed 'Ammended  witness  statement'
    on 5 December, which he confirmed and enlarged on in oral evidence.  He
    had come to this country in 1993 as the husband of his  first  wife,  a
    British citizen. In 1994 he had been given indefinite leave  to  remain
    on that basis, and then gone back to Pakistan for a month  or  two,  to
    see his mother, who was sick. He accepted Mr  Duffy's  summary  of  his
    movements till 2001 as involving regular visits to  Pakistan,  but  not
    for more than two or three months at a time.

10. Asked why he had applied for British citizenship in 1999,  the  sponsor
    explained that he had done so because he wanted to live here,  for  the
    indefinite future. After they  had  had  three  children,  all  British
    citizens, he had fallen out with his first wife in 1996 or 1997, and by
    this time was separated from her. His first wife had grown up  in  this
    country and always lived here, apart from visits to  Pakistan  for  and
    following their marriage in 1986. There had never been any plan for the
    first wife to live in Pakistan, and she had been unwilling to  share  a
    roof with his mother. His plans for the future when he became a British
    citizen were to live and work in this country; but  by  that  time  his
    first wife didn't want to be with him.


11. In 2001 both the sponsor and his first wife had gone out  to  Pakistan,
    so he could pronounce talaq against her. From that time on  till  2015,
    when his mother had died, he had lived in Pakistan,  as  he  needed  to
    look after her. He said he had lived in this country for ten  years  in
    all, but had no property here: he was living with his sister,  brother-
    in-law and nephew. When he had last renewed his  British  passport,  he
    had done so at the British High Commission in Islamabad.

12. Some findings of fact can be made without difficulty:

     a) the sponsor's first wife retained her domicile of  origin  in  this
        country throughout: there is simply no evidence to the contrary;

     b) both she and he were  habitually  resident  here  during  the  year
        before the talaq  was pronounced  on  18  May  2001:  the  evidence
        referred to at paragraphs 9 - 11 makes it clear that this  did  not
        change, in his case, till after that, when he stayed  there,  first
        to marry the appellant on 10 December that year, and then  to  look
        after his mother till she died;

     c) the appellant has been domiciled in Azad Kashmir throughout.

13. The question of whether the sponsor acquired a domicile  of  choice  in
    this country  when  he  became  a  British  citizen  in  1999  is  more
    problematic, and I shall go on to consider it only if I  need  to:  the
    rules of private international  law  require  clear  evidence  that  he
    intended to give up his domicile of origin, and live  in  this  country
    for good. If the appellant had to establish the validity of  the  talaq
    under s. 46 (2) of the Family Law Act 1986, in order to show  that  her
    marriage was also valid under the law of England and Wales, then it  is
    clear that each of my findings (a) on the first  wife's  domicile,  and
    (b) on her and the sponsor's habitual residence during the year  before
    the talaq , would be fatal to the appellant's case.

14. Nor could the talaq could qualify for recognition under s. 46  (2)  (b)
    (i), nor under (ii), since, even if the sponsor remained  domiciled  in
    Jammu and Kashmir, his first wife  never  was,  and  the  law  of  this
    country would not recognize a bare talaq  pronounced there  unless  all
    the requirements of s. 46 (2) were satisfied. Finally,  since  each  of
    them was habitually resident in this country for the relevant year, the
    talaq was in any case disqualified from recognition by s. 46 (2) (c).

15. The argument to the contrary relied on by  Mr  Mahmood  is  taken  from
    Abdin (see 4). At paragraph 7, the Upper Tribunal (Judge  Hugo  Storey)
    sets out the grounds on which a marriage is void, under the Matrimonial
    Causes Act 1973 s. 11, as amended  by  the  Private  International  Law
    (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1995. The relevant ones are these:

          d) in the case of a  polygamous  marriage  entered  into  outside
             England and Wales, that either party to the  marriage  was  at
             the time of the marriage domiciled in England and Wales.

             For the  purposes  of  paragraph  (d)  of  this  subsection  a
             marriage is not polygamous if at its inception  neither  party
             has any spouse additional to the other.



16. Mr Mahmood went on to refer to paragraph 9 of Abdin, where s. 5 of  the
    1995 Act is set out, as follows:

       5      Validity in English law of potentially polygamous marriages.
       (1)    A marriage entered into outside  England  and  Wales  between
             parties neither of whom is already married is  not  void  under
             the law of England and Wales on the ground that it  is  entered
             into under a law which permits polygamy and that  either  party
             is domiciled in England and Wales.
       (2)    this  section  does  not  affect  the  determination  of  the
             validity of a marriage by  reference  to  the  law  of  another
             country to the extent that it falls  to  be  so  determined  in
             accordance with the rules of private international law.

17. So far as the  relevance  of  this  section  is  concerned,  the  words
    'neither of whom is already married' in sub-section (1)  confirms  what
    the  heading  suggests.  This  section  is  dealing  with   potentially
    polygamous marriages; but the marriage  between  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant in this case was actually polygamous, unless the  talaq   had
    been valid in terms of s. 46 (2) of the Family Law Act 1986, since,  if
    not, then he was still married to his first wife at its inception. Here
    s. 5 of the 1995 Act is completely irrelevant, and the validity of  the
    marriage has to be decided by reference to s. 11 (d) of the Matrimonial
    Causes Act 1973. The effect of this is  that  the  marriage  is  to  be
    regarded as void, if, and only if the sponsor was domiciled in  England
    and Wales when it took place, and  so  I  shall  have  to  decide  that
    question on the facts.

18. The sponsor's declaration in his statement that he  still  retains  his
    domicile of origin counts for little: this is  a  question  for  me  to
    decide on the relevant facts.  Since  the  question  is  where  he  was
    domiciled at the time of his marriage in 2001, these mainly  relate  to
    his movements and intentions up to that point, though what has actually
    happened since is also relevant. While the sponsor  married  a  British
    citizen in 1986, came to live here in 1992, and got indefinite leave to
    remain in 1993, the first event which might show he  intended  to  make
    his permanent home in this country, rather than in  Pakistan,  was  his
    acquisition of British citizenship in 1999.

19. However by this time the  sponsor  had  already  fallen  out  with  his
    British wife, mainly because, he said, she was unwilling  for  them  to
    live with his mother in Pakistan. While  he  went  on  living  in  this
    country for most of the year till 2001, it  was  to  Pakistan  that  he
    returned, with her as it happened, to pronounce talaq  that  May,  Then
    he not only remained there till December to marry  the  appellant,  but
    for the next 14 years, to look after his mother till she died.

20. The sponsor now lives in this country, but with his sister and  family,
    as he has never acquired a house of his own here. In most cases  taking
    out British citizenship is strong evidence of an  intention  to  become
    domiciled in the relevant part of the  United  Kingdom,  and,  if  this
    sponsor had still been together with his first wife  when  he  did  so,
    then it would have been very strong evidence that they intended to make
    their permanent family home in this country.



21. However that was not the case, and, as  events  showed,  the  sponsor's
    main loyalty remained with his mother, as long as she lived.  While  he
    got an English divorce from his first wife in 2004, that may have  been
    for her purposes, rather than his. At all events, it did not  lead  him
    to do anything about returning to this country till  after  his  mother
    died in 2015, and the appellant's visa application was made  early  the
    following year.

22. Taking all the relevant evidence together, I am not satisfied that  the
    sponsor intended to give up his domicile of origin  when  he  took  out
    British citizenship in 1999, or at  any  time  before  he  married  the
    appellant in Azad Kashmir in 2001. Permission to appeal was sought  and
    given only on the validity of the marriage, and it follows, as  already
    explained, that the appeal must be allowed.

Respondent's appeal allowed: first-tier decision set aside
Appellant's appeal against refusal of wife visa allowed

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



