
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/13374/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 06 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                 AUDENE [M]
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bond of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  the  Philippines  born  in  1969.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent made on 11 June  2018  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis of his  private
    life and medical conditions.

 2. The immigration history in summary is that he entered the UK with entry
    clearance in February 2002.  In January 2003 he sought indefinite leave
    to remain as a dependant relative which was refused in June  2003.   In
    March 2013 he sought leave to  remain  on  family  and  private  rights
    grounds which was refused.  In June 2015 he lodged a  judicial  review.
    Permission was refused in November 2015.

 3. The basis of the  refusal  of  the  current  application,  made  on  29
    November  2017,  is  that  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules.   Also,  there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances outside the  Rules.   Consideration  had  been  given  to
    evidence that he receives kidney dialysis  three  times  a  week.   The
    respondent noted the claim that the appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    afford treatment in the Philippines.  The respondent added  that  there
    is a centre in Manila which provides free treatment.  If he had to  pay
    for treatment such would not make his  circumstances  exceptional  such
    that he is entitled to remain in the UK.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5.  Following a hearing at Taylor House on 19 December 2018 Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Abebrese dismissed the appeal having heard evidence
    from the appellant, his aunt, mother and sister.  In summary, he  found
    that the appellant could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Rules
    nor were there factors justifying exceptional circumstances outside the
    Rules.

 6. He sought permission to appeal which was granted on 18 March 2019.  The
    crux of the grounds, reiterated by Ms Bond, was that the  judge  failed
    to make clear and intelligible findings of  fact  on  the  core  issues
    including whether he would be able to access dialysis treatment in  the
    Philippines.   Also,  he  misapplied  the  test  for  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration, wrongly taking into account  precariousness
    and legitimate expectation.  Further,  he  misapplied  section  117B(4)
    when he stated that he gave no weight to any private life acquired.  In
    that regard he was providing emotional support to his mother and aunt.

 7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe's response was that while the judge  had  erred  in
    law in failing to correctly apply the test in section  117B(4)  it  was
    not material.  As for his treatment of paragraph 276ADE  he  had  given
    adequate reasons.  All in all, the case was hopeless  under  Article  8
    private life.  The jurisprudence indicated that it could not succeed on
    medical grounds.

Consideration

 8. I consider that the judge's decision  does  show  material  error.   It
    suffices  to  note  the  following.   He  failed  to  make  clear   and
    intelligible findings of fact on the core issues under  the  Rules  and
    Article 8.  At [22] he appeared to accept that the appellant would have
    difficulties in accessing the treatment that he requires  and  that  it
    would be costly.  At [28] he stated: 'The appellant  ...  could  obtain
    medical treatment in his country although  access  is  limited  and  it
    would be costly it is not reasonable to expect the  appellant  to  find
    the resources to pay for the treatment as he should have done whilst he
    was in this country.'  Then, 'the evidence suggests  that  there  is  a
    limited free service at Manila dialysis centre and the appellant  would
    be competing with local residents for the service  I  do  think  it  is
    unreasonable for the appellant to seek to source these facilities.'

 9. It is difficult to understand what the judge is saying without  reading
    in '... not unreasonable to expect the appellant to find the  resources
    ...' and '... I do not think it is unreasonable for  the  appellant  to
    seek to source these facilities.'

10. Further, in considering  paragraph  276ADE  he  erred  in  taking  into
    account the appellant's precarious immigration status  and  whether  or
    not he had a legitimate expectation that he would be allowed to  remain
    in the UK.  The issue of whether the appellant's immigration status  is
    precarious is not relevant to the criteria under paragraph 276ADE:  all
    applicants under that paragraph have precarious status.  The purpose of
    the paragraph is to permit those who satisfy  the  criteria  under  the
    various subparagraphs to remain in the UK.  If a person  satisfies  the
    criteria under the Rules he will be able to show that the  decision  to
    refuse the application is not proportionate.

11. In failing to make clear findings he materially erred.

12. Further, he applied the wrong approach to  the  assessment  of  private
    life under Article 8.  He stated he had given no weight at all  to  the
    appellant's private life because his immigration status was precarious.
     Section 117B(4) directs a judge to give "little weight" to  a  private
    life in such circumstances.

13. I set aside the decision for it to be remade.  Ms Bond  asked  that  in
    such event the matter be put back to a resumed hearing so that an up to
    date medical report could  be  got.   Also,  no  interpreter  had  been
    requested for the appellant.   In  accordance  with  the  directions  I
    consider it appropriate to proceed to remake the decision.  There is no
    dispute on the facts.

14. The appellant's claim is his right to remain in the UK on the basis  of
    his private life. Paragraph 276ADE states the requirements to be met by
    an appellant on that basis.  Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) reads:-

         '... has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years ...
         but there would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's
         integration into the country to which he would have to go if
         required to leave the UK.'

15. In Treebhawan and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5 -  compelling  circumstances
    [2017] UKUT 13 it was stated (at [37]): 'The other  limb  of  the  test
    "very  significant  obstacles"   erects   a   self-evidently   elevated
    threshold, such that mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere  hurdles  and
    mere upheaval or inconvenience, even when multiplied, will generally be
    insufficient in this context.'

16. Comment on that passage was made by Underhill  LJ  in  Parveen  v  SSHD
    [2018] EWCA Civ 932 (at 9]): 'I have to say that I do not find  that  a
    useful gloss on the words of the rule. It is  fair  enough  to  observe
    that the words "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold,  and
    I have no difficulty with the observation that the test will not be met
    by "mere inconvenience or upheaval." But I am not sure that saying that
    "mere" hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even if multiplied, will  not
    "generally" suffice  adds  anything  of  substance.  The  task  of  the
    Secretary of State or the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is  simply  to
    assess the obstacles relied on, whether characterised  as  hardship  or
    difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they regard them  as
    'very significant.'

17. In this case the appellant has spent  the  bulk  of  his  life  in  the
    Philippines.  He is familiar with its customs and its language.  He has
    a home there whose current occupant is a family member.  Even if he  is
    unable to live in it and by custom it cannot be sold,  there  seems  no
    reason why he cannot rent a property.  His position is that during  his
    many years of unlawful stay in the UK his sister, who is in  full  time
    work,  has  supported  him  financially.   Through  her  he  has   been
    financially independent. There seems no reason why his sister could not
    continue to support him were he to return.

18. The thrust of his position  is  his  ill  health.   It  appears  to  be
    undisputed that he requires kidney dialysis  treatment  three  times  a
    week. It also appears to be undisputed that free dialysis treatment  is
    available in Manila. Detail in that regard is given in a response to  a
    country of origin information request (p108ff respondent's bundle).  He
    is not from Luzon but from one of the southern islands.   No reason has
    been given why he cannot rent in Manila.   Even  if  he  is  unable  to
    access free treatment there is no reason why with the  continuing  help
    of his family the medical costs could not be met.  Whilst it  may  well
    be that the emotional support he gets from family members here would be
    lessened if he returned there is, as he indicated, some family  in  the
    Philippines. It has not been suggested  they  would  not  help  him  as
    necessary.

19. On the facts before me I accept that the appellant would face obstacles
    on return but I do not find these on the evidence before me to be at  a
    level of hardship or difficulty such as to be  'very  significant.'  He
    does not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

20. Turning to consider human rights outside the Rules, Article 3  has  not
    been argued.

21. As for Article 8, it is not suggested that  the  appellant  has  family
    life in the UK.  The issue is private life.

22. In that regard I have no reason to doubt that he  has  close  emotional
    ties with his mother, aunt and  sister.   Such  is  an  aspect  of  his
    private life.  That apart there is no  information  as  to  what  other
    aspects of his private life in terms of ties or connections he may have
    developed during his long period as an overstayer since he  arrived  in
    2002.  His health is, of course, an aspect of his private life  in  the
    context of his physical and moral integrity.

23. It is clear that the appellant's removal would be an interference  with
    the appellant's right to respect for his  private  life  and  that  the
    consequences are sufficient to engage Article 8.  Such interference  is
    in accordance with the law  and  necessary  in  the  interests  of  the
    economic wellbeing of the country.

24. The issue, thus,  is  proportionality.  As  noted  above  he  would  be
    returning to the country where he has spent most of  his  life.  He  is
    familiar with the language and culture. His claim hangs on his  medical
    condition. The appellant has end stage kidney  disease  which  requires
    dialysis three times a week.

25. In GS (India) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 40 it was  held  that  if  the
    Article 3 claim failed,  Article  8  could  not  prosper  without  some
    separate or additional factual element which brought  the  case  within
    the Article 8 paradigm: the core value protected being the  quality  of
    life not its continuance.  That meant that a specific case must be made
    under Article 8.  The rigour of the D exception  (D  v  UK  [1997])  24
    ECHR) for the purpose of Article 3 in such cases as these applied  with
    no less force when the claim was put under Article 8.  Although the  UK
    courts have declined to state that Article 8 could never be engaged  by
    the health consequences of removal from the UK, the circumstances would
    have to be truly exceptional before such a breach could be  established
    (paras 45, 85-87 and 106-111).  At paragraph  111,  Underhill  LJ  said
    this: 'First, the absence or inadequacy of medical treatment, even life
    preserving treatment in the country of return, cannot be relied upon at
    all as a factor engaging Article 8: if that is all there is, the  claim
    must fail.  Secondly, where Article 8 is engaged by other factors,  the
    fact that the claimant is receiving medical treatment in  this  country
    which may not be available in the country of return may be a factor  in
    the proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be treated  as  by
    itself giving rise to a breach since  that  would  contravene  the  'no
    obligation to treat' principle.'

26. In SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1894  the  Court  of  Appeal
    commented that the focus and structure of Article 8 is  different  from
    Article 3.  An absence of medical treatment would not of itself  engage
    Article 8.  The only relevance would be where that  was  an  additional
    factor with other factors which themselves engage  Article  8.   Razgar
    was referred to for the  proposition  that  only  the  most  compelling
    humanitarian considerations were likely to prevail over legitimate aims
    of immigration control.

27. In this case the evidence is that the appellant can access free medical
    treatment for his condition.  More widely, in adapting to life  in  the
    Philippines he can continue to receive the  financial  support  he  has
    evidently received from his sister the past fifteen years he  has  been
    here unlawfully.  Even if he is not able to access such free  treatment
    in Manila, I find on the evidence that,  through  his  sister,  he  can
    afford to pay for it.  There is family in the Philippines who can  give
    emotional and other support.

28.   He has built up any private life in the UK when he had no right to be
    here and for some of that time has  accessed  expensive  NHS  resources
    without paying. I give little weight to private life established  while
    he has been here unlawfully (Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, section 117B(4)). He does not speak  English  (section  117B(2)).
    The fact that,  through  his  sister,  he  is  financially  independent
    (section 117B(3)) is a neutral factor.

29. Under section 117B(1) the maintenance of immigration controls is in the
    public interest. I do not  see  there  to  be  special  or  exceptional
    circumstances in this case. On the evidence  before  me  the  right  to
    respect for the appellant's private life is outweighed  by  the  public
    interest in the removal of the appellant.

30. Ms Bond submitted that the appellant was not fit to  fly  and  was  not
    likely to be able to do so. In fact, the letter from a doctor at  Barts
    NHS Trust (22 May 2018) states he  'would  have  concerns  about  (his)
    fitness to travel at present due to  his  ongoing  medical  issues,  in
    particular the unresolved inflammation of his appendix on CT scan.'  No
    doubt the respondent would make up to date enquiries  and  make  travel
    arrangements accordingly.

Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.
    It is set aside and remade as follows:

           The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds

         No anonymity order made.



Signed                                             Date 04 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
















