
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/13568/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 January 2017                   |On 13 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     E K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by D Duheric & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  victim  of
    domestic violence.   The  respondent  refused  that  application  by  a
    decision dated 7 March 2017.  Under reference to paragraph  E-DVILR.1.3
    of the  immigration  rules,  the  respondent  held  that  the  evidence
    submitted did not establish the claim.

 2. The appellant sought to appeal to the FtT on human rights grounds.  The
    respondent argued that the FtT had no jurisdiction because the decision
    was not the refusal of a human rights claim.  In a decision promulgated
    on 19 May 2018 FtT Judge Green held that the appellant had made such  a
    claim and the FtT did have jurisdiction.  That is not now in dispute.

 3. FtT  Judge  Doyle  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 June 2017.

 4. Mr Govan conceded that the FtT's finding at [21 -22] that the appellant
    did not have any private life in the UK was wrong as a matter of law.

 5. It was common ground that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  fell
    to be set aside, that there was  no  basis  on  which  to  revisit  its
    findings of primary fact, and the UT  should  make  a  fresh  decision,
    based on those facts and on submissions.

 6. Mr Govan did not dispute that the facts found by the FtT at [10]  bring
    the appellant within the scope of  the  rules  for  a  grant  of  leave
    arising from domestic violence.  However, he said  that  the  appellant
    nevertheless required to provide evidence of the  type  sought  by  the
    respondent, and that the appropriate course would be for her to make  a
    further application, relying on the FtT's findings.  He submitted  that
    as the appellant's  immigration  status  had  been  precarious,  little
    weight was to be given to her private life, and the appeal should again
    be dismissed.

 7. It was accepted for the appellant that the facts,  as  the  FtT  found,
    fall short of the private life requirements of the rules, 276ADE.

 8. There was debate  over  the  extent  to  which  the  domestic  violence
    provisions are designed to  produce  an  outcome  which  mirrors  human
    rights obligations.  As I understood parties' positions, there  was  in
    the end no real dispute.  The provisions do not strictly correspond  to
    human rights obligations on  the  state.   Some  applications  of  this
    nature are human rights applications, and some  are  not.   Ability  to
    satisfy the provisions is not determinative, but  is  relevant  to  the
    present private life claim.

 9. Section 117A of the 2002 Act, so far as material, provides:

         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
                  Rights Act 1998.

         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, ...

         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's right
             to respect for private and family life is justified under
             Article 8(2).

10. And section 117B:

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         ...

11. In TZ and PG [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals
    said:

         "I suggested at [19] that there exists a structure for judgments in
         the FtT where article 8 is engaged. That was referred  to  by  Lord
         Thomas in Hesham Ali at [82  to  84]  and  recommended  by  him.  I
         strongly  endorse  his  recommendation.  Although   there   is   no
         obligation in law for a tribunal to structure  its  decision-making
         in any particular way and it is not an error of law to fail  to  do
         so, the use of a structure in the judgments in these appeals  would
         almost certainly have avoided the appeals, given that the  ultimate
         conclusion of the tribunals was correct. To paraphrase Lord Thomas:
         after the tribunal has found the facts, the tribunal sets out those
         factors that weigh in favour of immigration control - 'the cons'  -
         against those factors that weigh in favour of  family  and  private
         life - 'the pros' - in the form of a balance sheet  which  it  then
         uses to set out a reasoned conclusion within the framework  of  the
         test(s) being applied within or outside the Rules. It goes  without
         saying that the factors are  not  equally  weighted  and  that  the
         tribunal must in its reasoning articulate the weight being attached
         to each factor."

12. There is no reason why the applicant should be required to  repeat  her
    application to the respondent.  She has already engaged in many  stages
    of procedure, and she would be raising nothing new.

13. Compliance with the rules does not equate  to  a  right  to  remain  on
    private life grounds.  In many cases no such right would arise, e.g., a
    businessman or a student, without more.  However, the domestic violence
    provisions are in part 8 of  the  rules,  "family  members",  which  is
    indicative, and compliance with those provisions is relevant, as  found
    at [8] above.  It is difficult to see the public interest  in  refusing
    leave in a case which meets a rule, particularly a  rule  which  is  at
    least partly designed to respect and protect private life.

14. Mr Haddow submitted, rather tentatively, that based on ECtHR  authority
    the appellant's precariousness of status, being based to a large extent
    on a period when she could legitimately  expect  her  residence  to  be
    permanent,  was  distinguishable  from  precariousness  as  defined  in
    Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58 at [44].   I  agree  with  Mr  Govan  that  the
    definition in Rhuppiah excludes such a distinction.

15. Mr Haddow submitted, with rather greater justification, that this was a
    case where section 117A(2)  (a)  enabled  the  tribunal  to  find  that
    private life justified departure from the result indicated  by  section
    117B(5), applying the limited degree of flexibility explained  at  [49]
    and [58] of Rhuppiah.

16. The appellant's command of English and ability to maintain herself  are
    essentially neutral.  She sought to add to her private  life  claim  by
    reference to factors including her 10 years  of  residence,  education,
    work history, friendships, and good immigration history.  Those are all
    meritorious, but they would not, but for the domestic violence  aspect,
    amount to a good case, either in or out of the rules.

17. The appellant sought in the FtT to build a case of  great  difficulties
    in returning to Bosnia.  That was not relied upon in submissions before
    me, and was plainly exaggerated.

18. The one clear point against the appellant is  the  statutory  provision
    for little weight to be given to her private life.

19. Balancing the "pros and cons", there is negligible if any weight to  be
    given to the public interest.  That is  outweighed  by  even  a  little
    weight on the other side, and even more once something is added by  way
    of the limited flexibility available.

20. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is allowed.

21. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity has been preserved herein.

      [pic]

      Dated 1 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
