
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13303/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 19 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUDASSAR KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by  the  applicant  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 5 June  2018  refusing  him  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private and family life.  In this  decision,
    I will refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent.



Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 23 December 1991.   He
    first arrived in the UK on 14 March 2011 with  a  Tier  4  visa,  valid
    until 21 July 2014.  He met his wife, a British citizen,  in  2015  and
    they married in an Islamic ceremony in Ireland on 25 May 2016 and there
    was a subsequent civil ceremony in Nottingham on 6 November 2018.  They
    have a son, born on 4 November 2016 in Limerick, who  has  British  and
    Irish nationality.   The  appellant  has  a  stepdaughter,  his  wife's
    daughter, born in July 2009, also a British citizen.

3.    The appellant and his wife lived together  in  Ireland  from  February
    2016 until they returned to the UK in  November  2017  because  of  the
    worsening health of his mother-in-law.  They continue to live  together
    with the two children in Nottingham.

4.    The appellant's application for further leave to  remain  was  refused
    on the basis that he failed to make meet the  suitability  requirements
    of the Rules because on 17 October 2012 at  London  College  of  Social
    Studies (LCSS) he used a proxy to take a speaking  test  with  ETS,  so
    obtaining  his  TOEIC  certificate  by  deception.   Accordingly,   his
    presence in the UK was  not  conducive  to  the  public  good  and  his
    application was refused under para S-LTR.1.6 of the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent  put  in
    evidence and relied on  the  generic  witness  statements  from  Lesley
    Singh, Rebecca Collings, Peter Millington and  an  expert  report  from
    Professor  French  [17].   In  the  supplementary  bundle  there   were
    documents specific to the appellant, to the test centre where  he  took
    his test and a copy of the ETS Test Centre Look Up Tool showing that on
    the relevant date, 17 October 2012, of the 15 tests  taken  at  LCSS  1
    (7%) was questionable and 14 (93%) were invalid.

6.    The judge heard oral evidence from both the appellant  and  his  wife.
    He accepted that the respondent had discharged the  initial  burden  of
    showing that there was prima facie evidence of deception on the part of
    the  appellant  [23].   However,  she  said  that  she   accepted   the
    credibility of the appellant and his wife in all material respects  and
    that, where there were perceived inconsistencies in the  evidence,  she
    found the appellant and his  wife  had  satisfactorily  explained  them
    [28].  She noted that the appellant had provided details  of  where  he
    sat the test, the administrative arrangements for that  test  and  some
    detail of the tests undertaken but there was no persuasive  information
    before her from the respondent to show that the information provided by
    the appellant was incorrect [33].  She also noted  that  the  appellant
    had written to the respondent requesting a copy of the voice recordings
    of his TOIEC test, but the respondent said that he did not hold  copies
    and the appellant should have written directly to ETS [34].

7.    The judge found that in all circumstances she was not  satisfied  that
    the respondent had satisfied the  legal  burden  of  proving  that  the
    appellant's test results had been obtained  by  dishonesty  [36].   She
    accepted that the appellant had a private  and  family  life  with  his
    wife, child and stepchild and that he was in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with both children [42].  She took into account  that  the
    appellant and his wife had resided lawfully in the Republic of  Ireland
    for over  18  months  and  had  made  a  separate  application  to  the
    respondent under the Surinder Singh ((1992) EUECJ C-370/90) route [45].
     She found that the decision to  remove  the  appellant  would  not  be
    proportionate.   The  appeal  was,  therefore,  allowed  on  article  8
    grounds.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.

8.    In the  grounds  of  appeal,  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  failed
    correctly to consider the burden of proof as set out in the decision in
    SM and Kadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229,  which
    had made it clear that the generic evidence submitted was sufficient to
    discharge the evidential burden.  If  the  generic  evidence  had  been
    properly considered, the judge  would  have  found  that  the  onus  of
    proving deception on the balance of probabilities had been discharged.

9.    It is further argued that the judge did  not  adequately  address  the
    issue of whether there was an innocent explanation as the appellant was
    simply describing a process with which he would have been  familiar  in
    any event.  The judge referred to the appellant's  ability  in  English
    and to his other qualifications but the issue for her  was  whether  he
    had in fact employed deception.  It  is  also  argued  that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons why she found that there was no  reason
    for the appellant to use a proxy to take the test.

10.   Mr Bramble relied on the grounds and did not seek to expand  on  them.
    He confirmed that the appellant had now been granted a residence permit
    as a result of his application made under the rule in Surinder Singh.

11.   Mr Chohan submitted that the judge had reached findings properly  open
    to her for the reasons she had given.  She had made a specific  finding
    that the appellant and his wife were honest  witnesses  and  had  given
    clear reasons for her decision.  Whilst a different  judge  might  have
    reached a different conclusion, the fact  remained,  so  he  submitted,
    that the judge's decision was properly open to her for the reasons  she
    gave.

Assessment of whether the Judge Erred in Law.

12.   I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that the  decision
    should be set aside.  I am not satisfied that she did for the following
    reasons.  It  is  argued  firstly  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess
    correctly the burden of proof in line with the case of  SM  and  Qadir.
    There is no substance in this  ground.   The  judge  referred  to  that
    decision in [22] and found at [23] that the respondent  had  discharged
    the initial burden of showing that there was a prima facie evidence  of
    deception.  She then went on to consider  the  appellant's  explanation
    and found that the respondent had  failed  to  discharge  the  onus  of
    proving that the test results were obtained by dishonesty [36].   There
    is nothing in the decision to indicate that the judge did not  properly
    understand the approach set out in SM and Qadir.   Quite  the  reverse,
    her decision is entirely consistent with it.

13.   The grounds then argue that the generic  evidence  combined  with  the
    evidence particular to the appellant  was  sufficient  to  satisfy  the
    legal burden of proof  as  the  judge  should  not  have  accepted  the
    appellant's explanation.  However, in substance this  ground  seeks  to
    challenge issues of fact, which were for the judge to assess.

14.   The appellant put forward an innocent explanation: that he  had  taken
    the test and had not used a proxy.  He gave oral  evidence  to  support
    this contention.  It was a matter for the judge to decide  what  weight
    to give to that evidence in the context of the  evidence  as  a  whole.
    She found that the appellant and his wife were honest  witnesses.   She
    was also entitled to comment at [31] that she had no cogent evidence to
    show how the conclusion was reached that the appellant's  test  results
    were found to be invalid as opposed to questionable and that she  would
    have expected the respondent  to  be  able  to  confirm,  for  example,
    whether the same voice appeared on several tests or whether  there  was
    an incorrect gender of voice sample  when  compared  against  the  test
    candidate.

15.   The judge also commented that she had not been given details  of  what
    irregularities it was alleged had taken place on the specific  day  the
    appellant sat the tests or whether any  proceedings  had  been  brought
    against any party [32].  I am satisfied in the light  of  the  evidence
    before the judge and, in particular, her credibility findings that  she
    was entitled to conclude that the  respondent  had  not  satisfied  the
    legal burden of proving the appellant's test results were  obtained  by
    dishonesty.

16.   The grounds argue that the judge failed to deal  adequately  with  the
    fact that, although the appellant may have had no  need  to  engage  in
    deception in the light of his ability to speak English,  that  did  not
    necessarily mean that there were not in fact other reasons why a  proxy
    was used.  However, there is no reason to believe that the  judge  left
    matters such as this out of account.  These were issues of fact for the
    judge to decide in the light of the evidence as a whole. In  substance,
    the grounds again are simply seeking to re-open issues  of  fact  where
    the judge reached a decision properly open to her.

17.   In summary, the grounds do not satisfy me  that  the  judge  erred  in
    law.  She reached a decision properly open to her for the  reasons  she
    gave.

Decision

18.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and  it  follows  that  the
    decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds stands.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 14 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
