
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13620/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2019                            |On 25 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kerr, Counsel instructed by Karis Solicitors
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  who  dismissed   his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's refusal of his human rights claim  in  the  context  of  a
    decision to deport him from the  United  Kingdom  further  to  criminal
    offences committed here.

 2. The appellant is an Albanian national  who  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2003 clandestinely.  He was subsequently removed.  He  again
    re-entered  clandestinely  in  2004,  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities when he was arrested for assault and again removed in 2007.
     It is claimed he re-entered the United Kingdom in March  2008.   There
    is no record of lawful entry or leave to remain at the time.   He  made
    an application for leave to remain on the basis of family life with his
    daughter  who  is  a  British  citizen  born  in  October  2009.   That
    application was made in 2012 and leave to remain was  granted  on  that
    basis, initially and on further extension to 16 January 2019.

 3. On 9 August 2017 the appellant  was  convicted  of  assisting  unlawful
    immigration  into  the  EU  and  was  sentenced   to   twenty   months'
    imprisonment.  He was notified of the intention to make  a  deportation
    order against him and made submissions in response to that  in  October
    2017.  Those submissions relied primarily on his two  children  in  the
    United Kingdom and his partner here.  The eldest  child  is  a  British
    citizen, as I said, born in 2009, and the youngest child born  in  2017
    to his partner.  Both the appellant's partner and  youngest  child  are
    Albanian nationals with no leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. In terms of the respondent's decision refusing the human rights  claim,
    in relation to the oldest child, the respondent noted that she  resides
    with her mother and that there is no evidence  of  a  current  parental
    relationship between  her  and  the  appellant,  the  conclusion  being
    therefore that his deportation would not be unduly harsh  on  her.   In
    relation to the appellant's current partner and child, neither of  them
    had leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  again  there  was  no
    evidence of any subsisting relationship between them, including  during
    the time that he was in prison, the  conclusion  also  being  that  his
    deportation would not be unduly harsh either on those family members to
    remain in the United Kingdom if they obtained the appropriate leave, or
    to return to Albania with him.  Similarly, the private  life  exception
    to deportation had not been met  and  there  were  no  very  compelling
    circumstances.  The decision to make a deportation order was then taken
    by the respondent on 6 September 2017.

 5. The appeal against the refusal of human rights claim  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 20 August 2018.  At that  point  an  adjournment
    was sought on the basis that  there  were  ongoing  family  proceedings
    involving the appellant to resume a previous  child  arrangement  order
    for contact to resume between the appellant and his daughter which  had
    essentially ceased when he went into prison.  The  adjournment  request
    was on the basis that there should have been a hearing  in  the  Family
    Court proceedings just before the First-tier Tribunal appeal, which was
    adjourned when the child's mother did not attend.  The hearing had been
    relisted for a further date.  The First-tier Tribunal refused to  grant
    an adjournment on the basis of the ongoing Family Court proceedings and
    further to consideration of the guidance from the Upper Tribunal in  RS
    (immigration and Family Court  proceedings)  India  [2012]  UKUT  00218
    (IAC) found that  as  the  appellant  was  seeking  no  more  than  the
    reinstatement of the arrangement entered into previously and by consent
    on 21 January 2016 such that even if he succeeded in the current Family
    Court proceedings of resuming contact he would  still  be  unlikely  to
    meet the exceptions set out in paragraph 399A(ii)(b) of the Immigration
    Rules to prevent deportation on human rights grounds.

 6.  The  previous  contact  which  the  appellant  sought  to  resume  was
    unsupervised contact with his child between 11.00 a.m.  and  4.00  p.m.
    every other Saturday that was enjoyed prior to  August  2017.   It  was
    also  noted  that  the  child's  mother  was  a  reluctant   party   in
    facilitating contact and there had already been a  significant  gap  in
    contact in the relationship and only limited  contact  previously.   On
    the basis that no contact was resumed, the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the deportation would not be  unduly  harsh  on  his  daughter  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  In paragraph  36  of  the  decision  the
    Judge goes on to find:

         "Having now had the opportunity of considering the totality of  the
         evidence and reflecting on all of the issues that I am required  to
         consider, the conclusion that I have come to is that firstly, as  a
         matter of fact, presently the appellant does not have a  subsisting
         parental relationship with his daughter, and even if contact was to
         resume under the same terms as before, that would not amount to the
         unduly harsh test that is required to be satisfied under  paragraph
         399(a)(ii)(b)".

 7. The appellant appeals essentially on  three  grounds:  the  first  that
    there was an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal failing to adjourn
    the hearing  pending  Family  Court  proceedings  and  that  the  court
    therefore pre-empted the  outcome  of  those  proceedings  rather  than
    waiting for them.  Secondly, that there was a failure to  consider  the
    best interest of the children in accordance  with  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  Thirdly, that the First-
    tier Tribunal failed to analyse the test of unduly harsh and take  into
    account the public interest  in  deportation  and  the  nature  of  the
    offence.  In relation to the final ground of appeal, that has  somewhat
    been overtaken by the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC  53,  where  the
    test of unduly harsh has been confirmed to focus only on the child  and
    not by reference to any kind of balancing exercise against  the  public
    interest in deportation, the nature of the offence  or  the  length  of
    sentence.  This final ground of appeal  falls  away  in  light  of  the
    decision in KO.

 8. In relation to the failure to adjourn the proceedings, it is not at all
    clear from the decision or any evidence from the appellant  as  to  the
    precise nature of the adjournment request.  It appears  from  what  has
    happened since that hearing that there  has  been  a  positive  Cafcass
    report and a further hearing on 23 January in Family Court  proceedings
    with no consent or order for those documents to be  disclosed  in  this
    appeal at present, but with a final hearing set for 21 March 2019.

 9. There is no suggestion that I can see from the file that the First-tier
    Tribunal was asked to adjourn on  the  basis  that  there  would  be  a
    Cafcass report or further information to be forthcoming from the Family
    Court proceedings which would be relevant to an assessment of the  best
    interests of the child or the unduly harsh assessment.  Hindsight might
    show that that is what has  happened  which  may  be  relevant  if  the
    decision needs to be remade, but that is not the information which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. In any event, it is difficult to see in this case how  the  failure  to
    adjourn in these circumstances could be a material error of law.  There
    is no reason to think that the First-tier Tribunal was aware  that  any
    further evidence may be available and the findings made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal took  the  ease  at  its  highest  if  the  Family  Court
    proceedings were successful, as fully set out within  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  For these reasons, I find no error of law  in
    failing to adjourn the proceedings or even on pre-empting the  outcome,
    taken that it was considered in the appellant's favour in any event.

11. The second ground of appeal in relation to failure to consider the best
    interests is clearly made out as on the face of the decision  there  is
    no express consideration of the best interests of  the  child  at  all.
    However, that has to be considered against the factual situation before
    the First-tier Tribunal and in particular,  the  lack  of  evidence  in
    relation to the child before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant
    could describe a previous genuine  relationship  which  had  previously
    been accepted by the respondent - that was the basis upon which he  had
    leave to remain granted and there was a  child  arrangement  order  for
    contact and the appellant's evidence was that  it  was  going  well  up
    until  his  point  of  imprisonment.   There  is  however  no   further
    information at all about the appellant's daughter, largely  because  he
    had had no direct or meaningful contact with her for over a year by the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  There is no information  from
    her, about her, or from her mother to suggest that any detail could  be
    fleshed out on the best interest's assessment, even in the  absence  of
    any information from the Family Court.

12. In these circumstances it was fair for the First-tier Tribunal to find,
    on the history and evidence available, that the best interests  of  the
    child were to remain in the United  Kingdom  where  she  is  a  British
    citizen, where she resides in  a  stable  environment  with  access  to
    education and where she can continue living with her mother.  It  could
    be inferred based on the previous  history  of  the  child  arrangement
    order that it was also in her best interests to resume contact with her
    father and maintain a relationship with him, as that was  supported  by
    the previous Cafcass report which was available on file, albeit  dating
    from 2015.  There is nothing further than that that  could  inform  any
    more detailed best interest's assessment.  Even taking those matters at
    their highest, when moving on to the third ground of appeal that  there
    is a failure to analyse undue harshness properly, I can see no error of
    law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  that  in  any  event  the
    circumstances could not meet the exception in paragraph 399A(ii)(b)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

13. The requirements for a finding that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
    child to relocate with the appellant  and  unduly  harsh  for  them  to
    remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the  appellant  requires  the
    identification of factors which are beyond the normal  consequences  of
    deportation which are inevitably harsh and often damaging for children.
     Something much more than those usual consequences is required to  meet
    the unduly harsh test.  There is nothing  to  indicate  in  the  papers
    before the First-tier Tribunal or any evidence  given  before  it  that
    could suggest that test was even arguably met to the standard  set  out
    in KO and the authorities  referred  to  therein.   Although  the  best
    interest's  assessment  is  absent  from  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision, even if included and taking matters at their highest that  it
    is in the best interests of the child for the appellant  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom with her, I do not find that the absence of the best
    interest's assessment could be a material error of law on the facts  of
    this case.  It could have no bearing on the outcome of the appeal given
    the conclusion in paragraph 36 on which there is no separate  error  of
    law.  It is clear on the facts that this is a case where the  appellant
    simply falls far short of meeting any of the exceptions.

14. The First-tier Tribunal went on to  consider,  in  any  event,  whether
    there  were  further  exceptional  circumstances   or   whether   other
    exceptions were met under the Immigration Rules and  found  that  there
    were not.  There is no separate challenge to those  final  conclusions.
    For these reasons, although as I have said there is an error of law  in
    relation to a failure to expressly consider the best interests  of  the
    child, that is not a material error of law and it could not affect  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The First-tier decision  therefore  stands  and
    this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity given the Family Court  proceedings  in  relation  to  his
child.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   [pic]         Date         21st February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
