
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/13003/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 7 February 2018                 |On 27 February 2018                      |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  mrs c m o
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel instructed by Davies, Blunden &
Evans
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya, born on [ ] 1976 who  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated  9
    December 2015 to refuse the appellant leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on
    human rights grounds and to remove her.  The First-tier Tribunal, in  a
    decision promulgated on 21 April 2017 dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

      1) Arguable material misdirection in  law  on  a  material  matter  in
         relation to whether or not the appellant had the benefit of Section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  by
         showing a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
         British child.

      2) Placing weight on immaterial matters in  relation  to  the  child's
         current contact with her mother, the lack of supporting evidence of
         abusive phone calls from  the  child's  mother,  and  the  lack  of
         evidence from the child.

Error of Law discussion

 3. Ms Yong relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  on  page  36  of  the
    appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal which provided a copy
    of R (on the application of RK) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Section 117B(6); "parental relationship") 1JR  [2016]  UKUT
    00031 (IAC).

 4. RK provides, including as follows:

         '44. If a non-biological parent ("third party") caring for a  child
         claims such a relationship, its existence will depend upon all  the
         circumstances including whether or not there  are  others  (usually
         the biological parents) who have such a relationship with the child
         also.  It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a person will  be  able
         to establish they have taken on the  role  of  a  parent  when  the
         biological parents continue to be involved in the child's  life  as
         the child's life as the child's parents as in a case  such  as  the
         present where  the  children  and  parents  continue  to  live  and
         function together as a  family.   It  will  be  difficult,  if  not
         impossible, to say that a third party has 'stepped into the  shoes'
         of a parent.

         45.  It is not necessary to consider more fully the position  of  a
         step-parent or partner of the primary  carer  of  a  child  when  a
         family has split after separation or divorce of the parents.   That
         is  not  this  case.   That  situation  may,  depending  upon   the
         circumstances, present a persuasive factual matrix for there to  be
         a 'third parent'.  The respondent's guidance differentiates between
         situations where the non-residential biological parent plays no (or
         no meaningful) continuing role in the child's life and where he  or
         she does.  In the latter situation, it is said that the step-parent
         or new partner would be unlikely to have a 'parental relationship'.
          Whilst each case will be fact sensitive, I do not  inevitably  see
         the virtue of the argument (other than as a numerical imitation  of
         parents to no more than two) which excludes a step-parent  in  this
         latter situation from being in a 'parental relationship' if that is
         the substance of the relationship even  where  the  non-residential
         biological parent continues to play some role.  The issue  will  be
         fact sensitive and is best worked out in a case where  it  properly
         arises for decision.'

 5. Although Ms Yong relied on RK as supporting her position, RK  expressly
    declined to consider fully the position  of  a  step-parent.   What  is
    clear is that the issue is a fact-sensitive one.

 6. Ms Yong accepted that the judge had made findings in  relation  to  the
    role of the appellant in the child's life including at paragraphs  [26]
    and [28]. Ms Yong took issue with the conclusions  that  were  reached.
    However, she accepted that the appellant's grounds did not amount to  a
    rationality challenge.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal has given more than adequate  reasons,  at  for
    not accepting that the appellant had "stepped into" the  shoes  of  the
    appellant's mother.   The  Tribunal  considered  all  of  the  evidence
    including that although a  letter  from  the  mosque  stated  that  the
    appellant has taken a keen interest in her stepdaughter's education and
    had been consistent in picking the  child  up,  the  letter  failed  to
    explain what they know about  the  appellant's  role  with  the  child.
    Although the sponsor has stated that the  appellant  bathes  the  child
    which he cannot perform because she is 8 years old and cannot  do  that
    in his culture, the judge noted that there was no evidence  to  support
    that claim.  In addition the First-tier Tribunal went on to  note  that
    evidence was not adduced from the child about her relationship with the
    appellant,  the  sponsor  (her  father)  or  her  mother.   The   judge
    considered all the evidence including, at [26], that  the  letter  from
    the school gave very little information about  the  appellant  and  the
    extent and length of any role she had had in the child's education such
    as attending parent evenings or events held at  the  school.    I  note
    that it was accepted before me that at the date of the  hearing  on  23
    March 2017 the appellant had been living with the family  for  a  year,
    since March 2016, although the appellant and the sponsor indicated that
    they had been together since 2015.

 8. I do not accept Ms Yong's submissions  that  the  Tribunal  gave  undue
    weight to the fact that the child had visited her  mother  in  2015  in
    Tanzania.  This evidence was particularly significant  as  the  sponsor
    had stated that the child's mother was not involved in the child's life
    although he admitted in oral evidence that she had had contact with her
    mother two years previously because he had sent her to  Tanzania.   The
    finding that the judge made on the basis of  this  evidence,  that  the
    sponsor's  evidence that the mother and child had no  relationship  did
    not sit well with the 2015 visit to Tanzania, was one that was open  to
    her.  The Tribunal went on to find that there was no objective evidence
    that the sponsor had divorced his first wife nor any objective evidence
    that the child had no contact with her mother.

 9. Although Ms Yong attempted to  give  evidence  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing as to the divorce process,  regardless  of  whether  it  was  a
    verbal process or otherwise, there was no error in the judge's findings
    that no objective evidence had been provided of such a  process,  where
    such ought to have been available (and I note  there  was  no  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that there was any difficulty
    in obtaining such information).  In addition,  there  was  no  adequate
    explanation as to why there was no  evidence  that  the  child  had  no
    contact with her mother (where such could have been provided  including
    for example in a witness statement and/or oral evidence from the  child
    or a third party with knowledge  of  these  matters).   The  judge  was
    entitled to reach the findings that she did, at [24] that there was  no
    evidence to support the sponsor's  claim  that  his  ex-wife  had  been
    abusive on the phone or had blocked his calls and this  was  considered
    in the context that two years previously he had sent the child  to  see
    her mother which did not sit well with his evidence  that  she  had  no
    relationship with her.

10. The judge was entitled, particularly given that there was a Section  55
    duty on the Tribunal to consider the best interests of the child  as  a
    primary consideration, to consider that it  had  not  been  established
    that there was no relationship between the child and her  mother.   The
    fact, as argued by Ms Yong, that there was no evidence of  any  further
    relationship between the child since the visit in 2015, was of  limited
    weight, particularly in the context of the findings that  the  evidence
    of the sponsor was not accepted and in light of the Tribunal's concerns
    about the claims of no contact, yet the child  visited  her  mother  in
    2015.

11. Ms Yong submitted that it was relevant that this visit had taken  place
    prior to the appellant moving in with  the  family  and  there  was  no
    evidence of contact subsequent to 2015.  However, it was  open  to  the
    Tribunal for the adequate reasons  given  to  find  that  the  evidence
    suggested that the child still enjoys a relationship  with  her  mother
    "at some level" and that this impacts on the claimed relationship  with
    the appellant.  The Tribunal did not overstate the relationship between
    the child and the  mother  and  there  was  no  error  in  taking  into
    consideration  that  the  evidence  suggested  that  there   was   some
    relationship.

12. In any event, that was not the sole basis for the Tribunal finding,  at
    [28], that the appellant did not have a parental relationship,  in  the
    terms of Section 116B(6).   I  am  of  the  view  that  the  Tribunal's
    findings would stand even if the Tribunal were wrong in respect of  the
    relationship between the child and the biological mother (which has not
    been established).  The Tribunal's findings at [26], together with  the
    finding at [28], that there was a paucity of  evidence  to  demonstrate
    the genuine and subsisting relationship between the appellant  and  the
    child, amount to sustainable findings  that  it  this  case,  on  these
    particular facts,  there  was  no  parental  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the child in question.

13. Although Ms Yong also sought to challenge the  findings  at  [29]  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to return and that the appellant
    could return and apply for entry  clearance  (although  this  would  of
    course not have been  an  issue  if  the  appellant  had  succeeded  in
    establishing that she has a parental relationship with  a  child  which
    she did not) she  conceded  that  this  had  not  been  argued  in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal and was not before the Upper Tribunal.

14. In terms of the Tribunal taking into consideration that  there  was  no
    evidence to support the claim that the child's mother had been  abusive
    on the phone and the sponsor had blocked the calls, there was no  error
    in that approach.  Although it was submitted that it was  difficult  to
    consider what evidence could be provided, this might for  example  have
    consisted of evidence of  a  list  of  blocked  calls  from  his  phone
    provider or evidence from a third party aware of  these  circumstances.
    The Tribunal was entitled to take this into consideration in the  round
    including in the context of a number of unsupported  claims,  including
    that he had divorced his wife (where such evidence ought to  reasonably
    have been available).

15. In relation to the Tribunal  taking  into  consideration  the  lack  of
    evidence from the child, as the grounds  of  appeal  pointed  out,  the
    wishes of any children should be ascertained where possible and  again,
    in the context of considering the child's best  interests  and  in  the
    light of what the Tribunal found to be a paucity of evidence  generally
    about the relationship with  the  appellant,  there  was  no  error  in
    considering in the round in assessing  what  evidence  was  before  the
    Tribunal, that was no evidence from the child.   The  Tribunal  reached
    the sustainable conclusions it did on the basis of the evidence  before
    it.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

    Anonymity direction made as the appellant's sponsor has a  minor  child
    whose circumstances are related in this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
