
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13310/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2019                          |On 27th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [N S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Malaysia born on 21st  March  2003.   The
    Appellant first entered the UK with her mother and brother on 15th June
    2007 as a visitor with leave valid for six  months.   On  26th  October
    2013 an application was submitted on the basis of  family  and  private
    life with the Appellant as a dependant and this  was  refused  on  17th
    December  2013.   On  23rd  February  2015  the  Appellant  voluntarily
    departed back to Malaysia with her mother and brother.  However, she re-
    entered the UK again a visitor with leave granted for six months on 2nd
    November 2016.  On 27th April 2017 the Appellant made  a  human  rights
    claim for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  her
    family life with her grandparents in  the  UK.   That  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 11th October 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal O'Keeffe on  23rd  July  2018  at  Hatton  Cross.   By  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  30th  July  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 3. Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  were  lodged  on  12th  August
    2018.  Permission to appeal was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer on 10th October 2018.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged  on
    5th November 2018.

 4. On 21st December  2018  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grimes  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Grimes  noted  that  the  renewed  grounds
    contended that the judge had erred in finding  that  the  Appellant,  a
    child, cannot rely on paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration  Rules
    where she had seven years' residence in the UK before leaving and  then
    returning to the UK.  The issue raised  was  whether  the  phrase  "has
    lived continuously in the UK" requires that  the  residence  must  have
    been immediately before the application.   It  is  contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had not taken into  account  the  Appellant's
    residence between June  2007  and  February  2016  in  considering  the
    application of this Rule and that that constituted an arguable error.

 5. Judge Grimes considered the other grounds had less merit as  the  judge
    had highlighted the paucity of evidence before her and  concluded  that
    she had not been presented with  a  full  picture  of  the  Appellant's
    current circumstances.  However, permission was not  refused  on  those
    grounds.

 6. On 29th January 2019 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  In opposing the appeal the  Secretary  of  State
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had given  cogent  reasons
    for rejecting the purported "abandonment" of the  Appellant  and  found
    that her best interests are to be reunited with her mother and  brother
    in her country of nationality.  It is contended in the Rule 24 response
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly aware  of  the  relevant
    considerations endorsed by the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  and  had
    assessed the facts of the Appellant's case in light of these.  Further,
    it was contended that it was clear that  irrespective  of  whether  the
    Appellant  had  seven  years'  continual  residence  immediately   pre-
    application, or earlier, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  applied  a
    "reasonableness" test in concluding that "it is entirely reasonable  to
    require her to return to Malaysia".  Having  done  so,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  appropriately  went   on   to   consider   exceptional
    circumstances  applying  the  "unjustifiably  harsh"  test  and  it  is
    submitted that there is no material error disclosed in the decision.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Kannangara.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Melvin.



The Rule

 8. The relevant Rule here for due consideration is paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)
    which states that an appeal under private life can  be  allowed  if  an
    applicant is:-

         "(iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
             the UK for at least seven years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK."

Submission/Discussion

 9. Mr Kannangara relies on the Grounds of Appeal, particularly the grounds
    to the Upper Tribunal and submits that the question  in  this  case  is
    whether the Appellant can rely on Immigration Rule 276ADE  if  she  has
    left the UK after completing seven years of residence  and  returns  to
    the UK.  He submits that the judge had failed to consider the  question
    and refused to engage with the argument and that  that  constitutes  an
    error of law.  He submits that the Appellant was brought back to the UK
    in 2016 by her grandmother and that the judge failed  to  consider  the
    previous period in the UK and that it should  be  considered  with  the
    reasonableness  assessment.   It  is  his  contention  that  the  judge
    specifically failed to find that the Appellant had any significant life
    in the UK and had  minimised  the  life  established  in  the  UK.   He
    contends that the judge had failed to put weight on the fact  that  the
    child had nobody to receive her in Malaysia if returned  and  that  she
    was living a stable life in the UK.

10. He accepts that the Appellant left the UK  in  2015  but  that  it  was
    necessary for her grandmother to return her and had the judge looked at
    the period prior to her leaving, then he contends that she  would  have
    made a different assessment  of  the  case.   He  emphasises  that  the
    Appellant's mother does not want her back but the mother's partner  was
    happy to take the Appellant's brother.   His  appeal  was  consequently
    withdrawn.  He asked me to remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

11. Mr Melvin points out that  the  family  overstayed  in  2007  and  only
    returned to Malaysia when their appeal rights had been exhausted.   The
    Appellant was then granted a visit visa and again overstayed and  I  am
    asked to take this into account.  He submits it is  very  difficult  to
    see  how  the  Appellant  could  succeed  under  276ADE  against   this
    historical  background  and  submits  that  the  judge  has  looked  at
    everything.  He submits that there is no material error  of  law  under
    the Rules and  submits  that  there  are  no  compelling  circumstances
    outside the Rules, pointing out that there are family  members  of  the
    Appellant in Malaysia and that the judge had not been accepting of  the
    family members' evidence produced before  her.   He  submits  that  the
    judge was entitled to make the findings that she did and that there are
    no merits in the appeal.





The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. It is difficult in this instant case to see how the submissions made on
    the Appellant's behalf amount to anything other than disagreement  with
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  history  of  this
    matter is very fully set out in a detailed, well directed  decision  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The judge  has  detailed  the  evidence
    that she heard.  It is clear that she  was  aware  of  the  Appellant's
    previous immigration history and took that into  account,  as  well  as
    having regard to the welfare of the Appellant in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009.

15. She noted that the core of the Appellant's case was that she  had  been
    abandoned by her mother and she gave  full  consideration  to  all  the
    facts that were presented to her.

16. The decision is set out in a logical  and  reasoned  manner  and  gives
    consideration firstly to the Rules.  She was aware of  the  Appellant's
    immigration history, albeit that I acknowledge  that  that  would  have
    been at the instigation of the Appellant's mother.

17. At paragraphs 27 and 28 the judge has in considerable detail gone on to
    consider the Appellant's  best  interests  and  as  to  how  she  could
    continue to enjoy family life with her grandparents.  The  judge  found
    that refusing the Appellant's application was a  proportionate  measure
    and a fair balance of the competing interests and that it was  entirely
    reasonable to require her to return to  Malaysia  where  her  immediate
    family resides.   The  judge  found  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances in the Appellant's case which rendered refusal  a  breach
    of Article 8.

18. The judge has given a very detailed and thorough analysis based on  the
    evidence that was before her.   She  was  aware  that  the  Appellant's
    mother does not want the Appellant but that in itself  alone  does  not
    constitute a basis for allowing an appeal.  The  judge  has  considered
    all of the facts and given full and thorough reasons for  reaching  her
    conclusions.  In  such  circumstances,  the  submissions  made  by  the
    Appellant's  legal  representatives  amount   to   little   more   than
    disagreement in an attempt to reargue the case.  The decision discloses
    no material error of law and is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

