
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/13494/2018

                                                HU/13505/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th December 2018                   |On 14th January 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                      mr solomon ogah (First Appellant)
                  mrs ebere esther ogah (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Cipango, a Solicitor of Crown & Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McEvoy, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  who  was  born  on  29th
    November 1993, and the second appellant is his wife, also a citizen  of
    Nigeria who was born on 28th February 1980.

2.   The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 16th July 2008, on  a
    student visa which was valid until 31st October 2010.  In August  2010,
    he was granted leave to remain post-study until 6th  August  2012.   On
    3rd August 2012, he was granted leave to remain until 28th May 2016, as
    a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  In the meantime, the second appellant  came  to
    the United Kingdom on 5th February 2012, with their first child who had
    been born in Nigeria on 11th October 2011 on a student visa  which  was
    subsequently varied to leave  as  a  dependent  partner  of  the  first
    appellant.  Three further children were born in the United Kingdom:  in
    February 2013, July 2015, and in July 2017.

3.   On 26th May, 2016, the first appellant applied for further leave as  an
    entrepreneur which was refused on 26th  July  2017,  with  a  right  to
    administrative  review  which,  on  9th  August  2017,  maintained  the
    decision  with  amended  reasons  which  gave  a  right  to  a  further
    administrative review.  On  18th  September  2017,  the  second  review
    maintained the original decision and on  2nd  October  2017  the  first
    appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of having completed ten years' lawful residence and his  wife  on
    the basis of her family life with him.  It could not have come  as  any
    surprise to the appellants or to those  representing  them  that  those
    applications were refused on 13th June 2018 and 18th June respectively,
    the detailed reasons being provided in the decision  letters  of  those
    dates but  principally  because  the  first  named  appellant  had  not
    completed 10 years lawful residence, or anything like it.

4.   The reason given for the decision concerning the  first  appellant  was
    that he had not completed ten years' lawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom since he had not had any leave to remain since  18th  September
    2017, at which point he had only completed nine years and  two  months'
    lawful residence within the Rules.  Once his leave ran out on that date
    he failed to accrue any further leave whilst awaiting the  decision  on
    his application which, it was said, was out of time.   Neither  did  he
    qualify under 276ADE private life as he had been in the United  Kingdom
    less than twenty years and there would not be any significant obstacles
    to his integration back in Nigeria where he had spent the  majority  of
    his life and had made regular visits since coming to the United Kingdom
    and where his wife and children, none of whom  were  British  citizens,
    would be returned together and there were no exceptional circumstances.

5.   So far as the second  appellant  is  concerned,  it  was  said  in  her
    refusal letter that she did not meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM
    excluding EX.2. as to the test of insurmountable obstacles to  her  and
    her partner continuing family life outside  the  UK  and  none  of  the
    children qualified under EX.1. having been here  for  less  than  seven
    years.  In  terms  of  private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE  it  was
    reiterated that as with the first appellant, this appellant  had  lived
    the majority of her life in Nigeria and there were no very  significant
    obstacles to her integrating on return and she would be returning  with
    her husband and children who could be educated  in  Nigeria  and  whose
    best interests lay in accompanying their  parents  and  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances.

6    The appellants appealed on the grounds that  the  first  appellant  had
    completed ten years' lawful  residence  as  his  application  was  made
    within fourteen days of the administrative review of  his  entrepreneur
    decision which, according to the Home Office's own policy, it was said,
    meant  that  his  lawful  residence  was  not  broken  because  it  had
    automatically  been  extended  by  operation  of  section  3C  of   the
    Immigration  Act  1971.   The  decision  of  the  judge  was  that  the
    applications made by the appellants were submitted out of time and  the
    application made by the first appellant, based on his ten years' lawful
    residence, was premature, in that  he  had  not  at  the  time  of  the
    application completed ten years residence.  In paragraphs 11 and 12  of
    the decision the judge said this:-

         "11. Mr  Adewusi  countered  this  initially  by  pointing  to  the
             document he produced  referring  to  statement  of  changes  3
             November 2016 HC 667.  Since  this  short  extract  was  shorn
             (sic) of context I asked during  the  course  of  the  hearing
             precisely which rule it was referring to or  amending  and  Mr
             Aiguobasinmwin helpfully indicated that  it  was  relevant  to
             39E.  On further investigation after the  hearing,  it  became
             clear that this was correct but that the  extract  Mr  Adewusi
             provided was not from the statement of changes itself but from
             the explanatory note.  In any event what para 39E is concerned
             with is not lawful residence  or  continuation  of  leave  but
             whether an application made a short time  (now  only  14  days
             since HC 667) after expiry of leave  can  be  regarded  as  in
             time.  Para 276B(v) which makes an additional  requirement  to
             continuous lawful residence of 'not being in the UK in  breach
             of Immigration Rules'  provides  an  exception  so  that  this
             additional requirement is not breached where para 39E applies.
              The decision letter was therefore wrong in  saying  that  the
             application made on 2 October was out of time in the sense  of
             the appellant being 'in breach of immigration laws' since  39E
             did apply to the  application  made  on  2  October.   It  was
             therefore an application which was rightly  considered  as  to
             whether it satisfied the other requirements of 276B.


         12.  However, the fact that the appellant was not to be regarded as
             in breach of immigration laws and that his application was  an
             'in-time' application does not alter the fact that he did  not
             have lawful residence for ten years, both because he  had  not
             been here in any capacity for as long as ten  years  and  also
             because as from 18 September it was not 'lawful residence'  as
             he no longer had leave.  His application was therefore rightly
             rejected under 276B since he did not  have  ten  years  lawful
             residence at the time of  the  application  nor  could  he  in
             effect accrue that in the future as he never subsequently  had
             any leave to remain.  Of course the appeal is on human  rights
             grounds and the issue of whether he was  entitled  to  succeed
             under the rules is relevant in terms of whether  the  decision
             is legitimate and proportionate under Article 8.   Mr  Adewusi
             invites me to say that  he  should  succeed  on  human  rights
             grounds today because he now has accrued then years (which  he
             had not even at the date of the decision in June of this year)
             but the problem with this argument is that although he has now
             accrued ten years, the last ten months of that ten years  have
             been without leave and have not been 'lawful residence' within
             276B(i) as defined in 296A(b),  notwithstanding  that  he  was
             not, certainly between 18 September and 2 October, 'in  breach
             of immigration laws' which is a different concept  to  'lawful
             residence'.  Where 276B(v) and 39E might have  helped  is  if,
             for example, his ten  years  had  been  completed  on  a  date
             between 28 May 2016 and 18 September 2017.   These  provisions
             would have prevented him being in breach of  immigration  laws
             in submitting an application in the 14 days  following  expiry
             of leave on 18 September and such an  application  would  have
             been likely to succeed on the basis of  the  ten  year  lawful
             residence (with leave) that he had completed by  the  date  of
             the application (deemed to be in time).  They [do] not however
             assist him in terms of an application which whilst  deemed  in
             time, is not one which meets the other requirements  of  276B,
             in particular as to lawful residence."

7.   The grounds  suggested  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  contradicted
    himself in that if an applicant has made an in time application and has
    not become an overstayer, he cannot be regarded as an unlawful resident
    in the UK.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  seems  to  proceed  on  the
    understanding that Section  276B  introduces  a  different  concept  of
    lawful residence from the traditional definition of  lawful  residence.
    The grounds went on to say at paragraphs 5 to 9:-

         "5.  As stated above the purpose of the 14 day grace period  is  to
             give a subject who  has  been  refused  application  or  whose
             appeal has been dismissed to make further  applications  (sic)
             without losing their lawful residence in this  country.   This
             is the position whether the subsequent application is under 10
             year lawful residence or not.


         6.   It should be noted that  with  regard  to  applications  under
             276B, the main test is whether there has been  a  gap  in  the
             applicant's lawful residence in the United Kingdom within  the
             relevant 10 year period.  It is submitted where paragraph  39E
             of the Immigration Rules applies; there will not be a  gap  in
             the lawful residence of the applicant.


         7.   It is therefore submitted that the FTT Judge's  conclusion  on
             the issue  of  whether  the  appellant  had  continued  lawful
             residence beyond 18 September 2017 was legally misconceived.


         8.   It is further submitted that the FTT Judge  erred  in  law  in
             that he failed to consider whether the fact that at  the  date
             of hearing the appellant had completed 10 years  of  residence
             in the United Kingdom.  It is submitted that the FTT Judge was
             bound to consider this fact under section 84(5)  of  the  NIAA
             2002 as part of matters arising at the hearing.


         9.   It is in light of the above that the appellant is now  seeking
             permission to appeal against the decision of  FTT  Judge  R  D
             Taylor."

     First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb granted leave believing the  grounds  to
    be "arguable".

8.   At the hearing before me I was assisted by Mr  Chimpango  who  appeared
    on  behalf  of  the  appellants.   He  suggested  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected himself.  He accepted that the first appellant had made  an
    application for leave on the  basis  of  having  completed  ten  years'
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom  at  a  time  when  he  had  not
    actually completed ten years' lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom
    and would not have completed it for several months.  Mr Chimpango  told
    me that the reason the application  was  made  was  because  the  first
    appellant had no other basis under which he  could  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules  for  leave.   He  submitted  that  having  made  the
    application, leave was extended by paragraph  39E  of  the  Immigration
    Rules because the application was made within fourteen  days  of  prior
    leave having expired.  Prior leave expired on 18th  September  and  the
    application was made on 2nd October.  He submitted that notwithstanding
    the fact that the first appellant could not succeed in the application.
     The  fact  that  he  had  made  the  application  extended  his  leave
    automatically under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

9.   Responding briefly on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  McVeety
    told me that the first appellant's original application was made within
    fourteen days of the expiry of his previous leave, but  it  was  for  a
    purpose which the first appellant and  those  advising  him  must  have
    known could not possibly have been successful.  That was because at the
    time of the application the first appellant had not completed ten years
    leave.  The application was rightly rejected by the Secretary of  State
    and refused.  Leave was not therefore extended by  Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  Leave would only have been extended  by  39E  if
    the application made by the first appellant within fourteen days of his
    original leave having expired was for a purpose for which he could have
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules and where  his  leave  is
    extended pursuant to the application.  Mr Chimpango told  me  that  his
    client had completed ten years' leave on the day of the hearing  before
    the Tribunal Judge.

10.  I reserved my decision.

11.  Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 deals with the  continuation  of
    leave pending a variation decision. It deals with the position where an
    individual with leave seeks further leave but,  before  a  decision  is
    made by the Secretary of State, the existing  grant  of  leave  expires
    (s.3C(1)). In practical  terms,  applications  for  further  leave  are
    usually made relatively close in time to the expiry of  existing  leave
    and, if for no reason other than pressure of work, a  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State is likely to be reached after the existing leave has
    expired. The underlying purpose of s.3C is to ensure that an individual
    is not prejudiced by that "practicality" which would leave them in  the
    position of being an overstayer. It, therefore, statutorily extends the
    individual's existing leave beyond the point when  it  would  naturally
    expire.


12.  Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules had provided as follows:-

    The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to
    remain on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are that:
    (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in the
    United Kingdom.


13.  The provision in force for applications made before 24th  November
    2016, provided as follows:

         "(v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
         laws, except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days
         or less will be disregarded, as will any period of overstaying
         between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to
         remain of up to 28 days and any period of overstaying pending the
         determination of an application made within that 28 day period."
         .
14.  HC 667 substituted a new sub-para (v) for applications made on or
    after 24 November 2016 (as this application was) and is as follows:


         "(v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
         laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of these Rules applies, any
         current period of overstaying will be disregarded. Any previous
         period of overstaying between periods of leave will also be
         disregarded where -
         (a) the further application was made before 24 November 2016 and
         within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or
         (b) the further application was made on or after 24 November 2016
         and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied."

15.  At the date of the application for leave, namely 2nd October 2017,  the
    first appellant had not completed ten years' lawful leave in the United
    Kingdom.  It must have been obvious to him and to  those  advising  him
    that any application made in advance of him being qualified  for  grant
    of further leave under the Immigration Rules could not be  successful.,
    whether it was made during a period of existing  leave or  not.   Given
    that at the time of the application the application could not  possibly
    succeed, the first appellant's leave could not have  been  extended  by
    paragraph 39E when his  application  was  made  on  2nd  October  2017,
    because it was made for a category to which the first appellant was not
    entitled.  I have concluded therefore that the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R D Taylor in dismissing the appellants' appeal did  not
    amount to a material error of law and in the circumstances the decision
    of the judge shall stand.

Notice of Decision

16.  This appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley

A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley

A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

