
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
number: HU/13218/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2021                      |On 15 February 2021           |
|                                        |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          KAJANA THAVABALAKRISHNAN

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

For  the  appellant:  Ms  E  Rutherford  of  counsel,  instructed  by   Oaks
Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. To avoid confusion, I have referred below the parties  as  they  were  at
   the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing.

2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka with  date  of  birth  given  as
   24.2.94.

3. The relevant background is that  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  on
   29.4.15. An application for  asylum  was  withdrawn.  The  appellant  was
   advised that as she had claimed asylum in Switzerland under Third Country
   arrangements she was not entitled to do so in the UK. Her LTR application
   was made on the basis of her relationship with her partner, whom she  met
   in the UK and with whom she entered into a religious form of marriage not
   legally recognised as valid in the UK in December 2015. Her partner  also
   comes  from  Sri  Lanka.  His  asylum  claim  was  rejected  but  he  was
   subsequently granted LTR in the UK.

4. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   24.12.19 (Judge Clarke), allowing on human rights grounds the appellant's
   appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 16.7.19,  to
   refuse her application made on 8.9.18 for Leave to Remain (LTR) on family
   life grounds under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and alternatively
   outside the Rules pursuant to article 8 ECHR.

5. The application was refused because, whilst it was  accepted  the  couple
   had a genuine and subsisting relationship, the respondent considered that
   there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  Sri
   Lanka; her private life was established at a time  when  her  immigration
   status was precarious; suitable medical  treatment  for  the  appellant's
   diagnosed conditions of PTSD and depression was available  in  Sri  Lanka
   and she did not meet the article 3 threshold;  and  that  there  were  no
   exception  circumstances  which  would  render   the   refusal   decision
   unjustifiably harsh.

6. Judge Clarke entirely accepted the appellant's factual account  that  she
   was a LTTE member who had been persecuted,  tortured,  and  subjected  to
   sexual abuse. At [28] of the decision the judge found that the  appellant
   would face  very  significant  difficulties  in  continuing  family  life
   outside the UK and in particular that  these  difficulties  would  entail
   serious hardship for the appellant. In the premises, the  judge  accepted
   that the appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM and  that  as  she
   had established private and family  life  in  the  UK,  the  respondent's
   decision was not proportionate. Hence the appeal  was  allowed  on  human
   rights grounds.

7. The respondent's grounds of application for permission to appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  provide
   adequate reasons on a material matter, and made a  material  misdirection
   in law.

8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 1.4.20, on the basis that it is arguable that the  judge  may
   have too readily accepted: (i) the appellant's "asylum-like"  case;  (ii)
   the assertions as to her fragile mental health; and (iii) the claim  that
   she and her partner could not live together in Sri Lanka.  "It  may  have
   been appropriate for the judge to give consideration to other aspects  of
   this matter - including the questions of public interest set out in  Part
   5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

9. Pursuant to  directions,  the  Tribunal  has  received  the  respondent's
   submissions,  dated  11.6.20,  and  the   appellant's   further   written
   submissions, dated 18.6.20.

10. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the  oral  and  written  submissions,  and  the  grounds  of
   application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In doing  so,
   I also bear in mind the Court of Appeal's  direction  that  an  appellant
   Tribunal should not impose its own assessment of the facts over  that  of
   the fact-finding Tribunal; see Cadonius De-Havalan  Lowe  v  SSHD  [2021]
   EWCA Civ 62.

11. At the outset of the hearing before me, it  was  agreed  that  ground  2
   stood or  fell  with  ground  1.  If  the  finding  of  very  significant
   difficulties in continuing  family  life  outside  the  UK  stands,  then
   consideration of s117B of the 2002 Act falls away.

12. Relying on her written submissions, Ms Rutherford made a robust  defence
   of the decision. It was argued that, although the findings are admittedly
   brief, the judge's  finding  at  [14]  of  the  decision,  accepting  the
   credibility of the appellant and her partner on the basis of  being  open
   and honest, amounted to adequate reasoning. Ms Rutherford  asserted  that
   the Home Office Presenting Officer did not challenge the  conclusions  of
   the expert's report (Dr Dhumad) that the appellant has PTSD, is suffering
   from a depressive episode, is a suicide risk, and that even the threat of
   her return to Sri Lanka would likely  lead  to  a  deterioration  in  her
   mental health. However, as Mr Bates pointed out, the appellant was not in
   receipt of treatment or medication, and, more significantly, no  specific
   concession was made. It was not incumbent on the  Presenting  Officer  to
   advance every challenge to the appellant's case. I accept that ultimately
   the judge may have been entitled to accept the conclusions of the  expert
   report, but I am not satisfied that the  judge  was  entitled  to  do  so
   without adequate reasoning sustaining that conclusion.

13. This was a human rights appeal in which it was made clear  that  neither
   asylum nor articles 2 or 3 ECHR were pursued.  At  [8]  of  the  impugned
   decision, the judge correctly set  out  the  standard  of  proof  as  the
   balance of probabilities. However, I am concerned that the judge  appears
   to have simply accepted without question the appellant's factual claim of
   persecution, without reasoning, and in particular without considering  of
   the risk categories set out in the Country Guidance  of  GJ  [2013].  For
   example, at [24] of the decision the judge states that "there is no issue
   that the appellant has been a victim of torture and sexual abuse." It  is
   not clear whether the judge has applied the balance of  probabilities  or
   the lower standard  of  proof  of  a  reasonable  likelihood.  I  am  not
   satisfied that merely stating that the appellant was found to be open and
   honest and therefore credible  can  be  properly  described  as  adequate
   reasoning for the several findings made thereafter. Further, from the way
   in which the decision is drafted, the reader  might  (mistakenly)  assume
   that the primary facts and findings were entirely uncontested,  which  is
   not the case. Merely because the Presenting Officer did not  specifically
   challenge every aspect of the expert  report  cannot  be  converted  into
   deemed concession; the appellant still bore the burden of proof,  on  the
   balance of probabilities. In summary, the medical evidence  was  accepted
   without question, the judge extrapolating from those  findings  that  the
   appellant's mental  state  was  so  fragile  that  there  would  be  very
   significant difficulties in continuing family life with  her  partner  in
   Sri Lanka. However, the decision cries out for an explanation as  to  why
   her partner could not join her and, if so, why his and her widder  family
   support, including her parents,  would  not  be  adequate.  There  is  no
   suggestion that appropriate treatment would  not  be  available  for  the
   appellant in Sri Lanka and it is not claimed that the circumstances cross
   the high threshold for article 3 ECHR. The decision is devoid of adequate
   explanation as to why continuing family life in Sri  Lanka  would  entail
   such difficulties so as to amount to insurmountable obstacles within  the
   Rules, or render the respondent's decision so unjustifiably harsh that it
   is disproportionate pursuant to article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

14. If the appellant could not succeed under the Rules,  it  is  clear  that
   outside the Rules the judge  went  on  to  make  an  entirely  unreasoned
   article 8 ECHR assessment, failing to  address  the  mandatory  statutory
   public interest considerations under s117B of the 2002  Act.  It  follows
   that the  proportionality  assessment  outside  the  Rules  was  entirely
   unbalanced and, in consequence, unsustainable.

15. Whilst in due course the judge may have been entitled  to  come  to  the
   same conclusions, the decision must at the very  least  provide  adequate
   reasons open on the evidence to justify  reaching  those  conclusions.  I
   find that such reasoning markedly absent  from  the  decision.  Virtually
   each finding is presented as its own self-sustaining fact.

16. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  I  find  such
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, that it must  be
   set aside and remade afresh with no findings preserved.


17. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors of the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge vitiate all findings of fact and the conclusions from  those  facts
   so that there has not been a valid determination of  the  issues  in  the
   appeal. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request  of  both
   parties to relist this appeal for  a  fresh  hearing  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, I do so on the basis that this is a case which  falls  squarely
   within the Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.
Decision

      The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      The making of the decision in the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal, where an interpreter in Tamil will be required.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 February 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 February 2021





