
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13300/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2020                  |On 09 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

      1. This decision refers to the circumstances of the appellant's  three
         young children and for that reason I have maintained the  anonymity
         order.

      2. In this decision, I remake the substantive decision on whether  the
         appeal brought by the appellant against a decision dated 17 October
         2017, refusing her human rights application should  be  allowed  or
         dismissed on human rights grounds.

      3. In a decision promulgated on 3 December 2019, Upper Tribunal ('UT')
         Judge Rintoul gave reasons for setting  aside  a  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 12 March 2019,  dismissing  the
         appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Parties

      4. The appellant is citizen of Nigeria who entered the United  Kingdom
         ('UK') in June 2013 as a dependent of her husband.  He  held  leave
         to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant from 2009, which was then changed  to
         leave as a Tier 1 Migrant and then to leave as  a  Tier  2  Migrant
         (expiring on 4 August 2016).

      5. The appellant arrived in the UK with her son, A, who  was  born  in
         September 2007.  A is therefore 12, having arrived  in  the  UK  in
         June 2013, when he was 5.  The couple had two more children born in
         the UK, B in December 2014 and C in March 2018.

      6. The appellant and her husband ('the father')'s in-time human rights
         application to remain in the UK was refused by the respondent in  a
         decision dated 17 October 2017.  They both  appealed  against  this
         decision to the FTT, which dismissed their appeals.

      7. I have been informed that the father was granted  indefinite  leave
         to remain ('ILR') in the UK following the promulgation of the FTT's
         decision, and as noted by Judge  Rintoul  in  his  'error  of  law'
         decision, this meant that  his  appeal  was  deemed  to  have  been
         withdrawn.   He  has  played  no  further  part   in   the   appeal
         proceedings.   This  appeal  therefore  solely  relates   to   this
         appellant and her three children.  The father has  had  no  contact
         with the appellant and the children for many months  now,  and  for
         reasons set out below, the relevant Local Authority ('LA')  is  not
         supportive of direct contact.

Issues to be determined

      8. The FTT judge focussed upon Article 8  of  the  ECHR  and  did  not
         address Article 3.  Although this was  briefly  criticised  in  the
         grounds of appeal, it is clear from Judge Rintoul's  decision  that
         he was most concerned with the FTT's failure to  address  the  best
         interests of the children, in the context of Article 8.

      9. The appellant is no longer represented but confirmed before me that
         she was content for the decision to be remade under Article 8  only
         and that the focus of my decision should  be  upon  the  impact  of
         removal on her children,  albeit  that  it  would  be  relevant  in
         determining this to note her submission that the children  will  be
         adversely impacted by the deterioration in  her  mental  health  in
         Nigeria.

LA involvement with the family

     10. The LA first became involved with the family in  March  2014,  when
         the appellant was sectioned under  the  Mental  Health  Acts.   The
         family were supported whilst the  appellant  remained  hospitalised
         but the referral was closed in September 2017.  A further  referral
         was made to the LA in December 2017 and since this time the LA  has
         remained closely involved with the family.

     11. This information is set out in a detailed chronology and summary of
         current involvement dated  13  January  2020,  as  prepared  by  Ms
         O'Brien, a social worker employed by the LA, and submitted pursuant
         to an order made by Judge Rintoul at the error of law hearing.   In
         summary, the children became subject to a 'child  protection  plan'
         in April 2018 and investigations began regarding  the  impact  upon
         the children of inter alia, the appellant's  mental  health  issues
         and domestic abuse allegations against the  father.   By  May  2019
         this was downgraded to a 'child in need' plan but upgraded again to
         a 'child protection plan' in July 2019, following further  domestic
         abuse allegations against the father.

     12. In December  2019  the  appellant  and  A  were  video  interviewed
         regarding  the  domestic  abuse  allegations.   This  investigation
         remains ongoing.

Hearing

     13. At the beginning of the hearing before me the appellant provided me
         with a copy of the chronology prepared by the LA I have referred to
         above.   The  appellant  was  unrepresented  and   there   was   no
         interpreter available.  She  was  content  to  proceed  without  an
         interpreter.   I  was  satisfied  that  she  fully  understood  the
         proceedings and was able to give her evidence in  a  clear  manner.
         It was not disputed that the appellant was  a  vulnerable  witness,
         and  particular  care  was  taken  to  ensure  she  understood  the
         proceedings  and  was  able  to  give  evidence  comfortably.   The
         appellant clarified the family's current position and  was  briefly
         cross-examined by Mr Bates.

     14. Mr Bates  accepted  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  entirely
         truthful and credible and made it clear on behalf of the respondent
         that there was no challenge to the factual  matrix  articulated  by
         the appellant, which was consistent with the evidence from the  LA.
         Mr  Bates  accepted  that  the  children's  best  interests  firmly
         supported remaining in the UK given the following:  the  role  that
         the LA had played and continued to  play;  the  appellant's  mental
         health concerns, and; the specific concerns  disclosed  by  A.   Mr
         Bates quite properly reminded me that the case does not involve any
         'qualifying' children and a high threshold is  necessary  to  allow
         the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  Mr Bates however  invited  me  to
         note that the only powerful public interest in this  case  was  the
         maintenance of immigration control, which had been diminishing with
         time given A's proximity to residence in the UK for  a  seven  year
         period (in June 2020).  Mr Bates noted that  the  father  had  been
         granted ILR but was unable to provide me with any detail on why the
         respondent considered it appropriate to do so or to not  grant  his
         family members (to  whom  he  is  now  estranged)  ILR.   Mr  Bates
         candidly indicated that he was unable to 'concede' the appeal,  but
         the relevant material  factors  'probably'  outweighed  the  public
         interest and supported the appeal being  exceptionally  allowed  on
         Article 8 grounds.

     15. After hearing from Mr Bates, I told the appellant that  her  appeal
         was allowed on Article 8 grounds, for reasons I now give.

Legal framework

     16. The appellant's  application  to  remain  in  the  UK  fell  to  be
         determined under the Immigration Rules set out in Appendix  FM  and
         Appendix FM-SE.

     17. The respondent was also under an obligation to consider whether the
         refusal  of   the   appellant's   application   would   result   in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences, necessitating an  examination  of
         Article 8 factors, outside  the  rules.   GEN.3.1.-GEN.3.3  of  the
         Rules, which were amended from 10 August  2017  for  all  decisions
         made on or after that date by HC290 poses the  following  question:
         are there exceptional circumstances which would render  refusal  of
         leave to  remain, a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR,  because  such
         refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the
         applicant, their partner, a relevant child or another family member
         whose Article 8 rights it is evident from that information would be
         affected by a decision to refuse the  application.   In  accordance
         with GEN.3.3.(1) the decision-maker must take into  account,  as  a
         primary consideration, the best interests of  any  relevant  child.
         This  reflects  the  relevant  statutory  framework  that   primary
         consideration must be given to the best interests of  any  relevant
         child in line with section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009.

     18. When determining this appeal I bear in mind the demanding test  set
         out above and have taken into consideration sections 117A-D of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ('the  2002  Act').
         Section 117B(6) provides  enhanced  protection  for  persons  in  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with a 'qualifying  child'  who
         is defined in s. 117D(1)  to mean  a British  citizen  child  or  a
         child who has lived in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  seven
         years or more. From this  it  is  clear  that  none  of  the  three
         children are 'qualifying', albeit  A  would  become  a  'qualifying
         child' in June 2020.

     19. I have also borne in mind  the  relevant  domestic  and  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence on Article 8, but given the position  adopted  by  Mr
         Bates, I do not consider it  necessary  to  set  this  out  in  any
         detail.

Discussion

     20.  Dealing  firstly  with  the  appellant's   situation   under   the
         Immigration Rules, I turn first to 276ADE.  None  of  the  children
         are qualifying children either at  the  date  of  the  decision  or
         hearing and  cannot  meet  276ADE(1)(iv).   I  must  also  consider
         whether there are 'very significant obstacles' to  the  appellant's
         integration to Nigeria for the purposes of  276ADE(1)(vi).   In  so
         doing I must undertake a broad evaluative judgment  -  see  SSHD  v
         Kamara [2016] EWCA 813, [2016] 4 WLR 152  and  SA  (Afghanistan)  v
         SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 53.  I must assess whether  any  obstacles  to
         integration reach the high threshold required by 'very significant'
         - see Parveen v SSHD [208] EWCA Civ 932.

     21. The  appellant  told  me  and  I  accept  that  her  mental  health
         deteriorated significantly in March 2014  (when  she  was  pregnant
         with her second child, B) and this led to her  hospitalisation  due
         to a psychotic episode, for many months.   Although  the  appellant
         has remained stable  since  her  release  and  has  been  compliant
         regarding her anti-psychotic medication,   I  accept  her  evidence
         that this would be very difficult to maintain  in  Nigeria  without
         the extensive support network she has in the UK.  Importantly, this
         includes quarterly visits to her treating  Consultant  Psychiatrist
         Dr Vovnik and weekly visits to  her  home  by  a  community  mental
         health  nurse,  Ms  Rotheram.   Ms  Rotheram  has   emphasised   in
         correspondence  that  the  appellant  is  on  the  'Care  Programme
         Approach' and suffers with paranoid  schizophrenia,  a  severe  and
         enduring  mental  illness.  In  addition,  the  appellant  receives
         extensive support in parenting her children from the LA and members
         of her Church.

     22. By contrast, I accept the appellant's  evidence  that  she  has  no
         family or community to support her in Nigeria.  When she last lived
         there in 2013  her  contacts  were  inextricably  linked  with  the
         father.  Mr Bates  pressed  this  point  in  cross-examination  and
         entirely accepted during the course of his  submissions,  that  the
         appellant would have no meaningful support  from  her  family,  the
         father's family or otherwise in Nigeria and would have to fend  for
         herself there.   I note that the  respondent  adopted  a  different
         position at  the  FTT  hearing  (see  [26]  and  [43]  of  the  FTT
         decision).  At that time the father was still a part of the  family
         unit, and the evidence no longer  supports  the  appellant  or  the
         three children having any access to family support in Nigeria.

     23. I acknowledge that the appellant has tried her best to provide  for
         her family in difficult circumstances in the UK.  She has tried her
         best to work when able to and indicated that if allowed  to  do  so
         after her hospitalisation and after her leave  to  remain  expired,
         she would have liked to have worked to support her children in  the
         UK.  She worked briefly as a 'voluntary' toilet  bar  attendant  in
         2018 but has not returned when the LA explained that  she  did  not
         have permission to work from the respondent.  She will be  able  to
         work in Nigeria and is likely to endeavour to do  so.   However,  I
         note that the appellant's serious mental  health  deterioration  in
         2014 occurred at a time when she was working  very  long  hours  to
         provide for her family, which at the time only included one  child.
         In Nigeria she  will  be  a  single  mother  with  three  children,
         including a baby.  I have no doubt that she will try  her  best  to
         obtain employment but without any meaningful  support  in  Nigeria,
         this will cause  her  great  stress  and  anxiety,  and  given  her
         particular circumstances and current mental health, this is  likely
         to lead to a significant deterioration in her mental health  within
         weeks or months of the family's arrival in Nigeria, such  that  she
         is likely to return to the position in 2014, when she was unable to
         care for family or participate in society, and was sectioned for  a
         lengthy period.  In my view, a broad evaluative judgment of all the
         relevant factors but in particular this appellant's  mental  health
         history and current presentation, are  such  that  within  a  short
         period of time once in Nigeria she will face  serious  hardship  in
         caring for herself and her children with the consequence  that  the
         obstacles to her integration with the wider Nigerian  society  will
         be 'very significant'.

     24. I reach that conclusion even assuming that before her removal,  she
         will be provided with the necessary medication to last her for  the
         first months in Nigeria and after  that  time  medication  will  be
         available to her in Nigeria.  I also fully bear in mind the  points
         made by the respondent in  the  decision  under  appeal  that  this
         appellant resided for the majority of her life in Nigeria and  will
         have  considerable  knowledge  and  resilience  to  assist  her  to
         reintegrate.

     25. That is not, however, the end of the examination of the appellant's
         position under the Rules.  Even  if  I  am  wrong  in  relation  to
         276ADE, the appellant is still entitled to succeed under the  Rules
         if able to show,  pursuant  to  GEN.3.1-GEN.3.3.,  that  there  are
         exceptional circumstances which would render the decision to remove
         a breach of Article  8  because  such  refusal:  "would  result  in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant, their  partner,
         a relevant child or another family member whose Article 8 rights it
         is evident from that information would be affected by a decision to
         refuse the application."

     26. I am satisfied from the information before me  that  the  appellant
         and her three children would be so affected,  and  I  now  turn  to
         whether the effect was such as to  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences.  In so doing I have taken into account  the  relevant
         public  interest  and   public   interest   considerations.    When
         considering whether the  consequences  for  the  children  will  be
         unjustifiably  harsh  it  is  important  to  conduct   a   holistic
         assessment that addresses both sides of  the  Article  8  balancing
         exercise.

     27. Turning  first  to  consider  the  public  interest  considerations
         applicable in this case,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  a  public
         interest in the maintenance of immigration control  which  has  the
         legitimate aim of furthering the economic well-being of the UK.   I
         have proceeded on the basis that the  appellant  and  her  children
         have  no  legal  entitlement  to  remain  under   the   substantive
         Immigration Rules.  A is close to being but is not yet a qualifying
         child.  The appellant  can  speak  English  and  with  the  correct
         support in place may be able to work in the UK.  Little weight must
         be given to the family life  of  the  family  members  given  their
         immigration history.   None  of  these  are  trump  cards  or  come
         anywhere near to determining the balancing exercise.   However,  as
         acknowledged by Mr Bates this unusual case  raises  two  particular
         compelling and compassionate concerns, which I address in turn.

     28. First, I have already determined that the appellant's mental health
         is likely to significantly deteriorate on return  to  Nigeria  with
         adverse consequences for her and her children.  Even if I am  wrong
         in  concluding  that  this  meets  the  necessary   threshold   for
         276ADE(1)(vi) to be met, my underlying factual  assessment  remains
         relevant at this stage.

     29. Second, the children are currently subject to  a  child  protection
         plan to address identified safeguarding issues.  The  LA  initially
         considered there to be a period  of  stability  in  the  home,  but
         escalated their involvement in  July  2019.   Related  to  this,  I
         accept the appellant's evidence that she  has  been  provided  with
         comprehensive support from mental health professionals  and  social
         workers at the LA to help her to care for her  children.   This  is
         consistent with material from the LA demonstrating either weekly or
         fortnightly home or statutory visits to the family home  from  2018
         onwards.  There are particular concerns regarding A, who  has  made
         some very worrying significant disclosures.  He is emotionally very
         vulnerable and  seems to be being very closely monitored by the  LA
         and his school.  This includes 1:1 regular weekly sessions with the
         school monitor to provide him with ongoing  support  regarding  his
         emotional well-being.

     30. It is well-established that the  best  interests  of  the  children
         assessment requires a balanced approach. I do not need to dwell  on
         this in any detail because Mr Bates conceded that this is a case in
         which  the  children's  best   interests   overwhelmingly   support
         remaining in the UK, where both they and their mother can  continue
         to access the comprehensive support they have been assessed to need
         by the LA.

     31. Weighing up the above considerations  on  a  cumulative  basis  and
         balancing these against the public interest  as  identified  by  Mr
         Bates and the public interest considerations in section 117B(6)  of
         the 2002 Act, I am satisfied that for the  appellant  to  currently
         live in Nigeria with her children would within a  short  period  of
         time, result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.   The  children
         have no one else to turn to in Nigeria for support.  They are young
         and vulnerable.  Given the likelihood that the  appellant's  mental
         health condition is likely to deteriorate significantly,  they  are
         likely to be entirely isolated and without a viable and  dependable
         carer in Nigeria.

     32. In so finding I have reminded myself that this is a very high  test
         to meet.  This is not a 'pure health  case'  for  the  purposes  of
         either GEN 3.1 or Article 8.  My assessment is based  not  just  on
         the appellant's mental  health  but  the  particular  circumstances
         relevant to these children and  how  the  family  as  a  whole  and
         individually are likely to be  adversely  impacted  by  removal  to
         Nigeria.  Nonetheless, in my judgment this is one of the 'very  few
         rare cases' where article 8 might be engaged - in this  case  there
         is a separate or further element  (impact  on  vulnerable  children
         assessed to be in need) going beyond the appellant's mental  health
         - see GS (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at [111].





Conclusion

     33. For the reasons set out  above,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
         displaced the burden of establishing a breach of  276ADE(1)(vi)  if
         returned to Nigeria.  If I am wrong  about  this,  the  appellant's
         removal would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  her
         children such that this is one  of  those  exceptional  cases  that
         notwithstanding the public interest in  the  family's  removal,  it
         would be a breach of Article 8 to remove them.



Notice of decision

34. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 of the ECHR).




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer                                      Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                              2 March 2020


