
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13731/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th August 2020                           |On 02nd September 2020        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                          morenike tolulope onayemi
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Upper Tribunal issued  directions  on  2  June  2020  indicating  a
    provisional view that in light of the need to take precautions  against
    the spread of Covid-19  and  the  overriding  objective,  it  would  be
    appropriate in this case to determine the issue of whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error of law and  if
    so whether the decision should be set aside  without  a  hearing.   The
    Appellant made written submissions  and  raised  no  objection  to  the
    determination of the issues without  a  hearing.   There  has  been  no
    response from the Respondent either as to the means of determination of
    the error of law issues or as to the substance of the appeal,  however,
    the issues are clear in the appeal and no further submissions from  the
    Respondent are required  to  justly  determine  the  matter  without  a
    hearing.

 2. In circumstances where no objections were  made  to  the  issues  being
    determined without a hearing and where the Appellant has  made  written
    submissions and nothing further is needed from the Respondent; it is in
    the interests of justice to proceed  to  determine  the  error  of  law
    issues on the papers in light of the written submission  available  and
    the full appeal file.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 23rd January 2020,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse her human  rights
    claim on the grounds of 10 years' continuous lawful residence dated  19
    August 2019 was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 11 June 1976, who first
    entered the United Kingdom on 24 January 2009 with entry clearance as a
    student to 31 May 2010; following  which  she  was  granted  continuous
    periods of leave to remain as a Tier 1 post study worker and as a  Tier
    1 General Migrant to 3 July  2016.   On  1  July  2016,  the  Appellant
    applied for indefinite leave to remain as a  Tier  1  General  Migrant,
    which was  refused  on  18  December  2018  and  unsuccessfully  sought
    Administrative Review of the same out of time on 9 April 2019.   On  18
    April 2019, the Appellant applied for leave to remain on long residence
    grounds under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, the  refusal  of
    which is the subject of this appeal.

 5. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    last period of leave to remain ended on 1 January  2019,  short  of  10
    years' continuous lawful residence and that her application  for  leave
    to remain was made more than 14 days after the end of that period.   In
    addition,  the  application  was  refused  on  general  grounds   under
    paragraph 322(5) of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's  presence  was  undesirable  due  to  her  conduct,  namely
    dishonesty either to the Respondent over stating income in  a  previous
    application for leave to remain or to HRMC in  under  declaring  income
    for tax purposes.  In relation to private life, the Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements for leave to remain set out in  paragraph  276ADE
    of the  Immigration  Rules  and  nor  were  there  any  exceptional  or
    compassionate factors to warrant a grant of leave to remain.

 6. Judge Davies dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  23rd
    January 2020 on all grounds, albeit in the Appellant's  favour  it  was
    found that she did not use deception against either the  Respondent  in
    connection with an earlier application for leave to remain as a Tier  1
    migrant or against HMRC in connection with her tax returns,  such  that
    the refusal under paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules  could  not
    be  maintained.   However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    Respondent's previous refusal of indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1
    migrant on 19 August 2018 remained valid because it had been refused on
    additional grounds and  as  such,  the  Appellant's  continuous  lawful
    residence came to an end on  1  January  2019,  with  an  out  of  time
    unsuccessful application for Administrative Review  being  made  on  18
    April 2019 and her application for indefinite leave to remain  on  long
    residence grounds not being made until 18 April  2019.   The  Appellant
    could not therefore meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules because she was short of 10 years  continuous  lawful
    residence and was in the United Kingdom in breach of  the  law  at  the
    time of her application.

 7. Separately, the First-tier Tribunal considered the Appellant's  private
    life in  the  United  Kingdom,  finding  that  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements for a grant  of  leave  to  remain  on  this  basis  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and further  found  that  her
    removal would not be a disproportionate interference with her right  to
    respect for private life (with no family life having  been  established
    in the United Kingdom)  and  therefore  no  breach  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 8. The Appellant appeals on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred  in  law  in  failing  to  properly  consider
    whether the Appellant met the provisions of the Immigration  Rules  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  1  migrant,  specifically  as  to
    whether she had submitted the specified documents  in  paragraph  19(a)
    and 19-SD(a) of Appendix A in relation to her income.   The  Respondent
    refused the application  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided all of the payslips and bank statements for the  required  one
    year period of earnings but it  is  submitted  that  she  had  provided
    original payslips under  paragraph  19-SD(a)(i)(1)  and  personal  bank
    statements under paragraph 19-SD(a)(i)(ii); satisfying the requirements
    for two sources of evidence and in addition, P60  documents  were  also
    submitted.  The Appellant accepts that three months of bank  statements
    were missing but paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules  allowed  for
    evidential flexibility for these  to  have  been  requested.   On  this
    basis, the First-tier Tribunal should have found that the Appellant met
    the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 migrant and therefore should be  treated  as  having
    continuous lawful residence to the date of the hearing.

 9. Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  in  its
    assessment of proportionality for the purposes  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights  and  in  its  application  of  the
    factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  Specifically, that having found a number of positive factors  in
    the Appellant's favour, including those in section 117B, the First-tier
    Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons as to why the public  interest
    outweighed the Appellant's private life.

10. Pursuant to the directions issued by the Upper Tribunal on 2 June 2020,
    further written submissions were made on behalf of the Appellant  which
    continued  to  rely  on  the  written  grounds  of  appeal  with   some
    elaboration but nothing further of substance not already  contained  in
    the grounds of appeal.  As above, the Respondent  did  not  submit  any
    written submissions in response.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first ground of appeal is fatally flawed because it is premised  on
    the First-tier Tribunal's failure to consider matters  which  were  not
    before it, either by way of evidence or submissions and unless Robinson
    obvious (which this was very far from being) there can be no  error  of
    law in a First-tier Tribunal decision on this basis.

 2. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was against  the  refusal  of
    leave to remain on long residence grounds and on human  rights  grounds
    only.  As identified  at the outset of the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the issues to determine were  expressly  agreed  between
    the parties as (i) whether the Appellant met the  requirements  of  the
    long residence rule, and if  not,  (ii)  whether  the  refusal  of  the
    application would breach Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.

 3. As part of the consideration of whether the Appellant  had  ten  years'
    continuous lawful  residence,  it  was  necessary  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to  consider  her  immigration  history,  including  the  last
    refusal of leave on 18 December 2018, which it did.  One of the grounds
    of  refusal  in  that  decision  was  under  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules which was before the First-tier Tribunal to  consider
    in any event because it was, for the  same  reasons,  expressly  relied
    upon by the Respondent in the decision under appeal.   That  issue  and
    reason for refusal was  resolved  in  the  Appellant's  favour  with  a
    finding that she was not dishonest such  that  the  general  ground  of
    refusal could not be relied upon by the Respondent in either of the two
    previous refusals, in the Tier 1 decision in December 2018 or the  more
    recent refusal of leave on long residence grounds that was the  subject
    of the appeal.

 4. In paragraph 68, the First-tier Tribunal sets out the additional ground
    of refusal of the Appellant's Tier 1 application, that she only  scored
    75 of the required 80 points because she had  not  provided  sufficient
    documentary  proof  of  her  earnings.    The   First-tier   Tribunal's
    conclusions on this follow in paragraph 69:

         "69.  No  evidence  has  been  provided  for  this  appeal  or  any
         submissions made as to why that part of the decision taken  by  the
         Respondent was wrong.  The Appellant's  remedy  was  Administrative
         Review and I  understand  that  an  out  of  time  application  for
         Administrative Review was made and that it was  rejected.   I  have
         not  been  provided  with  copies  of  the  Administrative   Review
         application.  I do not know the reasons why it was made or  why  it
         was refused.  For the purposes of what I have  to  decide  on  this
         appeal I am  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  concluded  that  the
         Appellant did not qualify for Indefinite Leave to Remain as a  Tier
         1 (General) Migrant because she did not qualify for the required 80
         points due to a lack of evidence and that  the  Appellant  has  not
         successfully legally challenged that decision."

 5. It is abundantly clear from the paragraph above that the Appellant made
    no submissions at all in relation to the alternative reason for refusal
    of her last Tier 1 application; not submitting any relevant or material
    evidence in relation to it or the Administrative Review  that  followed
    and did not set out any  reason  why  this  part  of  the  Respondent's
    decision was wrong.  The submissions  now  relied  upon  as  the  first
    ground of appeal were simply not put to the First-tier Tribunal and nor
    was any of  the  evidence  which  could  even  arguably  support  those
    submissions.  The payslips and  bank  statements  referred  to  in  the
    grounds of appeal as being sufficient to satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 19 and 19-SD of Appendix A to the  Immigration  Rules,  upon
    which it is said that the First-tier Tribunal erred in not finding were
    sufficient to satisfy the rules were not in evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal; nor were the additional documents  which  the  Appellant
    implicitly states existed and could  have  been  provided  if,  in  the
    alternative,  paragraph  245AA  should  have  applied  such  that   the
    Respondent should have requested them before  making  a  decision.   In
    these circumstances, even if the submission had been made to the First-
    tier Tribunal (which it was not), in the absence  of  any  evidence  in
    support of it and details of the Administrative Review, the  First-tier
    Tribunal could not lawfully have made any findings on this issue in the
    Appellant's favour.  For these reasons, there is no error of law on the
    first ground of appeal.

 6. The second ground of appeal is equally without merit and amounts to  no
    more than disagreement with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  on
    the proportionality balancing exercise for the purposes of  Article  8.
    The First-tier Tribunal set out  its  findings  about  the  Appellant's
    private life and those factors which  were  in  her  favour;  correctly
    found (contrary to the suggestion in the grounds of appeal  that  these
    carried positive weight) that a number of factors in  section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 were neutral  and  set
    out the public interest in the maintenance of  immigration  control  in
    circumstances where a person does not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain.  In  particular,  the
    First-tier Tribunal applies the statutory requirement in section  117B,
    which it is required to do, to attach little  weight  to  private  life
    established while a  person's  immigration  status  is  precarious  and
    concludes that the little weight that can be given to the substance and
    quality of the Appellant's private life is  outweighed  by  the  public
    interest in this case.  The First-tier Tribunal has properly considered
    all relevant factors on both sides of the balancing exercise  and  come
    to a clearly reasoned conclusion which was open to it on the  evidence.
    The Appellant's ground of appeal framed as a reasons challenge is  more
    akin to a rationality or perversity challenge which falls far short  of
    the high threshold to challenge the finding made,  which  was  lawfully
    reached and explained.  There is no error of law on the  second  ground
    either.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed    G  Jackson                                      Date          30th
    August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

