
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13498/2018
                                                               HU/13499/2018
                                                               HU/13503/2018
                                                               HU/13504/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2019                     |On 17 April 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     DR
                                     pr
                                     sr
                                     rr
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Richards, Counsel, instructed by Huneewoth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies  both  to  the  Appellants
and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have anonymised the Appellants in order to protect  the  identity  of
    the child Appellant, SR.

2.   The Appellants are citizens of Mauritius.  DR's date  of  birth  is  18
    April 1976. He is married to PR. PR's date of birth is 16 January 1976.
     They have two children, RR and SR. Their respective dates of birth are
    23 April 1999 and 17 October 2002. Thus, SR is a child. He  is  at  the
    time of  the  hearing  before  me  aged  16.  The  Appellants  made  an
    application on human rights grounds.  This was refused by the Secretary
    of State on 29  March  2017.   The  Appellants  appealed  against  that
    decision.  Their appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("the FTT") Obhi in a  decision  that  was  promulgated  on  4
    January 2019, following a hearing at Taylor House on 17 December  2018.
    Permission was granted to the Appellants  by  Judge  of  the  FTT  C  J
    Gumsley.

3.   DR came here as  a  student  in  2010.  He  was  joined  by  the  other
    Appellants that same year.  They were granted entry as visitors.  Their
    leave expired on 6 August 2010.  That year they applied for  permission
    to remain on human rights grounds and their applications  were  refused
    with no right of appeal.  The applications were reconsidered  following
    further submissions and again  refused.   They  appealed  against  this
    decision.  Their appeals were dismissed on 23 July 2015 by Judge of the
    FTT Egan ("the first judge").  An application for  permission  to  both
    the FTT and the Upper Tribunal ("the UT") were refused.  The Appellants
    became appeal rights exhausted on 29 December 2015.  They made  further
    submissions on 6 January 2016. These were considered and refused on  28
    April 2016 by the Respondent under paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  They made a human rights application on  29  March  2017.  This
    gave rise to the decision of 12 June 2018 which was the subject of  the
    appeal before the FTT.

The decision of the FTT

4.   The judge heard evidence from the adult Appellants.  PR's  evidence  is
    set out at paragraphs 16 to 27 of the decision. PR adopted her  witness
    statement as her evidence-in-chief. She told the judge that she did not
    return to Mauritius following the  dismissal  of  her  appeal  in  2015
    because she had left for a better life and  had  problems  there  as  a
    result of her inter-caste marriage.  She was  integrated  and  did  not
    wish to return.  She gave evidence about how in 2010 she had managed to
    persuade the Entry Clearance Officer that she would return.   She  gave
    evidence that she sold the family house in Mauritius 2010  for  over  1
    million Mauritian rupees. They did not have bank accounts in Mauritius.
     She also said that she had a bank account in Mauritius, but she had no
    funds in it or access to it.  She initially said that she did not  have
    contact with anyone in Mauritius. She changed her  account  when  asked
    about the evidence she gave in 2015. She said that  the  documents  she
    relied on at that hearing were sent to her by the one and  only  friend
    in Mauritius called Mariana.  She  was  questioned  about  threats  she
    claimed to have received from her family in Mauritius. She said her son
    had received a threat via a text message.  She said that she  does  not
    have contact  with  her  family  there.   Her  evidence  was  that  her
    husband's business collapsed in Mauritius and he had then decided to go
    abroad.  She said that she was educated to A' level and she had  worked
    in Mauritius for eight years.  When she and her husband married in 1995
    he was working in a factory.  She confirmed that she had  been  working
    illegally in the UK.  The family rents a house here  which  they  share
    with others.  They  receive  financial  help  from  the  church  and  a
    relative in the UK.  Her sons attended school in Mauritius.  They  were
    taught in French.  They speak French. They do not have health problems.
     She has not made enquiries about her eldest son  attending  university
    in Mauritius.  When asked why her sons could not study there, she  said
    that the system was not the same. The Respondent's case as put  to  the
    Appellant was that the education system is similar in Mauritius and her
    sons could do A levels and GCSEs there.  In answer to this  she  stated
    that the schools are not computerised and the schools there are not the
    same.

5.   DR gave evidence which is recorded  at  paragraphs  28  to  36  of  the
    decision.  He confirmed the sale of the property in Mauritius.  He said
    that it had been sold for 1.4 million Mauritian rupees.  He  said  that
    the money had been used by his wife and children to come to the UK.  He
    said that he was not working here and they received  support  from  the
    church and his cousin.  In his witness statement he said  that  he  had
    been working.  He said he did not have a bank account here. When it was
    put to him that his wife's evidence was at odds with his on this issue,
    he accepted that he did have a bank account here.  He said he  did  not
    know whether he had savings.  His evidence was that the family does not
    have contact with anyone in Mauritius. He could not find employment  in
    Mauritius. He has a basic education. He had an upholstery business  for
    four years in Mauritius. He said it would be difficult for him to start
    again if returned. It would be difficult for him to  find  a  job.   He
    said the church would not  be  able  to  assist  them  to  re-establish
    themselves in Mauritius.

6.    The  judge  heard  submissions  from  the  representatives  which  she
    recorded  at  paragraphs  37  and  38.    Both   representatives   made
    submissions in relation to the decision of the  first  judge  in  2015.
    Both accepted that the first judge's findings were the starting  point.
    The first judge did not accept that the family did  not  have  ties  to
    Mauritius. He found  that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  them  from
    returning. The first judge found that it was  in  the  children's  best
    interests to return to Mauritius with their parents.   Mr  Metzer,  who
    represented the Appellant before the FTT, made lengthy oral submissions
    accepting that the first  judge's  decision  was  the  starting  point.
    However, he submitted that at that time the children had  not  been  in
    the UK for seven years and they  were  not  qualifying  children.   The
    first judge accepted that the children had integrated into UK  society,
    but he concluded there  were  no  obstacles  to  reintegration  as  the
    parents could assist them in learning Creole and they  were  not  at  a
    crucial stage of their education. Mr Metzer submitted  that  they  were
    now at a crucial stage of their education.  SR was  about  to  sit  his
    GCSEs and RR was due to commence university.  The case was advanced  on
    the basis that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family
    returning to Mauritius and that it was in the children's best interests
    to remain here in the UK.

7.   The judge made findings which he set out at paragraphs  39  through  to
    50. He found that the decision of the  first  judge  was  his  starting
    point.  He considered the evidence of DR and PR that  their  respective
    families disapproved of their relationship and following their marriage
    they were victims of threats and harassment.  However, the judge  noted
    that they had not sought protection from the authorities  in  Mauritius
    and had not applied for protection.  The judge referred to the decision
    of the first judge and the reference to PR having made a  complaint  to
    the police when in Mauritius and  being  told  that  it  was  a  family
    dispute and they would not get  involved.   The  first  judge  did  not
    accept that the authorities were unwilling or unable  to  assist.   The
    judge took into account the evidence of the adult Appellants about  how
    they had had to move around, however noted that DR's evidence was  that
    they had lived in the same house for seven years before coming  to  the
    UK and he found that PR had "tried to downplay that and  said  that  it
    had been four-five years".  The judge found that it  was  difficult  to
    know which of the Appellants can be relied upon and he was not able  to
    form a view that the Appellants were credible, reliable  or  honest  in
    their dealings with the Home Office or the Tribunal.

8.   In respect of PR the judge found as follows:-

         "[PR] was not forthcoming with information which she perceived  may
         undermine her case and had to be pushed: the first  Appellant  [DR]
         made a statement, which he then immediately retracted when told  by
         Ms Sreramaan that his wife had said something different."

    The judge said that their evidence "has to be seen in  the  context  of
    their behaviour".  The judge found that their move from  Mauritius  was
    "a deliberate and conscious action to evade the immigration laws of the
    UK".  The judge found they were aware they could not  come  to  the  UK
    through legal channels so  therefore  DR  came  illegally  via  Ireland
    having secured entry and then arranged for his  wife  and  children  to
    join him.  The judge found that  PR  had  signed  a  false  declaration
    telling the Entry Clearance Officer that she  and  her  children  would
    return to Mauritius and that they were entering the UK for the  purpose
    of a holiday.  The first judge in 2015 taking their case at the highest
    found that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  children
    returning to live in Mauritius and that it was in their best  interests
    for the children to return with their parents and that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances.

9.   The judge made findings at paragraph 40 in relation to the children  as
    follows:-

         "40. It is now some  three  years  since  that  decision.   In  the
             meantime [RR] has completed his A-Levels and is  now  a  young
             adult.  He was born in April 1999 and is now 19 years of  age.
             He has a girlfriend, he has almost  established  independence.
             He is no  longer  a  child.   He  has  benefitted  from  being
             educated through the state school system and could now  attend
             university either in his native  Mauritius  or  as  any  young
             foreign adult who wishes to study in the UK  by  applying  for
             permission to do so, once he is back in Mauritius through  the
             Points Based System.  The younger child was  born  in  October
             2002 and is now aged 16 years.  I am told that he is about  to
             embark  on  his  GCSEs.   The  second  appellant,  his  mother
             confirmed  that  she  had  studied  to  A-Level  standard   in
             Mauritius so it is possible for him to continue his studies in
             Mauritius  too.   They  are  taught  in  English  or   French,
             languages that these young people speak fluently.  There is no
             need for them to speak Creole.  In respect of  the  older  son
             there will be no disruption as he is not  currently  studying,
             there is no impact on him of the move.  In  the  case  of  the
             younger son, the move could be managed by his parents  in  the
             same way that they managed their move to the UK, there will be
             initial disruption but the first and  second  appellants  have
             the wherewithal and the resources to achieve a transition back
             to Mauritius."

10.  The judge found that there was no risk to the children from  family  in
    Mauritius.  The judge stated as follows at paragraph 42:-

         "42. The third and fourth appellants have always lived  with  their
             parents.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  they  should  not,
             although the older son, [RR] could live  independently  if  he
             chose.  Their best interests were comprehensibly considered by
             the Tribunal in 2015 and I see no reason to depart  from  that
             decision.  I have considered the letter  written  by  [RR]  on
             pages 6-7 of the court bundle, the letter from [SR] on page  8
             and the handwritten letter of Courtney Anais  Hicks.   I  have
             also considered the letters from friends from the  Pentecostal
             Church,  the  letters  from  Leisure  Plan  and   the   school
             information relating to the children."

    The judge went on to find that  the  evidence  of  DR  an  PR  was  not
    credible (see paragraph 43).

11.  The judge considered Mr Metzer's submissions in relation to  the  child
    Appellants. He said that they were both qualifying  children.  He  said
    the following:-

         "45. Paragraph 276ADE(iv) states that even in the case of  a  child
             who has been in the UK for  7  or  more  years,  consideration
             needs to be given to whether it is reasonable to require  that
             child to return.  The interests of the child cannot be seen in
             isolation of the interests of the parent.  The most recent and
             authoritative case on the issue of best interests in  relation
             to children whose parents have a poor immigration  history  is
             that case of KO and others, a decision of the Supreme Court of
             the 24 October 2018.  The court at paragraph 6 of the decision
             set out the question which was 'in determining whether  it  is
             'reasonable to expect' a child to leave the UK with  a  parent
             (under section 117B(6)), ...... the tribunal is concerned only
             with the position of  the  child,  not  with  the  immigration
             history and conduct  of  the  parents,  or  any  wider  public
             interest factors  in  favour  of  removal.   By  contrast  the
             Secretary of State  argues  that  both  provisions  require  a
             balancing exercise, weighing any adverse impact on  the  child
             against the public interest  in  proceeding  with  removal  or
             deportation of the parent'.  The Supreme  Court  considered  a
             number of cases, including that of NS,  where  the  child  had
             been in the UK for 10 years, the Supreme Court did not disturb
             a decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  where  the  parents
             behaviour had been appalling and it would be wrong  to  permit
             them to remain, the fact  was  that  the  parents  were  being
             deported and so the child  had to go  with  them.   The  Court
             emphasised the need to consider  the  best  interests  of  the
             child in the real world and not in isolation.

         46.  Hence in the present case the issue as in all other  cases  is
             one of reasonableness.  Is it reasonable  for  the  third  and
             fourth appellants  to  leave  the  UK  if  their  parents  are
             required to do so.  In my view it is reasonable for them to do
             so.  The impact on them  has  been  exaggerated.   The  fourth
             appellant may have a girlfriend, but there is nothing to  stop
             them meeting up, or him applying to come to study  in  the  UK
             legally; the chances of him being able to do that successfully
             are enhanced if he returns to make the application.

         47.  In assessing parents' case, I need to do apply the  law.   The
             first and second appellants have deliberately sought to  evade
             the Immigration Law, but it is  under  those  provisions  that
             their appeal  must  be  determined.   They  do  not  meet  the
             requirements  of   paragraph   276ADE,   as   there   are   no
             insurmountable obstacles to them returning.  I accept they  do
             not want to, but  that  those  not  amount  to  insurmountable
             obstacles when considered on an objective  basis.   I  do  not
             accept their evidence in relation to the sale  of  their  home
             and the proceeds of sale and what has happened  to  them.   If
             what they say is true, then there is no reason why they cannot
             rent when they return.  I also do not accept the  evidence  of
             the first and second appellants that they have no contact with
             anyone in Mauritius.  They had a business there and worked for
             many years, it is inconceivable that they have no  connections
             as they claim.  In relation to the children it  is  reasonable
             for them to return to a country in which they have family  and
             are  lawful  nationals  of.   The  obstacles  that  they  have
             encountered in the UK, such as [RR] not being able  to  pursue
             higher education, his parents not being able to work  legally,
             are obstacles they will not have in their own country."

12.  Having found that the Appellants could not  meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules the judge went on to consider  proportionality,  taking  into
    account Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  and  reached  the  following
    conclusions:-

         "49. It is significant that the private lives of  these  appellants
             have been established almost wholly during a period when  they
             were unlawfully in  the  UK.   They  have  repeatedly  ignored
             decisions of the respondent and the Tribunal.  Section 117B(1)
             provides that  it  is  in  the  public  interest  to  maintain
             effective immigration controls.  To allow these appeals  would
             be  to  condone  the  behaviours  of  the  first  and   second
             appellants  in  entering  the  UK  illegally  or   through   a
             misrepresentation of intention as the  second  appellant  did,
             and to totally disregard the immigration controls  which  have
             been put in place to ensure that everyone who  seeks  to  make
             their life in the UK does so on the basis of  the  same  rules
             and that those who seek to evade them do not get an  advantage
             over those  that  do  not.   There  would  have  to  be  truly
             exceptional circumstances for these  appellants  to  be  given
             preferential treatment.  I accept that the children are not to
             blame for the actions of their parents.  However the  decision
             in relation to them, particularly the fourth appellant (as the
             third  appellant  is  an  adult  and  for  the   purposes   of
             considering his rights outside the rules, the relevant date is
             the date of the hearing) is based on his  best  interests  and
             the impact on him of his  return  to  Mauritius  even  if  his
             parents' poor history is completely ignored.

         50.  I am satisfied that the first and second appellants can return
             to Mauritius and re-establish their private and  family  lives
             there.  I am satisfied that the third  and  fourth  appellants
             should return with their parents as it is not unreasonable  to
             expect them to do so.  In the case of  the  fourth  respondent
             there is an advantage to him returning in that he  can  access
             her education which he cannot in the UK.  In the case  of  the
             third appellant, he will be able to  undertake  his  GCSEs  in
             that country instead of the  UK,  the  reasons  given  by  his
             mother (they don't use computers  in  Mauritius  and  use  big
             books)  are  not   sufficient   to   make   it   unreasonable,
             particularly bearing in mind that her knowledge comes from her
             own experience of education some twenty years ago."

The grounds of appeal

13.  The grounds of appeal are lengthy and repetitive.  However, the  thrust
    of them is that the judge erred in respect of  SR  when  assessing  his
    best interests and that the conclusions  reached  were  irrational  and
    contrary to the judgment in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

The Legal Framework

Best Interests of Children

14.  By virtue of Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009, in making decisions on deportation, the SSHD must have regard
    to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in
    the UK.

15.  The House of Lords in ZH (Tanzania) v Home Secretary [2011] 2  AC  166,
    held that in the application  of  Article  8(2),  the  children's  best
    interests should be treated  as  "a  primary  consideration",  to  give
    effect to Article 3.1 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child.
    Nationality and the rights of citizenship are of particular  importance
    in assessing the best interests of any child.  Thus, the decision maker
    must ask whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  live  in
    another country, and to be deprived of the opportunity to exercise  the
    rights of a British citizen.  However, even if it is found to be in the
    best interests of the child to remain in the UK,  that  factor  can  be
    outweighed by the strength of "countervailing considerations" in favour
    of removal (per Lady Hale at [29]-[33]).

16.  In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC  74
    Lord Hodge, delivering  the  judgment  of  the  court,  summarised  the
    principles to be applied, at [10]:

         "(1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;

         (2)  in making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

         (3)  although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)  while different judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)   it  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;

         (6)  to that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an Article 8 assessment; and

         (7)  a child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

17.  The  headnote  of  the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 reads as follows:

         "(1) The  case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
             following principles to assist in the determination of appeals
             where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

             i)   As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                  children to be with both their parents and if both parents
                  are  being  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the
                  starting point suggests that so should dependent  children
                  who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
                  to the contrary.

             ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
                  origin can lead to  development  of  social  cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven  years  from  the  age  four  is
                  likely to be more significant to a child  than  the  first
                  seven years of life.  Very young children are  focused  on
                  their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the economic  well-being  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases."

Paragraph 276ADE(1)

18.  The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of  application,
    the applicant:

         "(iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
             the UK for at least seven years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
             lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  twenty  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK."

Article 8 of the ECHR: Public Interest Considerations

19.  "117A    Application of this Part

             (1)  This Part applies where a court or Tribunal  is  required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Acts -

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of  the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
                  Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  Section
                      117C.

             (3)  In subSection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2)."

    "117B    Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
             cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom,
                  that persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                  speak English -

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom,
                  that persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom are financially independent, because such  persons
                  -

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom."

20.  The Supreme Court in KO [2018] UKSC 53 engaged with  276ADE(1)(iv)  and
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Rules and the court said as follows:

         "16. It is natural to  begin  with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). This paragraph is directed solely  to
             the position of the child. Unlike its  predecessor  DP5/96  it
             contains  no  requirement  to  consider  the  criminality   or
             misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor. It is impossible
             in my view to read it  as  importing  such  a  requirement  by
             implication.

         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
             of the rule without material change,  but  this  time  in  the
             context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would  infer
             that it was intended to have the  same  effect.  The  question
             again is what is 'reasonable' for the child. As Elias LJ  said
             in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber)[2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there
             is nothing in the subsection to  import  a  reference  to  the
             conduct of the parent. Section  117B  sets  out  a  number  of
             factors relating to those seeking leave to  enter  or  remain,
             but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B(6)  is  on
             its face free-standing, the only qualification being that  the
             person relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of
             relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para  10  above)
             seems to me wholly  appropriate  and  sound  in  law,  in  the
             context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected
             to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to
             be with them. To that extent the record  of  the  parents  may
             become indirectly material, if it leads to  their  ceasing  to
             have a right to remain here, and having to leave. It  is  only
             if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave that the provision may give the  parents  a
             right to remain. The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd  in
             SA  (Bangladesh)  v  Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

                  '22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                      whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave
                      the UK one has to address the  question,  'Why  would
                      the child be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom?'
                      In a case such as this there can only be one  answer:
                      'because the parents have no right to remain  in  the
                      UK'. To approach the question in any other way strips
                      away  the  context  in  which   the   assessment   of
                      reasonableness is being made ...'

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
             considering the 'best interests' of children in the context of
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department[2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

                  '58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
                      interests of the children must be made on  the  basis
                      that the facts are as they are in the real world.  If
                      one parent has no right  to  remain,  but  the  other
                      parent does, that is the background against which the
                      assessment is conducted. If neither  parent  has  the
                      right to remain, then that is the background  against
                      which the assessment is conducted. Thus the  ultimate
                      question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
                      child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
                      the country of origin?'

             To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully  disagree.  There  is
             nothing in the section to suggest that 'reasonableness' is  to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world  in  which  the
             children find themselves."

Submissions

21.  I granted the Appellants an adjournment to enable Counsel  Mr  Jonathan
    Metzer to attend the hearing at 2pm on the basis that  he  was  engaged
    with another hearing at Hatton Cross.  However, he was unable to attend
    the Tribunal for 2pm and in  his  place  was  Mr  J  Richards,  Counsel
    instructed  by  Huneewoth  Solicitors,  attended   to   represent   the
    Appellants. A few minutes before the hearing  I  received  an  eighteen
    page "skeleton" argument prepared by Mr Metzer dated 14March 2019.   Mr
    Richards relied on this document.

22.  Ms  Everett  submitted  that  read  in  isolation,  the  decision  with
    reference to paragraph 42, may be problematic but  she  submitted  that
    the judge in his overall assessment took into account material  factors
    such as SR now being a qualifying child and that he was at  a  critical
    stage of his education.  She  drew  my  attention  to  the  absence  of
    challenge  to  the  findings  that  SR  could  resume  his  studies  in
    Mauritius.

Error of law

23.  The grounds concern the way in which the judge engaged with  SR's  best
    interests.  The judge's assessment of his best interests is in my  view
    flawed. There was a  significant  change  in  circumstances  since  the
    decision of the first judge in 2015. SR was at a critical stage in  his
    education.  He was, at the date of the decision, over halfway through a
    GCSE course.  He is due to sit exams in May/June 2019.  He had become a
    qualifying child which is, as the  statutory  regime  acknowledges,  of
    significance. He had been here since  the  age  of  7.   The  judge  at
    paragraph 42 concluded that there was no  reason  to  depart  from  the
    decision of the judge in 2015.  This is not a sustainable decision.  In
    my view, the judge did not make a careful examination of  all  relevant
    factors in relation to SR.  It is my view that had he done so the  only
    rational conclusion on the evidence before the judge is that there  had
    been a material change since 2015. It was necessary for him  to  decide
    SR's best interests on the evidence that was before him.

24.  For this reason the decision of the judge is materially flawed.  I  set
    aside the decision to dismiss the appeals.  There is  no  challenge  to
    the primary findings of fact.  It is only the assessment of the child's
    best interests and therefore the assessment of proportionality which is
    affected by the error.

Conclusions

25.  I heard submissions from the parties.  In respect of  the  remaking  of
    the decision Ms Everett confirmed that she relied  on  the  submissions
    that were made by the Presenting Officer at the hearing before the FTT.
     Mr Richards addressed  me  briefly  with  reference  to  the  skeleton
    argument.

26.  I must now consider SR's best interests. In the light of  his  age  and
    the stage in his education, I conclude  that  his  best  interests  are
    overwhelmingly to remain here with his family to complete  exams.  From
    KO we know that reasonableness must be assessed  without  reference  to
    the conduct of SR's parents, but that it also must be made on the facts
    as they are in the real world.  In this case  the  Appellant's  parents
    (and RR) do not have a right to remain here.  The question  is  whether
    it is reasonable to expect SR to follow his parents who do not  have  a
    right to remain here.  I conclude that it would not be  reasonable.  It
    is in SR's best interests to remain here with his family to enable  him
    to complete his GCSE course. It would be unreasonable to expect him  to
    leave at this stage in his education. I would go as far as to say  that
    to uproot him now, a matter of weeks before his exams, would be  cruel;
    notwithstanding the "real world" facts in this case. Whilst there is  a
    natural expectation that SR would go with his parents to  Mauritius  as
    they have no right to remain here, he is at a  critical  stage  in  his
    education.  He is a qualifying child who has a significant private life
    here by virtue of the length of time that he has been here and his  age
    when he came here. SR may be able to resume studying in  Mauritius  but
    it is far from clear that he would be able to complete  the  same  GCSE
    course which he has started here and is soon to complete.

27.  For the above reasons I conclude  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect SR to follow his parents to Mauritius. SR meets the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Rules. Thus, his appeal is allowed under
    Article 8. His parents' appeals are similarly allowed under  Article  8
    with reference to S117B(6).

28.  RR was born on  23  April  1999.He  is  now  19.  The  application  was
    submitted on 29 March 2017, one month before his 18thbirthday. His case
    was advanced before the FTT on the grounds that removal is unreasonable
    in the context of para 276ADE(1)(iv).  The grounds of appeal before  me
    relate to SR. There is no independent  challenge  to  the  decision  in
    respect of RR.  However, I accept that the outcome of the appeal of his
    family members is a material consideration when assessing  RR's  rights
    under Article 8.  In  contrast  to  his  brother,  [RR]  has  completed
    compulsory education. The determinative issue in SR's  appeal  was  the
    stage in his education. This was the thread running through the grounds
    of appeal. RR's  intention  is  now  to  study  at  university.  It  is
    significant that he has been here for in excess of 7 years prior to his
    18th birthday. He has been in the UK since he was aged 10.   He  has  a
    significant private life here by virtue of the length of  time  he  has
    been here.  There was no evidence before  the  FTT  or  me  that  would
    establish dependency in the Kugathas sense (Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA
    Civ 31). However, I accept that there would be an interference with his
    rights under Article 8. However, I conclude that it  is  reasonable  to
    expect him to return to Mauritius.  There would be nothing  to  prevent
    RR making an application from Mauritius to return to the UK  and  study
    at university.  I accept that it will be difficult for him to return on
    his own to Mauritius, but I do not find  that  it  is  unreasonable  to
    expect him to do so. It is open to  the  family  to  join  him  on  the
    conclusion of SR's GCSE course in May/June 2019. His parents  have  not
    been  straightforward  about  their  ties  to  Mauritius.  It  can   be
    reasonably inferred that there will be some support  available  to  him
    pending their return or until he  can  return  independently  to  study
    here, should that be his wish.

29.  I allow the appeals of DR, PR and SR.

30.  I dismiss the appeal of RR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

