
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13573/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell


                                   Between

                                  DILIP RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khalid of Goulds Green Chambers, Uxbridge
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Nepalese national who was born on 17 May  1987.   As
    long ago as 10 November 2015, he was refused  entry  clearance  as  the
    adult dependent child of a former Gurkha soldier.  He appealed  against
    that decision to the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal  was  dismissed
    by Judge Harris.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  and  his
    parents in the United Kingdom continued to enjoy a family life  despite
    their  separation  since  2011  but  that  the  respondent's   decision
    represented a lawful and proportionate interference  with  that  family
    life.



 2. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    and by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede.  An application under CPR 54.7A  (a
    'Cart' judicial review) was refused by HHJ McKenna but was  granted  by
    Hamblen LJ on renewal to the  Court  of  Appeal.   On  30  April  2019,
    therefore, permission to appeal was granted  by  Mr  Ockelton  VP,  who
    reminded the parties that the Upper Tribunal's task was that set out in
    s12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

The Submissions of the Parties

 3. At the outset of the hearing before us, we expressed some concern  that
    Judge Harris had cited Ghising [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and had  concluded
    in reliance on  that  authority,  at  [49],  that  the  respondent  had
    provided a scheme for remedying the historic  injustice  identified  in
    the earlier authorities.  As has been asserted in the grounds presented
    at all stages in this case, Judge  Harris  erred  in  relying  on  that
    decision of Lang J and UTJ Jordan in so concluding because that  aspect
    of the Upper Tribunal's decision had been over-ruled by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8; [2013] 1 WLR  2546  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal had returned to consider the weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
    historic injustice in Ghising [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) ("Ghising No  2)").
    In Ghising No 2, the Tribunal held that the historic wrong suffered  by
    ex-Gurkha servicemen was to be given substantial weight and that:

         "where it is found that Article 8  is  engaged  and,  but  for  the
         historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled  in  the  UK
         long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article
         8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,  where  the
         matters relied on  by  the  Secretary  of  State/  entry  clearance
         officer consist solely of the public interest in maintaining a firm
         immigration policy."


 4. We observed at the hearing that  Judge  Harris  had  erred  in  law  in
    failing to apply the  'but  for'  test  set  out  above  and  that  his
    conclusion, at [52], that the historic  injustice  was  not  in  itself
    sufficient to tip the balance in this appellant's favour was  wrong  in
    law.

 5. Mr Lindsay submitted that any such error on the part  of  Judge  Harris
    was not material because the matters relied upon by the respondent  did
    not consist solely of the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control.  In particular, the respondent had relied upon the
    statutory  public  interest  factors  in  s117B  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Part 5A NIAA 2002  had  not  been  in
    force when Gurung or Ghising No 2 had been decided and  the  judge  had
    been entitled to attach weight to those factors and  to  conclude  that
    the public interest in the appellant's exclusion outweighed his  family
    life with his mother and father.

 6. We asked Mr Lindsay whether that submission was  available  to  him  in
    light of [55]-[57] of Jitendra Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320,  in  which  the
    Court of Appeal accepted that the  provisions  of  Part  5A  could  not
    affect the outcome of the appeal  when  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    Article 8(1) was defective.  Mr Lindsay initially submitted  that  what
    had been said in those passages was obiter but he then accepted that he
    was in some difficulty in seeking to advance a contrary submission.

 7. Mr Khalid submitted that the judge's error was not  simply  failing  to
    cite Gurung or Ghising No 2.  He should have applied the 'but for' test
    in Ghising No 2 and his failure to  do  so  represented  a  fundamental
    error of approach.  Had the judge  adopted  the  correct  approach,  he
    would have been bound to find in the appellant's favour.  There was  no
    suggestion of bad character and it was not  possible  to  suggest  that
    s117B sufficed to overcome  the  historic  injustice,  particularly  in
    circumstances where the appellant might now be financially  independent
    or able to speak English if there had been no historic  injustice.   Mr
    Khalid invited us to set aside Judge Harris's decision  and  to  remake
    the decision, allowing the appeal.

 8. Mr Lindsay accepted that this was a case in which the decision fell  to
    be remade by the Upper Tribunal in the event that the decision  of  the
    FtT was set aside.  He had no further submissions to  make  as  to  the
    disposal of the appeal.

 9. Mr Khalid invited us to order that the  appellant  should  recover  the
    costs of the proceedings in  the  event  that  the  appeal  was  to  be
    allowed.

10. We indicated that we would set aside Judge Harris's decision and remake
    the decision on the appeal.   We  reserved  that  decision  for  postal
    delivery.

Discussion

11. We are satisfied that Judge Harris erred in law.  Before explaining why
    we reach that conclusion, we should summarise his reasoning more  fully
    than we have above.

12. At [27], the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
    continued to enjoy a protected family life.  From [31],  he  turned  to
    consider the issue of proportionality.  He found that s117B(1), (2) and
    (3) NIAA 2002 militated against the appellant because  the  maintenance
    of immigration control is in the public interest  and  he  was  neither
    financially independent nor able to speak English: [33]-[36].  He noted
    that the historic injustice suffered by the Gurkhas was  a  significant
    factor but he concluded that the respondent had issued a policy  (Annex
    K) which was designed to address that  injustice.   The  appellant  was
    unable to meet all the criteria in that  policy  because  he  had  been
    living apart from the sponsor  for  more  than  two  years:  [38]-[47].
    Judge Harris was satisfied that the guidance in Ghising [2012] UKUT 160
    (IAC) applied to the current scheme in the Annex K policy and  that  he
    should take this into account in  his  assessment  of  proportionality:
    [49].  At  [53]-[54],  he  concluded  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances  which  warranted  a  conclusion  that  the   appellant's
    continued exclusion was disproportionate.  The reasons that he  reached
    that conclusion were summarised at [52]:

         'Given the redressing of the historic injustice by the creation  of
         the policy, I am not satisfied  that  the  mere  existence  of  the
         historic injustice affecting the appellant is by itself  sufficient
         to make the refusal of entry clearance disproportionate.  Moreover,
         having carefully read the Court of  Appeal's  judgment,  I  am  not
         persuaded by the submission of  Mr  Khalid  that  Jitendra  Rai  is
         authority for saying that, in cases involving the adult children of
         Gurkha veterans, compelling or exceptional  circumstances  are  not
         required to establish  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
         right to respect [sic] and  that  the  existence  of  the  historic
         injustice is enough'.


13. In summary, therefore, Judge Harris concluded that the introduction  of
    an amended policy  (in  2015)  had  addressed  the  historic  injustice
    suffered by the Brigade and their family members and  that  the  public
    interest factors in s117B NIAA 2002 outweighed the  appellant's  family
    life.  In our judgment,  neither  limb  of  that  reasoning  withstands
    scrutiny.

14. The respondent's current policy is entitled Gurkhas discharged before 1
    July 1997 and their family members.  It is  in  its  second  iteration,
    which was issued on 22 October 2018.  It is clear from page 11  of  the
    policy, however, that the part of it  which  is  material  for  present
    purposes replicates guidance which was issued on 5  January  2015.   It
    was that policy which  was  known  as  Annex  K.   From  2015  onwards,
    therefore, the respondent's policy guidance has contained the following
    list of factors for Entry Clearance Officers to consider in such  cases
    (we have numbered the bullet points for ease of reference):

          1) the former Gurkha parent has been, or is  in  the  process  of
             being  granted  settlement  under   the   2009   discretionary
             arrangements or was granted leave under the  2004  Immigration
             Rules where the requirement to  have  been  discharged  on  or
             after 1 July 1997 had been waived


          2) the applicant is the son or daughter of the former Gurkha


          3) the applicant is outside the UK


          4) the applicant is between 18 and 30  years  of  age  (including
             applicants who are 30 on the date of application)


          5) the applicant was under 18 years of age at  the  time  of  the
             former Gurkha's discharge


          6) the applicant is financially and emotionally dependent on  the
             former Gurkha


          7) the Secretary of State is satisfied that  an  application  for
             settlement by the former Gurkha would have  been  made  before
             2009 had the option to do so been available


          8) the applicant has not been living apart from the former Gurkha
             for more than 2 years on the  date  of  application,  and  has
             never lived apart from the sponsor for more than 2 years at  a
             time, unless this was by  reason  of  education  or  something
             similar (such that the family unit was maintained, albeit  the
             applicant lived away)


          9) the applicant has not formed an independent family unit


         10) the applicant does not  fall  to  be  refused  on  grounds  of
             suitability under paragraph 8 or 9 of Appendix Armed Forces or
             those provisions of part 9 of the Immigration  Rules  (general
             grounds for refusal) that apply  in  respect  of  applications
             made under Appendix Armed Forces of the Immigration Rules.


15. In our view, this  list  of  factors  was  prepared  to  assist  junior
    officials to make Article 8 ECHR compliant assessments in the  majority
    of cases by signposting factors  which  are  relevant  to  the  various
    stages of the assessment.  Factor (1) relates  to  the  status  of  the
    sponsor.  Factors (2), (4), (6), (8) and (9) relate to  the  engagement
    of Article 8 in its family life aspect.   Factors  (5),  (7)  and  (10)
    relate to proportionality.   In  many  cases,  consideration  of  those
    factors would produce  a  sensible,  structured  consideration  of  the
    issues which emerge from years of litigation, without the need  for  an
    ECO to analyse decisions from Kugathas [2003] INLR 1 to Rai [2017] EWCA
    Civ 320.

16. It is not suggested in the policy that consideration of  these  factors
    would produce an Article 8 ECHR compliant assessment in all cases.  Nor
    is it suggested, as Judge Harris thought, that  the  intention  was  to
    redress the historic injustice by the  promulgation  of  this  list  of
    factors.  On the contrary, the policy is  clear  that  Article  8  ECHR
    falls for consideration in all cases which do not satisfy the  list  of
    factors.  The relevant section of the guidance provides as follows:

         'As  part  of  any  proportionality  aspect  of   the   Article   8
         consideration, you must have taken account of the relevant case law
         below:


         The Court of  Appeal  confirmed  in  Gurung  and  Ors,  R  (on  the
         application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
         ECWA Civ 8 (21 January 2013) that the "normal position is that they
         [adult dependent relatives] are expected  to  apply  for  leave  to
         enter or remain under the relevant provisions of the Rules or under
         the provisions of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights".


         The Court also found that the historic injustice faced  by  Gurkhas
         who were not able to settle in the UK until 2009  should  be  taken
         into account during the Article 8 consideration of the case but was
         not determinative: "If a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic
         injustice, he would have settled in the  UK  at  a  time  when  his
         dependent (now) adult child would have been able to  accompany  him
         as a dependent child under the age of 18, that is a  strong  reason
         for holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult  child  to
         join his family now" [42].


         The Upper Tier Tribunal found in Ghising  and  others  [2013]  UKUT
         00567 (IAC) that where Article  8  is  engaged  and,  but  for  the
         historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled  in  the  UK
         long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article
         8 proportionality assessment in the Appellant's favour,  where  the
         matters relied upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State/entry  clearance
         officer (ECO) consist solely of the public interest in  maintaining
         a firm immigration policy.


         If, in the course of the consideration, matters come to light  that
         may be prejudicial to maintaining a fair  immigration  policy,  the
         Secretary of State (and those acting on their behalf) may  consider
         whether public interests are best served by  refusal  of  leave  to
         enter or remain. In some cases, this may  ultimately  mean  removal
         from the UK. Thus,  a  poor  immigration  history  and/or  criminal
         behaviour may be sufficient to outweigh  other  factors  that  have
         been brought forward on the appellant's behalf.


         In all cases where either an application under this policy or an
         application under Article 8 is refused, the applicant should be
         given a written refusal of their application. This should set out
         why their application falls for refusal under the relevant areas
         considered / applicable.'


17. The effect of  the  2015  policy  was  not  to  abrogate  the  previous
    authorities, therefore, but to underline the continuing application  of
    the 'but for' test which emerged from Gurung and Ghising No 2.   Having
    concluded that there  was  a  family  life  in  existence  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor, Judge Harris erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    follow  that  approach  when  assessing  the  proportionality  of   the
    appellant's continued exclusion from the United Kingdom.

18. Judge Harris also concluded  that  section  117B  NIAA  2002  militated
    against the appellant in the assessment of proportionality.  We do  not
    consider that the public interest factors in Part 5A  of  the  Act  are
    capable, however, of overcoming the historic injustice in a  case  such
    as the present, by which we mean a case  in  which  there  is  no  poor
    immigration history or criminal behaviour.  We  reach  that  conclusion
    for the following reasons.

19. Firstly, that conclusion is supported by Jitendra  Rai,  in  which  the
    Court of Appeal accepted the submission made on behalf of the appellant
    that 'in view of the  historic  injustice  underlying  the  appellant's
    case, such considerations would have made no difference to the  outcome
    and certainly no difference adverse to  him':  [55]-[57].   Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that what was said by Lindblom LJ  in  those  paragraphs  was
    obiter dicta but we do not think that is  correct  because  the  appeal
    would not have been allowed and remitted to the Upper Tribunal if s117B
    was capable of outweighing the historic injustice in  a  case  such  as
    this.

20. Secondly, even if we are wrong in our understanding of Jitendra Rai, we
    do not consider  that  s117B  is  capable,  as  a  matter  of  law,  of
    outweighing the historic injustice recognised in the authorities  in  a
    case such as the present.  Part 5A was inserted into the  2002  Act  by
    s19 of the Immigration Act 2014 on 28 July 2014.  By  that  stage,  the
    Court of Appeal and the Upper Tribunal had reached a concluded view  on
    the weight which was to be attached to the historic injustice in  cases
    such as this.  Parliament must be taken to have legislated in light  of
    that consistent line of authority: Robinson [2019] UKSC  11;  [2019]  2
    WLR 897, at [62].  In so doing, Parliament made no attempt to over-rule
    that consistent line of authority.  It required courts and Tribunals to
    have regard to the consideration  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest in full knowledge of  the
    established jurisprudence which established that the weight to be given
    to  immigration  control  can  be  reduced  in  certain  circumstances.
    Situations in which there has been administrative delay  was  one  such
    situation: EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41;  [2009]  1  AC  1159  refers.
    Situations in which there had been  a  recognised  historic  wrong  was
    another.  Whilst the Tribunal is required to have regard to the general
    public  interest  in   maintaining   effective   immigration   control,
    therefore, it also has regard to the  authorities  which  bear  on  the
    weight which can properly be attached to the  public  interest  in  the
    specific circumstances under  consideration.   Judge  Harris  erred  in
    failing to recognise the continuing  application  of  those  principles
    when he came to consider s117B(1).

21. We consider that Judge Harris also fell into error in his consideration
    of s117(2) (English language) and  s117B(3)  (financial  independence).
    In a case of this nature, we do not consider  that  those  factors  can
    properly be held against an appellant when the  historic  injustice  is
    borne in mind.  The historic injustice against the Brigade  meant  that
    retired Gurkhas were not able to live in the United Kingdom.  When that
    injustice was remedied, a further one came about, in that they were not
    able to bring their dependents to the United Kingdom.  Had the historic
    injustice not occurred, therefore, those in  the  appellant's  category
    would have come to the United Kingdom and would have had an opportunity
    to learn English and  to  become  financially  independent.   To  apply
    s117B(2) and (3) to the detriment of  an  appellant  such  as  this  is
    therefore to allow  the  respondent  to  gain  an  advantage  from  the
    historic injustice.  Whilst it is mandatory to  have  regard  to  those
    general considerations in any proportionality assessment, therefore, we
    do not consider that it was appropriate  for  Judge  Harris  to  attach
    weight to them on the facts of this case.

22. Thirdly, we note that the October 2018 guidance  contains  instructions
    to Presenting Officers in cases of this nature.  That guidance does not
    suggest that s117B NIAA 2002 has the effect which Judge Harris  thought
    it did in this case.  Whilst the respondent's guidance is obviously not
    an aid to statutory construction, we note that the absence of reference
    to Part 5A in that guidance is  consistent  with  our  conclusion  that
    those  general  factors  are  not  capable  -   absent   countervailing
    considerations such as an adverse immigration history or criminality  -
    from outweighing the significant weight which is to be attached to  the
    public interest in a case such as the present.

23. In the circumstances, we have come to the  clear  conclusion  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's assessment of proportionality in  this  case  was
    vitiated by legal error.  The fact that the appellant had  lived  apart
    from the sponsor for more than two years meant that he was not able  to
    satisfy the terms of the policy, as Judge Harris  found.   But  he  was
    found to have continued to enjoy a family life with his  parents  since
    they had departed Nepal and come to the United Kingdom and it has  been
    accepted throughout that the appellant's father would have brought  his
    family to the UK before 2009 had they been permitted to do so.  In  the
    absence of any countervailing considerations, and  we  find  there  are
    none, the outcome required by Gurung and Ghising  No  2  is  clear  and
    neither the amendment of the policy nor the  introduction  of  Part  5A
    NIAA 2002 justifies a different outcome.  We therefore set aside  Judge
    Harris's proportionality assessment and  remake  the  decision  on  the
    appeal in light of his findings of fact.  For the reasons we  have  set
    out above, we conclude that the  respondent's  decision  represented  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's family life and  the
    appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

24. Mr Khalid invited us  to  order  that  the  appellant,  or  rather  the
    sponsor, should recover the costs of these proceedings.  We were  asked
    to consider a short statement from the sponsor in which he stated  that
    the proceedings had been protracted and he had found  it  difficult  to
    meet the expense, given that he is a pensioner.  Whilst  we  sympathise
    with the sponsor in this regard, we do not consider that we are able to
    make any such order.

25. The Upper Tribunal's costs jurisdiction is governed by  section  29  of
    the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.   The  wide  powers
    conferred by s29(1)-(2)  have  effect  subject  to  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules, however.  Rule 10 of Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 is the  relevant  provision  for  present  purposes.   Rule  10(3)
    permits the Upper Tribunal to make an order for costs in very  specific
    circumstances, as Mr Khalid was eventually constrained to  accept.   He
    had initially submitted that these were judicial review proceedings but
    that is plainly wrong.  Whilst the proceedings before HHJ  McKenna  and
    Hamblen LJ might be described in that way, the effect of  Hamblen  LJ's
    order was to quash  UTJ  Kebede's  refusal  of  permission  to  appeal.
    Permission to appeal was then granted by the Vice President,  who  made
    reference to s12 of the TCEA 2007  at  that  time.   It  could  not  be
    clearer that the proceedings before us are statutory appeal proceedings
    under that part of the Act, rather  than  judicial  review  proceedings
    under ss15-21 of the Act.

26. Rule 10(3) also gives this chamber of the Upper Tribunal power to order
    wasted  costs  or  where  a  party  or  hi  representative  had   acted
    unreasonably in the proceedings.  Mr Khalid did  not  seek  to  suggest
    that an order should be made on either basis.  He was  correct  not  to
    make that submission.

27. Ultimately, it transpired that the sponsor  was  particularly  keen  to
    recover the costs of the proceedings under 54.7A of the Civil Procedure
    Rules; the Cart judicial review proceedings.  Mr Khalid was not able to
    direct our attention to any provision in the TCEA, the UT Rules or  the
    CPR under which we could make such an order.  As he accepted, he  would
    have to make a late application to  the  Administrative  Court  or  the
    Court of Appeal for such an order.  We do not consider  it  appropriate
    to express a view on any such application,  whether  in  terms  of  its
    timeliness or its merits.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was materially erroneous in law  and
is set aside.  We remake the decision on the appeal, allowing it on  Article
8 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date 11 June 2019

MARK BLUNDELL
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
