
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13117/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Determination and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2018                 |On 30th November 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                  ANDRE [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                     DECISION BY CONSENT AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and by the consent of the parties the following order is made:

      i) Upon the parties' agreement that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal promulgated on 8th August 2018 discloses a material  error
         of law, it is hereby ordered by consent as follows.

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law in relation to the
         Grounds of Appeal as pleaded by  the  Appellant's  Counsel  in  the
         following respects:

             "The grounds argue in essence that the judge, in assessing the
             Article 8 situation of the Appellant, failed to  consider  the
             best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  wife's  three   British
             children and  the  family  life  that  the  children  and  the
             Appellant share.  It was stated by Counsel that  the  argument
             was briefly recorded in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  in
             respect of the issue of  the  "parental  relationship"  shared
             between the Appellant and these three qualifying children (and
             the impact that may have in respect of Section 117B(6) of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002) as well  as  the
             dramatic effect on  the  children  that  the  removal  of  the
             Appellant would  have,  none  of  which  was  not  taken  into
             consideration  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   in   his
             decision.  It was  further  raised  that  the  three  children
             provided witness statements and their evidence was accepted by
             the Home Office Presenting Officer at the First-tier  Tribunal
             hearing.  Ms Everett for the Secretary of State did  not  seek
             to argue otherwise in relation to these two  grounds  nor  the
             acceptance of  their  evidence,  and  as  a  consequence,  the
             parties were able to accept that there was a material error in
             the decision such that it infects the remainder of the judge's
             findings as the judge did not properly approach  and  appraise
             the Article 8 family life shared by the Appellant  with  these
             children  (notwithstanding  his  findings   on   whether   the
             relationship with his wife was  genuine  and  subsisting),  in
             light of the witness statements from the three children  which
             confirmed that the Appellant was "like a father" to them."

 1. As a consequence of the above agreed error the decision is set aside in
    its entirety and is remitted to be heard by a  differently  constituted
    bench.

 2. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed.

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for legal error by
    consent.

Directions

 4. I make the following  directions  for  the  continuation  and  remitted
    hearing that is to shortly follow before the First-tier Tribunal:

      1) The appeal is to be remitted to Taylor House.

      2) No interpreter is required.

      3)  Five  witnesses  are  to  be   called   according   to   Counsel's
         instructions.

      4) The time estimate given is three hours.

      5) No special directions are requested.

      6) I do not make any anonymity  direction  as  my  decision  does  not
         disclose, or require me to discuss, the identity of the children.


Signed                                  Date 25 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
