
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13268/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 October 2016                            |On 20 October 2016             |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON



                                   Between

                                  GHINA [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Saracens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Lebanon born on 7 July 1989.
     The respondent,  in  a  decision  dated  December  2015,  refused  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain as the spouse of  a  person
    present and settled in the UK.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 8 April 2016, made on the papers, Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Mensah dismissed the appellant's  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and  Article  8.   The  appellant  appealed  with
    permission.

Error of Law

 3. The appellant appealed on the grounds that she was refused because  she
    did not meet the requirements of the English language test at paragraph
    284(ix)(a) and Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   It  was  argued
    that the judge failed to take into account documents  lodged  with  the
    appellant's notice of appeal of relevance to Article  8;  secondly,  it
    was argued that the judge had failed  adequately  to  engage  with  the
    original grounds of appeal, with reference to the question  of  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life in Lebanon; thirdly,
    the judge had failed to adequately consider, or to consider at all, the
    best interests of the  appellant's  child  and  the  interests  of  her
    husband;  fourthly,  that  the  judge  had  failed   to   undertake   a
    proportionality assessment under Article 8; fifthly, that the judge had
    failed to consider the public interest  assessment  as  required  under
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act; and finally that the appellant challenged
    the legality of certain aspects of the Immigration  Rules.   Permission
    was granted on all grounds bar the grounds that sought to challenge the
    legality of aspects of the Immigration Rules.

 4. It was conceded by Mr Bramble at the outset, sensibly in my view,  that
    there was a material error of  law.   In  the  grounds  of  appeal  the
    appellant listed documents submitted on appeal and these  included,  in
    addition to the refusal documents, copies of  her  husband's  passport,
    her son's indefinite leave  to  remain,  her  spousal  visa,  a  school
    letter, marriage certificate,  birth  certificate,  tenancy  agreement,
    council tax, water bill, P60, and bank  statement.   In  addition,  the
    appellant had submitted grounds of appeal indicating that her  son  had
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK and was settled  with  his  father
    and attended North East School in Neasden, London. Being his mother  it
    was argued that the appellant's presence was vital to  give  the  child
    care and attention. It was also argued that as a mother  the  appellant
    could not stay away with her child and if she was to  take  him  abroad
    with her he would be missing school for the remainder of  the  academic
    year and the year after, and it was not possible to get him  registered
    for this year and the year to follow. The appellant  also  argued  that
    her husband worked full-time and as a result her husband could not give
    their son enough attention if he was to remain in the  UK  without  the
    appellant.

 5.  It was also set out that the appellant's husband is a British  citizen
    person present and settled in London and  that  he  also  requires  the
    support and presence of the appellant and cannot risk moving abroad  to
    leave behind a successful career  and  stable  life  in  the  UK.   The
    grounds argued the family unity would be jeopardised and splitting  the
    family would be disastrous in all aspects and that the purpose of their
    marriage would not be fulfilled.   The appellant stated  that  she  had
    received her initial leave to remain in  the  UK  for  the  purpose  of
    joining her husband and child and that she needed to continue  to  stay
    with them.  It was further argued that she had not breached  the  terms
    of her initial leave to remain visa.  She argued that she was not  tied
    to Lebanon any longer and that she was totally dependent on her husband
    and her life had gone through a "radical change".

 6.  Finally  the  appellant  cited  the  current  security  and  political
    situation in Lebanon and the Middle East and that it was not stable  or
    safe.  In light of these points the appellant argued that it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect any family separation and this  would  adversely
    affect the interests of both the child of the appellant and the sponsor
    and the family as a whole.  It was  argued  that  the  removal  of  any
    member of the family  would  result  in  severe  consequences  for  the
    family.

 7. The judge at [6] indicated that she had considered documents  including
    the notice of appeal, the notice of decision and the appellant's letter
    of 1 February 2016 with two enclosures.  The notice of appeal contained
    the grounds of appeal as set out in the preceding  paragraphs  of  this
    decision as well as the list of enclosed documents referred  to  above.
    There was no suggestion that the judge did not have  these  grounds  of
    appeal or documents.  The judge failed to engage with these grounds  of
    appeal and materially erred when she said at [9] that the appellant had
    not sought to dispute "any other matter in the decision other than  she
    has raised the fact that her husband has purchased a property for  them
    to reside as a family in the UK".

 8. The judge's failure to take into account the  grounds  of  appeal  also
    resulted in a failure to consider the best interests  of  the  chid  in
    this appeal and the judge did not adequately consider or give  adequate
    reasons why therefore the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

 9. In addition the judge was of the view that the information provided did
    not address any exceptional circumstances justifying departure from the
    immigration  rules.   However  the  judge  was  focusing  only  on  the
    information provided in the appellant's letter of 1 February 2016 which
    addressed on the English language test issue  and  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor had bought a home and not on any of the issues  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal with additional documents.

10. I am satisfied that the error is material as conceded  by  Mr  Bramble.
    It was agreed by both parties before me that given the lack of findings
    of fact and the nature and extent of the findings which  must  be  made
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it is set aside.  The decision is remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for an oral hearing before any  judge  other  than  Judge
    Mensah.

Anonymity

No application for anonymity was sought or is  made.  Although  there  is  a
child in this appeal there was no identifying information  in  the  decision
such that an anonymity directing would be appropriate.

Signed                                  Date: 19 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee application was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 19 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


