
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13741/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2017                             |On 13 June 2017               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR MUHAMMAD USMAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr Usman (In person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Norton-Taylor given after  a  hearing  on  15  August  last  year
    whereby he allowed the appeal of the respondents to this appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse a claim  made  by  him
    for leave to remain in this country on human rights grounds.

2.   The respondent came to this country originally  in  January  2007  with
    his mother.  He was born on 4 May 1991 and is a national  of  Pakistan.
    Accordingly when he arrived in this country he was some 16  years  old.
    Unfortunately he committed a serious offence on 16 January 2008 when he
    sexually assaulted a young woman.  He was not apprehended at  the  time
    but it was discovered that he had been involved because in  the  course
    of the assault he had bitten his victim and a DNA sample was taken.  In
    2012 he was arrested on suspicion  of  having  committed  robbery.   We
    should say immediately that that turned out to be an error and  it  was
    accepted that he was not guilty of  any  offence.   Nonetheless  a  DNA
    sample was taken following his arrest and this matched the sample  that
    had been taken from the victim of the assault in 2008.

3.   The sentence that was imposed upon him as a result of that offence  was
    one of nine months described as  imprisonment  although  of  course  he
    being under 18 the sentence was one of detention.  As a result of  that
    the Secretary of State decided that he should be deported having regard
    to the fact that he had committed an offence which had,  it  was  said,
    caused serious harm.  The circumstances of the offence we do  not  need
    to go into in any detail, suffice it to say that at half past seven  or
    thereabouts on a January night when of course it was dark the  21-year-
    old victim was approached and grabbed by the respondent and the assault
    on her involved  his  putting  a  hand  on  her  buttocks  through  her
    underwear and having pulled her trousers down and attempted to kiss her
    on her lips, he bit her  on  her  cheek  before  running  off  when  he
    apparently heard a car door shut nearby.  He was charged not only  with
    the touching of her in an indecent fashion but also with the much  more
    serious offence of an intention to rape.  Of that he was acquitted.  So
    the offence, nasty though it was, and for a first offender meriting  an
    immediate custodial sentence, nonetheless in the  hierarchy  of  sexual
    offences was at a relatively low end.  Nonetheless the First-tier Judge
    decided that it did cause serious harm to the victim  and  that  was  a
    finding that he was entitled to reach and one which we do not  seek  in
    any way to go behind.

4.   Other than that the respondent has not offended and it is to  be  noted
    of course that he was only 16 still when that  offence  was  committed.
    He is now married to a British citizen of Bangladeshi ethnicity and has
    now three small children.  As we say there is no suggestion that he has
    misbehaved in any criminal way or indeed at all since his offending and
    the chances that he will commit offences are small.  Thus he is in  the
    position of one who when he was a young man and before he met with  and
    got married to his present partner committed the offence which we  have
    described which was serious enough but he has on the  face  of  it  put
    that offending behind him.

5.   The law applicable is  contained  in  Sections  117B  to  117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and paragraphs 398 to 399A
    of the Immigration Rules.   The  relevant  provisions  of  the  various
    amendments to Section 117 are those under 117C because that deals  with
    the approach to Article 8 in cases involving foreign criminals and  the
    first point made is that it is in  the  public  interest  that  foreign
    criminals should be deported and  the  more  serious  the  offence  the
    greater the public interest in deportation.

6.   If a foreign criminal has been sentenced to less than four  years  then
    the relevant test which is in issue in this case  is  that  deportation
    should not take place if there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his integration into the country to which it is  proposed  that  he  be
    deported, and that is Section 117C(4)(c).  And more  important  perhaps
    is Section 117C(5) which provides that a relevant exception, that is an
    exception to deportation, applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child and  the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.  As  we  say
    that is the more  significant  provision  which  is  material  for  the
    purposes of this appeal.  There is no doubt that he does have a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner  who  is,  as  we
    have said, a British citizen, and  equally  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with three qualifying children.  And the issue is
    whether his deportation would be unduly harsh on  the  partner  or  the
    children.

7.   The decision made by Judge Norton-Taylor  was  carefully  reasoned  and
    conscientious as Judge Kopieczek granting permission observed.  It  was
    thorough and thoughtful but what moved  her  to  grant  permission  was
    that, as she put it, the judge had not identified what factors were  in
    play that made his deportation unduly harsh as  distinct  from  matters
    that  were  likely  to  affect  a  spouse  or  young  children  in  any
    deportation case.

8.   It must be obvious that in assessing what is unduly harsh a  judge  has
    to consider the facts of the individual case and then make  a  judgment
    whether on those facts it can properly be  decided  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh and there is obviously no  straightforward  dividing  line
    which enables it to be said that a particular decision  is  or  is  not
    unduly harsh.  The test that has to be applied is set out by the  Court
    of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450  and  in  that  case  Lord
    Justice Laws so far as material stated as follows.  First in  paragraph
    22 he said:

         "I turn to the interpretation of the phrase unduly harsh.   Plainly
         it means the same in Section 117C(5) as in Rule 399.  Unduly  harsh
         is an ordinary English expression.  As so  often,  its  meaning  is
         coloured by its context."

    That perhaps is a statement as he himself said of the obvious.  He went
    on in the next paragraph:

         "The context in these cases invites emphasis on  two  factors,  (1)
         the public interest in the removal of foreign criminals and (2) the
         need for  a  proportionate  assessment  of  any  interference  with
         Article 8 rights."

    He then referred to the provisions in Section 117C(2) namely  that  the
    more  serious  the  offence  the  greater  the   public   interest   in
    deportation.  And he went on in paragraph 24:

         "This steers the Tribunals and the court  towards  a  proportionate
         assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.
         Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in  his  removal,
         the harder it will be to show that  the  effect  on  his  child  or
         partner will be unduly harsh.  Any other approach  in  my  judgment
         dislocates the unduly harsh provisions from their context."

9.   So that is the approach which the judge refers to and  clearly  had  in
    mind in deciding whether on the facts of this case there  would  be  an
    unduly harsh effect on his partner and  the  children  were  he  to  be
    deported and in reaching that decision he of course had to consider the
    relative seriousness of the offence which the appellant had  committed.
    And he made the point, and indeed it is a point that is  relied  on  in
    all these cases by the Secretary  of  State,  that  offences  involving
    sexual assaults are particularly to be regarded as serious.  He set out
    the mitigating factors which ranged from his age when the  offence  was
    committed and his immaturity, that it was not at the higher end of  the
    scale of sexual offences, he  found  that  the  remorse  expressed  was
    genuine and was committed  over  eight  years  before,  there  were  no
    further convictions and no other material misconduct  and  a  very  low
    risk of reoffending.  Those  in  themselves  were  relatively  powerful
    reasons on their face for reaching a consideration on  proportionality.



10.  Now so far as his wife is concerned, as we have said she is  originally
    from Bangladesh and therefore if he is deported and if the family  life
    is to continue then she has to go to a country which she  does  not  in
    any way know and obviously if he went on his own that  would  split  up
    the family who are close  and  would  create  its  own  real  problems.
    Equally there was some evidence that she suffers from eczema  and  that
    would not be assisted by having to live in a country such  as  Pakistan
    where there are high levels of  sunshine.   However  that  was  not  in
    itself particularly relied on by the First-tier Judge.  So far  as  the
    children are concerned they, obviously having  been  born  and  so  far
    brought up here, albeit they are relatively young, it would  hardly  be
    in their best interests if they were uprooted and had to go to Pakistan
    and even less in their best interests if they were to  be  deprived  of
    the father in all the circumstances.

11.  What the judge then  decided  is  set  out  in  paragraph  112  of  his
    judgment and we think it would be right that we cite the material parts
    of that.  What he said was this:

         "The operative harshness in both  scenarios  is  I  conclude  undue
         because of the way in which the test has been framed by  the  Court
         of Appeal and an application of the specific facts  of  this  case.
         When the threshold of  what  is  or  is  not  undue  is  calibrated
         according to the appellant's own criminal and  immigration  history
         and all other relevant factors there is on my findings of fact  and
         previous conclusions thereon  a  disproportionate  relationship  in
         this case between what the children are due to bear  in  the  wider
         sense on the one hand and on  the  other  the  public  interest  of
         deporting this particular appellant  notwithstanding  the  powerful
         influence of Section 117C(1) and paragraph 398 of the Rules seen in
         the light of the relevant case law.

         This case is an example of the observation made in the  case  cited
         where the relative nature of the test was acknowledged.   The  less
         serious the offending and immigration history the easier it may  be
         to show undue harshness.  Here the strength of the appellant's case
         through his children as it were in demonstrating undue harshness is
         very significantly increased by the  facts  relating  to  the  very
         matters to which I must have regard under MM (Uganda).   The  wider
         interpretation of the term actually benefits the appellant.  If the
         child focused approach had been favoured by the Court of Appeal  my
         conclusion might have been different.  As it is the factors in  the
         appellant's favour go to outweigh the ............  factor  of  the
         public interest albeit by a narrow margin.  It is hard to  conceive
         the wide margins in deportation cases."

12.  In our judgment  that  was  a  perfectly  correct  self  direction  and
    analysis of the situation having regard to  what  should  have  weighed
    with the judge.  As we say in all these cases provided that the correct
    approach is adopted it is a question of judgment and giving  weight  to
    the various factors which determine the result.  With great respect  to
    the Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek we do not take the view  that  there
    is merit in the grounds sought to be relied on namely that  as  it  was
    put that there was nothing outside what can be regarded as the norm  in
    relation to effect on partners and children that justified the  finding
    made by the First-tier Judge.  As we say in our view  that  was  not  a
    correct approach and the judge was entitled to  find  as  he  did.   In
    those circumstances this appeal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]




Signed                                  Date: 7 June 2017


Mr Justice Collins

