
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13030/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th September 2020               |On 17th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     BPK
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") made an anonymity direction and it is
    appropriate to continue that direction.  Unless and until a Tribunal or
    court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any
    member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
    to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The hearing before me on 15th September 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  I sat at the
    Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were
    open to the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and I was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would
    have been, if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was
    satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the open
    justice principle has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced;
    and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or
    interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was
    satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is
    proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
    issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


 3. The appellant is a national of Iran.  His appeal against the
    respondent's decision of 18th July 2019 to refuse an application made
    on 5th April 2019 for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his
    private life and following a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia, was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian for reasons set out in
    a decision promulgated on 8th November 2019.


 4.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on
    22nd April 2020.  The matter comes before me to determine whether the
    decision of Judge Andonian is vitiated by a material error of law.


 5. The appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraphs [4] to [7]
    of the decision of Judge Andonian.  The Judge records, at [9], that the
    appellant's human rights appeal was in the main based on the
    difficulties that he was likely to face on return to Iran arising from
    his paranoid schizophrenia. At paragraphs [18] to [26] of the decision,
    Judge Andonian considered the availability of treatment in Iran. In the
    respondent's decision of 18 July 2019 the respondent considered the
    availability of medical treatment for mental health in Iran, and
    referred to a response to a MedCOI request dated 19th January 2019
    which confirmed the availability of in/out patient treatment by
    psychologists and psychiatrists including the availability of
    psychiatric treatment via Cognitive Behavioural Therapy, EMDR and the
    availability of antidepressants and antipsychotics. That evidence is
    noted in paragraph [19] of the decision of Judge Andonian.  At
    paragraphs [20] to [23] of the decision, Judge Andonian refers to the
    November 2019 CPIN report that addresses, inter alia, medical and
    healthcare issues in Iran.  At paragraphs [40] to [46], Judge Andonian
    refers to the expert report of Dr Mohammed Kakhki that was relied upon
    by the appellant.  At paragraph [46], Judge Andonian states:


         "...I prefer to rely on the CPIN and objective evidence concerning
         Iran rather than the appellant's expert report commissioned by his
         legal advisers."


 6. Mrs Aboni, rightly in my judgement, concedes that the CPIN had not been
    relied upon by either party at the hearing of the appeal before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  She acknowledges that the hearing of the appeal
    took place about a week before the CPIN was published and the appellant
    was given no opportunity to address or make submissions in relation to
    matters set out within that report.  She properly accepts that the
    judge appears to have placed significant weight upon the matters set
    out in that report.


 7. Mrs Aboni accepts that there is an issue of fairness and that and
    whilst it may be open to a judge to prefer to rely upon matters set out
    in a CPIN report, the judge erroneously relied upon the report without
    giving the appellant a fair opportunity to address its content.  She
    accepts that the error is material to the outcome of the appeal.


 8. In MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) the Upper
    Tribunal held that where there is a defect or impropriety of a
    procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance, this may amount
    to a material error of law requiring the decision of the First-Tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside. The authorities referred to by
    the Upper Tribunal in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105
    (IAC) make it clear that upon an appeal such as this, the criterion to
    be applied is fairness and not reasonableness.


 9. I accept that the decision of the FtT is infected by an error of law
    and that the appropriate course is for the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian to be set aside.  In the circumstances I do not
    need to address the other grounds of appeal relied upon by the
    appellant.  As to disposal, the parties agree that the appropriate
    course is for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for hearing de novo
    with no findings preserved.  I have decided that it is appropriate to
    remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
    September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and
    extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


10. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


11. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Andonian
    promulgated on 8th November 2019 is set aside.


12. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
    with no findings preserved.


13. I make an anonymity direction.

Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         15th September 2020
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
