
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13187/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Priory Courts Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2019                            |On 18 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                NASEEM IQBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mrs S Ahmad of Ahmad and Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office presenting officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Graham (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 24 September 2018.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 7 January 1973. He  applied
    for leave to remain in the UK as the parent of  a  British  child.  The
    application was refused on 11 October 2017 and the appeal was heard  on
    30 August 2018.

 3. The appellant did not attend the hearing. His  representative  attended
    and advised that the appellant  was  ill  and  could  not  attend.  The
    representative applied for an adjournment to enable  the  appellant  to
    attend. Another  reason  for  the  adjournment  request  was  that  the
    appellant had instructed his solicitors on  10  August  2018  and  they
    needed further time to prepare the case. The judge was  told  that  the
    appellant had applied to the Family Court a month  ago  for  a  contact
    order in respect of his son but no hearing date had yet been given.

 4. The judge dealt with the adjournment application at paragraphs 7-11  of
    her decision. The application to adjourn was refused. With reference to
    the appellant's illness the judge  noted  that  there  was  no  medical
    evidence to support the contention that the appellant was unfit through
    illness to attend the hearing. The judge told the  representative  that
    if medical evidence to confirm that the appellant was too ill to attend
    was sent in within 24 hours it would be considered. The judge  recorded
    that at the date of preparation of her decision which was 14  September
    2018 no medical evidence had been supplied.

 5. In respect of the application to the Family Court the  judge  found  it
    questionable whether this was  necessary  given  that  the  appellant's
    representative stated that the appellant had a written  agreement  with
    his former partner in respect of contact with his child. There  was  no
    evidence that the application to the Family Court had been made by  the
    appellant prior to instructing his representatives and no hearing  date
    had been allocated. The judge was satisfied that the hearing should not
    be adjourned on this ground.

 6. The judge noted that the initial hearing of this appeal had taken place
    on 11 May 2018 and on that occasion the hearing had been  adjourned  at
    the request of the appellant because the  solicitors  representing  him
    had been closed down. The judge  had  advised  the  appellant  that  he
    should instruct new solicitors as the hearing would  not  be  adjourned
    again for lack of legal representation. The judge  was  satisfied  that
    the appellant had had sufficient time to instruct  solicitors  so  that
    his appeal could be ready for hearing on 30 August 2018.

 7.  When  the  adjournment  application  was   refused   the   appellant's
    representative withdrew. The judge proceeded to hear the appeal in  the
    absence of the appellant and his representative. The  judge  noted  the
    lack of a bundle of documents  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  the
    absence of  any  witnesses.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his
    child and was not satisfied that he was taking and intended to take  an
    active role in the child's upbringing. The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not satisfy appendix FM in relation to family life.

 8. The judge considered the appellant's private life noting that  he  only
    entered the UK in May 2011 and that he had lived in  Pakistan  for  the
    first 38 years of his life and he had a  wife  and  three  children  to
    return to in Pakistan. The judge found no very significant obstacles to
    the appellant's integration in Pakistan and therefore concluded that he
    did not satisfy paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) of the immigration rules.

 9. The judge did not  find  that  the  appeal  disclosed  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences if
    the appellant had to return to Pakistan. The judge noted that the  best
    interests of the child would be to remain with his mother and that both
    are British citizens and would  remain  in  the  UK  if  the  appellant
    returned to Pakistan. The appeal was dismissed.

10. The appellant, through his solicitors, applied for permission to appeal
    to the  Upper  Tribunal.  It  was  contended  that  there  had  been  a
    procedural  impropriety  in  refusing  the  adjournment  request.   The
    solicitors  made  reference  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  2005,
    notwithstanding that those rules were replaced  in  October  2014.  The
    solicitors should have been aware of that, but this is not  a  material
    matter as there are similar provisions within the 2014 Procedure Rules.
    In summary it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  acted  unfairly  in
    refusing the adjournment.

11. It was contended that the appellant had been unwell on the day  of  the
    hearing and had visited a walk in medical centre as he  was  unable  to
    arrange  an  appointment  with  his  own  GP  and  required  medication
    urgently. The appellant's representative had made the  judge  aware  of
    this. The solicitors had  written  to  the  FTT  on  3  September  2018
    enclosing a prescription that the appellant had received on  30  August
    2018. It was accepted this was not within the 24  hours  stipulated  by
    the judge but it was explained that the  appellant  had  not  been  fit
    enough to attend his solicitors on 31 August 2018.

12.  In addition the judge was made aware that the solicitors had only been
    instructed on 10 August 2018 and they needed further  time  to  prepare
    the case. The appellant's previous representatives had been the subject
    of an intervention by the Solicitors Regulation Authority  and  it  was
    submitted that this intervention had occurred at around the time of the
    appellant's initial hearing on 11 May 2018. It was submitted  that  the
    previous adjournment was not the fault of the appellant and he suffered
    anxiety and stress in appointing new solicitors having paid substantial
    fees to his previous solicitors.

13.  It was further submitted that the judge had erred by not having sought
    further information from the Family Court if there was any doubt as  to
    the appellant's relationship with his child. It was also submitted that
    the judge had erred by  not  considering  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's British child.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird who  found  it  arguable
    that the judge had acted unfairly in refusing to adjourn the appeal and
    proceeding in the appellant's absence.

15. Following the grant of permission  the  respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  2008.  In
    summary it was contended that the judge had  not  acted  unfairly.  The
    grounds seeking permission to appeal had failed to  particularise  what
    illness the appellant was suffering from on the day of the hearing. The
    respondent's  view  was  that  the  applications  to  adjourn  'was   a
    deliberate attempt by the appellant to stall his hearing.'

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

16. Mrs Ahmad, behalf of the appellant, relied upon the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal and explained that  the
    appellant did not have access to his file of papers from  his  previous
    solicitors until the end of July 2018.

17. Mrs Ahmad explained that an application to adjourn had  been  submitted
    to the FTT by letter dated 17 August 2018. I explained that  there  was
    no letter from Mrs  Ahmad's  firm  requesting  an  adjournment  on  the
    Tribunal file. I obtained a computerised case history and there was  no
    record of any adjournment request  being  received  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, and I advised Mrs Ahmad of this. I received a  copy  of  the
    letter dated 17 August 2018.

18. Mrs Ahmad pointed out that her firm had sent a letter to the FTT  dated
    3 September  2018  enclosing  a  prescription  dated  30  August  2018,
    explaining that the appellant had been  unwell  on  the  hearing  date,
    suffering from 'excessive vomiting and diarrhoea along with a heavy flu
    and headaches which came to light  on  the  date  of  his  hearing.'  I
    advised Mrs Ahmad that this letter was on the  Tribunal  file  and  was
    date stamped as having been received on 2 October 2018. Mrs Ahmad  also
    submitted a letter dated 6 September 2017 from the Home Office  to  the
    appellant's previous solicitors confirming that  the  Home  Office  had
    received from the appellant a letter from his former partner confirming
    that he had regular contact with his son together with  a  copy  of  an
    undated letter from the appellant's former partner  confirming  contact
    between the appellant and his son.

19. On behalf of the respondent Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 response
    in contending that the judge had not materially erred in law.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. The issue that I have to decide is whether the judge acted unfairly  in
    refusing the adjournment request and proceeding to decide the appeal in
    the absence of the appellant.

21. The principles to be applied when considering  an  adjournment  request
    are set out in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  Where  an  adjournment
    refusal is challenged on fairness grounds it is important to  recognise
    that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FTT  acted
    reasonably, but the test to be applied is that of fairness, and whether
    there was any deprivation of the  affected  party's  right  to  a  fair
    hearing.

22. The appeal was lodged on  23  October  2017.  The  appellant's  initial
    solicitors were the subject of an intervention by the SRA on  18  April
    2018. The appellant's first hearing before the FTT was on  the  11  May
    2018. The appellant attended that hearing without legal  representation
    and requested an  adjournment  to  obtain  legal  representation.  That
    application was granted and I accept that the appellant was advised  by
    the judge to obtain legal representation as soon as possible.

23. On 11 May 2018 the FTT issued a notice confirming that the next hearing
    will take place on 30 August 2018. I accept that the appellant did  not
    instruct his current solicitors until  10  August  2018,  approximately
    three months after his first hearing was adjourned,  and  approximately
    four months after the SRA intervention into his previous solicitors.

24. I find the FTT did not receive the letter dated 17 August 2018 from the
    appellant's current solicitors requested an adjournment.  There  is  no
    evidence on the file that the letter was received and the  computerised
    case history makes no reference to  an  adjournment  application  being
    received after the initial hearing  on  11  May  2018  and  the  second
    hearing on 30 August 2018. If the letter  had  been  received  the  FTT
    would have made a decision on  the  adjournment  application  and  this
    would be evident from the file and the computerised case history.

25. I find that there was no medical evidence  produced  to  the  judge  to
    indicate the nature of the appellant's illness which prevented him from
    attending the hearing  on  30  August  2018.  The  judge  prepared  the
    decision on 14 September 2018 and the FTT had not received any  medical
    evidence on behalf of the appellant at that time. I am  satisfied  that
    the letter from the appellant's current solicitors  dated  3  September
    2018 was not received by the FTT until 2  October  2018.  I  make  this
    finding for two reasons. Firstly the original letter is on file and  is
    date stamped as having been received by the  FTT  on  2  October  2018.
    Secondly the computerised case history discloses an  entry  made  on  2
    October 2018 recording the receipt of  the  letter  dated  3  September
    2018.

26. Therefore the judge did not have any medical evidence to  confirm  that
    the appellant was not well enough to attend the hearing  on  30  August
    2018. The letter dated 3 September 2018, which was not provided to  the
    judge, encloses a prescription for cyclizine tablets, which are used to
    prevent nausea and vomiting. There is no other medical evidence.

27. In addition to the absence of the appellant, for  which  there  was  no
    satisfactory explanation the judge noted that no  bundle  of  documents
    had been prepared on behalf of the  appellant,  there  was  no  witness
    statement from the appellant, and no witness statement from his  former
    partner.

28. The judge acknowledged at paragraph 4 that the appellant had  submitted
    a photograph of himself and his son and  the  letter  from  his  former
    partner and noted at paragraph 15 that the Home Office bundle contained
    a statutory declaration from the former partner dated 22  October  2017
    but there is no more recent evidence. The  judge  considered  the  best
    interests of the child noting that he is British and he lives with  his
    mother who is also British and both would remain in the UK.

29. I conclude that the judge did not  act  unfairly  and  her  refusal  to
    adjourn the hearing did not deprive the appellant of a right to a  fair
    hearing. The appellant had been given ample opportunity to prepare  for
    the hearing. No satisfactory explanation was given  for  his  delay  in
    instructing solicitors. No satisfactory explanation has been  given  as
    to why a bundle of documents was  not  prepared.  The  claim  that  the
    appellant was not ready for the hearing is contradicted by  the  letter
    from the solicitors dated 3 September 2018 in which it is confirmed  at
    paragraph 3 that the appellant attended all his consultations with  his
    solicitors 'and was prepared for his hearing and that he  had  obtained
    very strong evidence in the form of photographs documenting his  family
    life, which was the basis of his appeal.'

30. The judge was entitled to note the lack  of  any  medical  evidence  to
    support the contention that the appellant was so unwell  on  30  August
    2018 that he could not attend the hearing. Even when  the  prescription
    was produced to the FTT on 2 October 2018, that without more  does  not
    demonstrate that the appellant was so unwell that he could  not  attend
    the hearing.

31. I find no material error of law and the decision of the FTT stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose  a  material  error  of  law.  The
appeal is dismissed.

There has been no request for anonymity and no anonymity direction is made.

Signed  [pic]                       Date 13 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed  [pic]                       Date 13 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
