
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/13030/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28th November 2017                      | On 15th December 2017           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Mr NADEEM AZAM FAROOQI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 29th December 1984.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 11th November 2011 with  entry  clearance
    granted as a Tier 4 Student valid until 23rd January  2014.   Following
    the Appellant applying for an extension  of  leave  under  the  Tier  4
    Student route, this was granted with  leave  expiring  on  20th  August
    2015.  A decision was made to curtail the  Appellant's  leave  on  13th
    February 2015 where the Appellant's leave expired on 19th  April  2015.
    However, on 3rd December 2014 the Appellant had applied  for  leave  to
    remain under the  family  and  private  route.   That  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by a Notice of Refusal dated 6th  May
    2016.  The Appellant appealed.  The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Richards-Clarke at Manchester on 26th January 2017.
     In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  8th  February  2017  the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 2. In February 2017 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds contended there were two  errors  of  law,
    firstly with regard to the  evasiveness  the  Appellant  had  allegedly
    demonstrated in relation to taking the TOEIC test and  that  the  judge
    had failed to take  this  into  account,  and  secondly  the  judge  in
    allowing the appeal on the basis that the Immigration  Rules  were  not
    met made no further findings on human rights.

 3. On 17th August 2017 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Murray noted that the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    stated that one of the reasons for  the  Respondent  not  granting  the
    Appellant's application  was  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had submitted a  valid  English  language  test  certificate.
    Secondly, it was noted that being a Section  82  appeal  the  right  of
    appeal could only be on a human rights basis and it was  arguable  that
    the judge had not considered human rights in her decision.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response lodged on behalf of Mr Farooqi.  It is  on
    that basis that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I note that this is an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  However, for the purpose of continuity  throughout  the  appeal
    process Mr Farooqi  is  referred  to  herein  as  the  Appellant.   The
    Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed  Counsel,  Mr   Hussain.    The
    Respondent appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Mr Harrison seeks to do no more than rely on  the  written  Grounds  of
    Appeal and confirms that he is not asking  me  to  re-hear  the  matter
    today.  He does not wish to pursue  arguments  pursuant  to  the  first
    Ground of Appeal but merely states that the judge has  failed  to  make
    due  and  proper  consideration  of  Article  8.   That,  he   submits,
    constituted a  material  error  of  law.   He  relies  on  the  grounds
    submitting that the appropriate test is not whether it is reasonable to
    expect the Sponsor to go to live in Pakistan where she has  work,  home
    and family, but whether there are insurmountable  obstacles.   Further,
    that the  Tribunal's  determination  amounts  to  a  finding  that  the
    Immigration Rules will never be proportionate in  a  case  involving  a
    British citizen and that  no  weight  has  been  given  to  the  public
    interest and this is not consistent with authority.

 6. Mr Hussain refutes these contentions stating that if I  look  carefully
    at the decision I will find that  all  issues  based  on  human  rights
    arguments have been properly considered  by  the  judge  and  that  the
    decision contains no material errors of law and he asked me to  dismiss
    the appeal.



The Law

 7.   Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. I remind myself that under the  current  Immigration  Rules  issues  of
    human rights are properly codified, albeit  that  there  is  always  an
    argument  that  can  be  raised  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  My starting point is paragraph 27  of  the  judge's
    decision.  Here she has stated:

         "The Grounds  of  Appeal  claim  that  the  decision  breaches  the
         Appellant's rights under Article 8.  However as I have reached  the
         conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  application  comes  within  the
         Immigration Rules I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  consider
         Article 8 further".

    The important word therein is "further".  That indicates that what  the
    judge was considering was having firstly considered Article 8 under the
    Rules and having allowed the appeal, whether she needed  thereon  after
    to go on and  consider  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   She  made  a
    perfectly reasonable conclusion that she did not.

10. Further, it is necessary to look at the judgment.  At paragraph 22  the
    judge gives due consideration as to whether  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of Rule EX.1 of Appendix FM and goes on to  give  due  and
    proper consideration of the  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles.   She
    fully and properly addresses this.  That is in direct contradiction  to
    the submission made within the Grounds of Appeal.

11. Further, the judge has thereafter at paragraphs 24 and 25  gone  on  to
    consider  the  Appellant's  immigration  history  and  maintenance   of
    effective immigration control and the public interest  as  set  out  in
    Section 117A to 117D Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and
    made findings at paragraph 25, including a  finding  on  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with her partner continuing outside the United
    Kingdom, that she was perfectly entitled to.

12. In all the circumstances it is clear that the judge has  given  a  very
    full, detailed and well reasoned analysis of the Appellant's  claim  on
    human rights grounds.  In such circumstances the decision discloses  no
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


