

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13513/2017
                                                           and HU/13519/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2018                            |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                             PRAKASH POKHREL and
                                SUNITA SUBEDI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTON NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Iengar of Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.    The  Appellants  are  Nepalese  and  are  husband   and   wife,   born
    respectively in 1986 and 1989.  They arrived on 24 September 2009,  the
    husband with leave as a Tier 4 (General) student migrant and  the  wife
    as his dependent.  The husband's student leave was extended on a number
    of occasions until 30 May 2012 and the wife's leave  as  his  dependent
    until the same date.  In time, the husband had applied for leave  as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study) migrant which was granted to expire  on  21  August
    2015 and the wife was given leave in line as his dependent.

2.   On 20 August 2015 the husband applied for further leave  to  remain  on
    medical grounds and on the basis of his private and  family  life  with
    his wife.  She applied for further leave as his wife.

The Respondent's Original Decision

3.   On 16 October  2017  the  Respondent  refused  the  applications.   The
    Appellants were not present and settled in the United Kingdom  and  did
    not have any children.  Their son was born on  8  May  2017  some  five
    months before the date of the Respondent's decision but  there  was  no
    evidence in the Tribunal file that the Respondent had been informed  of
    the birth before the date of the decision under appeal.  They  did  not
    meet any of the time critical requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of
    the Immigration Rules and there were no very significant  obstacles  to
    their integration on return to Nepal.

4.   The Respondent did not accept the Appellants'  claim  that  they  could
    not live together in  Nepal  because  their  respective  families  were
    opposed to their marriage.  It was noted they had lived together in the
    Nepal before coming to the United Kingdom.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

5.   By a decision promulgated on 07 September 2018 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal AA Wilson dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

6.   On 11 October 2018 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  PJM  Hollingworth
    granted the Appellants permission to appeal because it was arguable the
    Judge had not  made  an  adequate  analysis  of  the  difficulties  the
    Appellants claimed they would face on return, in particular because  of
    the husband's medical condition.  It was arguable  the  Appellants  had
    established   compelling    circumstances    making    their    removal
    disproportionate and that  the  Judge  should  have  conducted  a  full
    proportionality exercise.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

7.   The Appellants attended the hearing with their son.   I  explained  the
    purpose and procedure of an error of law hearing  and  other  than  the
    husband's confirmation of the Appellant's' address, they took no active
    part in the proceedings.

Submissions for the Appellants

8.   Ms Iengar pointed  out  that  the  Judge  had  incorrectly  stated  the
    husband's nationality. Further, the husband fortunately  did  not  have
    bone cancer referred to in paragraph 1 of the Judge's decision but  the
    transplant referred to in the middle of page 3 of the Judge's  decision
    as successful had in fact not been successful which he had  made  clear
    at paragraph 6 of his statement of 16  July  2018  at  page  3  of  the
    Appellant's' Bundle (AB).  This error of fact will  have  infected  the
    rest of the Judge's assessment of the difficulties the Appellants would
    face on return to Nepal.  The Judge  had  made  neither  an  assessment
    whether the husband would be able to work  nor  a  finding  whether  he
    accepted their claims on this particular issue.

9.   The Judge had made no assessment of  the  difficulties  the  Appellants
    claimed they would face in accessing appropriate care in  Nepal  or  of
    their claim they would be destitute on return referred to in paragraphs
    6 and 8 of the husband's statement: AB p.3.  There had been  no  proper
    assessment by way of reference to the evidence whether  the  Appellants
    would face significant obstacles on return in relation to each  of  the
    Appellants.  The decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

10.   Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  Respondent  had   addressed   the
    availability of medical facilities in Nepal in the Reasons for  Refusal
    Letter.  The husband at paragraph 6 of his statement had accepted  that
    treatment was available in Nepal but noted it was  very  expensive  and
    that the treatment he had received in the United Kingdom had been  very
    good.  The wife had expressed similar views at the end of  paragraph  5
    of her statement at AB  p.7.   The  Appellants  were  not  entitled  to
    succeed on the grounds of the price and quality of medical treatment in
    the United Kingdom.

11.   Further, even  if  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his  finding  that  the
    transplant in the husband's arm had been successful, that  finding  was
    immaterial in the light of the Judge accepting that  treatment  was  in
    any event continuing.

12.  The Judge had adequately dealt with the claim based on the  Appellants'
    private and family life in the United Kingdom in the last paragraph  of
    his decision.  It was notable there was no other  evidence  of  private
    life.  The decision may be brief but it contained no material error  of
    law and should be upheld.

Response for the Appellants

13.  Ms Iengar submitted  that  the  problems  which  the  Appellants  might
    encounter on return to Nepal had been referred to or canvassed  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter and in the Appellants'  evidence  but  there
    was nothing to  indicate  they  had  been  factored  into  the  Judge's
    decision.  He had made material errors  in  identifying  the  husband's
    nationality and his medical complaint.  He  had  not  made  any  proper
    assessment of the proportionality of the decision under appeal  by  way
    of reference to Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  He had not addressed the wife's  position  and  had
    inadequately considered the issue whether  the  Appellants  would  face
    very significant obstacles to re-integration on return to  Nepal.   The
    Appellants had prior to the date of the Respondent's decision  supplied
    medical evidence for the  husband  at  Sections  D,  E  and  F  of  the
    Respondent's bundle which had not been addressed  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.

14.  The wife was an appellant in her own right and the Judge had needed  to
    consider her circumstances even if it  did  not  include  the  evidence
    relating to her Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder which he had  considered
    to be a "new matter".  Nevertheless, her mental state was a  factor  to
    be considered in  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  Appellants'
    return to Nepal.

Further comments for the Respondent

15.  Ms Isherwood commented  that  the  grounds  for  appeal  had  not  been
    amended., What was a "new matter" under s.85  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  had  been  explained  in  Quaidoo  (new
    matter: procedure/process) [2018] UKUT 00087 (IAC).  The Appellants had
    not challenged the Judge's treatment of this in his  decision  and  the
    appeal was an attempt to re-argue the case.

16.  The only medical evidence on the wife was at AB pp.18-19 and was  dated
    8 November 2017 together with an open letter of 3 July 2018  confirming
    her continuing symptoms for which she is in  the  course  of  receiving
    therapy.

17.  Ms Iengar countered that the  wife's  mental  health  was  not  a  "new
    matter" and had needed to  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  the
    obstacles to re-integration.

Consideration and Conclusion

18.  Even if  the  mis-statements  of  the  husband's  nationality  and  his
    medical  complaint  in  paragraph  1  of  the  Judge's   decision   are
    attributable to a combination of the use of a Voice Recognition Program
    and  inadequate  proof-reading,  the  difficulty   remains   that   the
    Appellants will have been given adequate reason to form the  perception
    that their appeals have not been fully and fairly adjudicated.

19.  The grounds for appeal and the grant of permission to  appeal  did  not
    include any challenge to the Judge's findings that  the  birth  of  the
    Appellants' child and the issue of the wife's mental  health  were  new
    matters within the scope of s.85 of the 2002 Act.

20.  For the reasons given in paragraph 18  of  this  decision  I  find  the
    errors in paragraph 1 of the Judge's decision are material  errors,  if
    only because justice will not have been seen  to  be  done.   There  is
    sufficient merit in the submission that these errors will have infected
    the rest of the Judge's consideration of  the  appeals  which  together
    with the paucity  of  the  assessment  whether  there  are  substantial
    obstacles to the Appellants' re-integration on return to  conclude  the
    decision is unsafe and should be set aside.

21.   Having regard to the extent of the fact-finding  exercise  which  will
    have to be conducted and the provisions of s.12(2) Tribunals, Court and
    Enforcement Act 2007 I conclude that the appeals should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh with no findings preserved.

22.  I would mention that the Appellants may wish to take advice  first,  on
    what constitutes a "new matter" within the scope of s.85  of  the  2002
    Act and whether the Respondent consents to any "new matter" being dealt
    with at the hearing afresh and second, on the jurisprudence on  medical
    cases and whether either of the Appellants falls within  the  scope  of
    Articles 3 or 8 of the European Convention: see for instance GS (India)
    v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ.40 and AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ.64.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    is set aside.
    The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   19.
xii. 2018




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



