
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13063/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2020                  |On 9 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                        Brijeshkumar Vipinbhai Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of India, was born  on  6  December  1977.  He
    appealed to First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary  of
    State dated 23 July 2019 refusing his human rights  claim.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 16 January 2020,  dismissed
    the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The Upper Tribunal issued  directions  on  1  July  2020  indicating  a
    provisional view that the matter of error  of  law  may  be  determined
    without a hearing. The appellant has not responded to those  directions
    but the Secretary of State, by a submission  dated  8  July  2020,  has
    stated her view that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  should  be  set
    aside and the appeal returned  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision. The Secretary of State agrees with the
    appellant's grounds of appeal that the judge failed to make findings of
    fact in respect of the evidence of one of the witnesses in the appeal.

 3. In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I direct that  the  appeal  be  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Anthony) for that Tribunal to remake the hearing at
    or following a hearing de novo. None of  the  findings  of  fact  shall
    stand.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The decision will be remade by the First-
    tier Tribunal at or following a hearing de novo.




    Signed   Date 5 September 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


