
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13338/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 July 2020                    |On 29 July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                              DARYLLE DADWA-AS

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Mr S Krushner of Counsel, Paramount Chambers, London
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 13 April 2020  against
         the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Brewer,  promulgated
         on 5 December 2019  following  a  hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  4
         December 2019.

      2. The appellant is a national of the  Philippines  born  on  26  July
         1999. He entered the UK in July 2016 as a Tier 2 dependent child of
         his mother and  subsequently  sought  to  remain  on  human  rights
         grounds.

      3.  The  judge  considered  that  the   appellant   would   not   face
         insurmountable obstacles on return  to  the  Philippines  where  he
         still had a home and  some  family.  He  found  that  although  the
         appellant has established a private life in the UK,  there  was  no
         evidence of any family life between the appellant  and  his  mother
         prior to 2019 and that the Kugathas threshold  had  not  been  met.
         Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

      4. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this was  granted  by
         the First-tier Tribunal.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      5. The matter was to have been listed for a hearing  but  due  to  the
         Covid-19 pandemic and need to take precautions against its  spread,
         this did not happen and directions were sent to the parties  on  12
         May 2020. They were asked to present any objections to  the  matter
         being dealt with on the papers and to make any further  submissions
         on the error of law issue within certain time limits.

      6. The Tribunal has received written submissions  from  both  parties.
         Neither  party  has  raised  any  objection  to  the  matter  being
         considered on the papers but I nevertheless consider  whether  that
         course of action is appropriate.

      7. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      8. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and  to  all  the
         evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. I take the  view
         that a full account of the facts are set out in those papers,  that
         the arguments for and against the appellants have been clearly  set
         out and that the issue to be decided is straightforward and narrow.
         There are no matters arising from the papers  which  would  require
         clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed  for  that
         purpose. I have regard to the  importance  of  the  matter  to  the
         appellant and consider that a speedy determination of  this  matter
         is in his best interests. I am satisfied that I am able  to  fairly
         and justly deal with this matter on the papers before me and I  now
         proceed to do so.

         Submissions

      9. The appellant's written submissions are  dated  19  May  2020.  The
         respondent's submissions are dated 18 June 2020. There has been  no
         response, as far as I am aware, from the  appellant  as  of  today.
         Given the contents of the respondent's reply,  however,  I  do  not
         consider that the appellant is put at any disadvantage due to this.



     10. The appellant's submissions rely on the  grounds  put  forward  for
         permission to appeal and argue that the judge based his  assessment
         on incorrect facts, specifically, a belief that the  appellant  had
         entered the UK as a  visitor.  That  infected  his  proportionality
         assessment and rendered his conclusions unsafe. It is also  pointed
         out that his findings that there was no  family  life  between  the
         appellant and his mother prior to 2019 was  incompatible  with  his
         acceptance that the appellant had entered the UK in  2016  and  had
         lived with his mother since then. The grounds also  note  that  the
         judge repeatedly referred to the appellant as being from Nepal.  It
         is  also  maintained  that  the  judge's  s.55  assessment  of  the
         appellant's stepfather's daughter is flawed as if there  is  family
         life between the appellant, his mother  and  stepfather,  then  the
         child is more likely to be part of that.

     11. The respondent concedes that the judge proceeded  on  an  incorrect
         factual premise and does not oppose the appellant's request to have
         the determination set aside.  The  respondent,  however,  maintains
         that there is  no  error  in  the  judge's  findings  on  the  s.55
         assessment; it is pointed out that the child does not live with the
         appellant.

         Discussion and conclusions

     12. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the  submissions made by both parties. I am satisfied that for  the
         following reasons the judge's determination contains errors of  law
         and that it is unsustainable.

     13. The judge refers to the appellant's return to Nepal at  3  and  20.
         This may be carelessness on the part of the  judge  rather  than  a
         confusion over the facts of  the  case  but  it  does  not  inspire
         confidence in the determination.

     14. The judge, whilst correctly recording that  the  appellant  entered
         the UK in 2016 as a Tier 2 dependent child (at  1),  then  assesses
         the article 8 claim on the basis that the appellant  entered  as  a
         visitor (at 7 and 8). Given the significant difference between  the
         public interest in the removal of a visitor and the removal  of  an
         individual who had  entered  in  a  category  that  could  lead  to
         settlement,  the  proportionality  assessment  has   clearly   been
         compromised by this misrepresentation  of  the  facts.  This  is  a
         material error and rightly conceded as such by the respondent.

     15. The judge further finds that there was no family life  between  the
         appellant and his mother until 2019 when the  evidence  before  him
         was that the appellant entered the UK in 2016 to  join  his  mother
         and has been living with her in the UK. This error further  infects
         his assessment of article 8.

     16. There are no findings as to  the  issues  of  language  ability  or
         financial independence when s.117B is considered.

     17. Given the incorrect factual bases on  which  the  judge's  findings
         were made, I am unable to preserve any of them. It is impossible to
         say whether the judge was simply careless in  his  preparation  and
         assessment of the case or whether he  had  confused  the  appellant
         with another. The appellant has not had  a  fair  hearing  and  the
         decision is set aside in its entirety so that  the  appeal  can  be
         reheard and decided afresh  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

         Decision

     18. The appeal is allowed  in  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal is set aside because it contains errors of  law.  A  fresh
         decision shall be made by another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
         at a date to be arranged.

         Anonymity

     19. No request for an anonymity order has been made at any time  and  I
         see no reason to make one.




         Signed


         R. Keki?



         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 16 July 2020
