
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13756/2015
     HU/13758/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14th February 2018                 |On 8th March 2018                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                 Tara Limbu
                                Pabitra Limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Puar, Counsel, instructed by N.C. Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are twins and are nationals of Nepal.  They appealed  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  against  decisions  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 19th November 2015 to refuse their applications for entry
    clearance to settle in the UK as the adult dependent relatives  of  the
    father, an ex-Gurkha soldier. First-tier Tribunal Judge Moan  dismissed
    the appeals and  the  Appellants  now  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on 4th  December
    2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Sponsor  joined  the  British
    Army in October 1965 and retired in May 1981 with a  full  pension  and
    exemplary service record.  He married in 1968.  After his retirement he
    returned to Nepal to live with his family.  One of his daughters  lives
    in Hong Kong and he has three adult  children  who  remained  in  Nepal
    after the Appellant and his wife came to the UK in June 2012 with their
    two youngest children.

 3. The Appellants applied for entry clearance to join their father in  the
    UK on 13th October 2015.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  those
    applications under Annex K and EC-DR.1.1(d) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Entry Clearance Officer also considered Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and considered that the Appellants  had  not
    demonstrated that they have family life with  their  parents  over  and
    above that between an adult child and parents.

 4. In her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted at paragraph 5 that
    the Presenting Officer confirmed  that  the  Respondent  accepted  that
    there was a historical injustice point  in  the  case  which  would  be
    decisive in the proportionality  assessment  and  identified  that  the
    issue for the appeal was solely whether there was family  life  between
    the Appellants  and  the  UK-based  family.   It  was  noted  that  the
    Respondent accepted that if there was family life  the  decision  would
    not be proportionate because of the  historical  injustice.   Therefore
    the only issue to be determined was whether there was family  life  for
    the purposes of Article 8 between the  Appellants  and  their  parents.
    The judge considered  the  evidence  and  concluded  that  it  was  not
    sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  family  life  existed  between   the
    Appellants and the Sponsor continuously throughout the period from June
    2012 until the date of the decision and dismissed the appeal [39].

    Error of law

 5. The Grounds of Appeal identify seven alleged errors in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  In his submissions Mr Puar began by outlining the
    argument in relation to Ground 7. He submitted that the judge  did  not
    deal with the credibility of the  Appellants  or  the  Sponsor  in  the
    decision but appeared to have rejected their  evidence  without  giving
    reasons.  He referred to the key findings in the decision and suggested
    that the only real finding in relation to the Sponsor's credibility was
    at paragraph 24 but in his submission this was a point in  relation  to
    which the judge drew no adverse conclusions.

 6. Mr Puar highlighted a number of areas where the judge had, in his view,
    fallen into error.  He highlighted paragraph 33 where the  judge  said:
    "However, it is equally likely  that  their  brother  was  working  and
    supporting the family in  Nepal."   In  his  submission  there  was  no
    evidence to support this conclusion and in fact the  witness  statement
    of the Sponsor indicates the contrary. Mr Wilding submitted  that  this
    sentence was an observation rather than a clear finding.   He  accepted
    that if this had been a  clear  finding  and  that  if  the  judge  had
    attached any weight to this assertion she may have  fallen  into  error
    but this comment must be viewed in the  context  of  the  rest  of  the
    decision where the judge is pointing to the gaps  in  the  evidence.  I
    agree that this sentence is an observation rather than  a  finding  and
    does not affect the finding in that paragraph that it is highly  likely
    that the family lived as a single unit before the Sponsor came  to  the
    UK.

 7. Mr Puar submitted that the comment by the judge at  paragraph  38  that
    family life existed at the time of the separation and  "this  would  be
    culturally usual" was not based on any of the evidence before her.  The
    judge went on to find that she could not be satisfied that family  life
    had existed since separation in 2012 but in his view the  judge  failed
    to deal with  the  evidence  in  the  Sponsor's  witness  statement  at
    paragraph 20 where he said: "In Nepal girls do not  normally  work  and
    their father provides for them until they  are  married."  In  my  view
    paragraph 38 would read equally without that  sentence  and  I  do  not
    consider it to be significant  when  looking  at  the  judge's  overall
    findings. In my view the judge has given sufficient reasons for finding
    that family life existed before 2012 and for finding that  it  had  not
    been established that it existed after 2012.

 8. Mr Puar submitted that the judge had failed to have regard  to  all  of
    the evidence in relation to telephone calls  and  contact  between  the
    Appellants and the Sponsor and the family in the UK.  He highlighted  a
    number of matters in relation to this.  At paragraph 16 of the  witness
    statement the Sponsor said:

         "We have had a regular contact with each other.  We speak  to  each
         other by phone as well as through Viber.  My wife and I do not know
         how to use Viber and my daughter Anita uses  her  mobile  phone  to
         chat on Viber when she is free.  Both Anita and Yadav are in  full-
         time education.  As such I ended up  using  the  calling  cards  to
         speak to my children in Nepal.  I have provided some of  the  Viber
         data from my daughter's phone as I understand from Anita  that  she
         deletes the data to free up the phone memory."

 9. Mr Puar submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    Sponsor's witness statement in relation to  this.   He  also  submitted
    that the judge had failed to take into account all of the Viber records
    in the Appellants' bundle.  At paragraph 23 the judge said that  copies
    of mobile phone logs were in the bundle and that the summary  of  calls
    showed a total of eight calls from the first Appellant's phone  to  the
    Sponsor whereas he said that the Sponsor  had  stated  in  his  witness
    statement that the first Appellant deleted her call logs to save memory
    and the judge said that "this was a plausible explanation for why  only
    eight calls were shown on her phone".

10. I accept that the judge appears to have missed the summary at  page  54
    of the Appellants'' bundle, which notes  35  outgoing  calls  from  the
    first Appellant's phone to a number in the UK.  However,  I  accept  Mr
    Wilding's submission that quite a number  of  these  calls  were  where
    there had been no contact showing 0 seconds where it was  obviously  an
    attempt to make contact which was unsuccessful.  In any event, I do not
    consider this a material  error  because  at  paragraph  23  the  judge
    accepted that there was a plausible  explanation  for  why  only  eight
    calls were on the first Appellant's phone.

11. The judge also noted: "No evidence of contact  was  produced  from  the
    Sponsor's phone or that of his daughter in the  UK."   The  judge  came
    back to this at paragraph 34 where she said:

         "The call logs  were  from  the  first  Appellant's  phone  to  the
         Sponsor's and so would not include any  calls  from  the  Sponsor's
         youngest daughter.  The call logs were for a  very  limited  period
         and I was not given an explanation why  information  could  not  be
         obtained from the Sponsor's phone or from  his  younger  daughter's
         phone, which should have been easier to obtain.   I  had  not  been
         provided with any evidence to show the content of contact."

12. It is clear that the judge's concern in relation  to  the  evidence  of
    contact was that it related to the first Appellant's phone and  not  to
    any the UK phones.  This is of particular significance when considering
    the context of the witness statement  where  the  Sponsor  referred  to
    using calling cards to speak to his children in Nepal and  speaking  to
    the children in Nepal through his daughter in  the  UK's  mobile  phone
    (paragraph 16).

13. Mr Puar asserted that the judge failed to have sufficient regard to the
    Sponsor's evidence in the witness statement that he uses the  cards  to
    make  phone  calls  to  his  family  in  Nepal,  however  there  is  no
    documentary evidence in relation to these cards which also  could  have
    easily been obtained.  Therefore the judge was entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions she did at paragraph 34 that there was limited evidence  in
    relation to the claimed ongoing contact.  This was a  finding  open  to
    her on the evidence.  I do not accept that there was a misdirection  on
    the facts as asserted by Mr Puar.

14. Mr Puar submitted that the decision  reveals  an  overreliance  by  the
    judge on the documentary evidence without  dealing  properly  with  the
    Sponsor's witness statement or oral evidence.   However,  I  accept  Mr
    Wilding's  submission  that  the  burden  was  on  the  Appellants   to
    demonstrate that their  relationship  amounts  to  family  life  within
    Article 8 and that, as the relationship is between adult relatives,  it
    was incumbent on the Appellants to demonstrate that their  relationship
    went beyond the normal emotional ties between adults and their parents.

15. The judge needed to consider all of the evidence before her and, in  my
    view, she did so.  In her findings from paragraphs 23 to 38  the  judge
    highlighted the aspects of the evidence which were not,  in  her  view,
    sufficient.  The judge summarised the contents of the Sponsor's witness
    statement and his oral evidence.  It is clear  that  this  was  in  the
    judge's mind in assessing this appeal as a whole.  In  considering  the
    substance of the appeal the judge set out the deficiencies, as she  saw
    it, in the documentary  evidence  and  was  entitled  to  draw  adverse
    conclusions  from  these  deficiencies  regardless   of   the   witness
    statements and oral evidence, particularly in light of  the  fact  that
    the evidence highlighted by the judge was  evidence  which,  the  judge
    noted, would have been easy to obtain.

16. Mr Puar's final submission was that the judge erred  at  paragraphs  38
    and 39 in that it appears that the judge was under the impression  that
    she must be satisfied that family life existed from June 2012 (when the
    Sponsor left Nepal for the UK)  until  the  date  of  the  appeal.   He
    referred to paragraph 39 of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320. He submitted  that
    in this case the judge was looking at  whether  family  life  has  been
    established on a continuous basis up until the date of the hearing.  Mr
    Wilding submitted that the judge was dealing with the case put  by  the
    Appellants which was that the Appellants  had  been  dependent  on  the
    Sponsor before and after his departure in June 2012.   He  pointed  out
    that it was not put to the judge that the  Appellants'  dependency  had
    ceased and that was re-established later but  it  was  the  Appellants'
    case that family life continued on the same basis up to the date of the
    hearing.  In his submission at paragraphs  38  and  39  the  judge  was
    dealing with the issues before her.

    It seems to me that the issue to be determined by the  judge  here  was
    whether there is family life between the  Appellants  and  the  Sponsor
    within Article 8. This  is  exactly  what  the  judge  did.  The  judge
    correctly identified the relevant case law and noted the guidance given
    in the case of Rai at paragraph 39 [18].  There Lord  Justice  Lindblom
    identified the real issue under Article 8(1), which was whether

         "as a matter of fact, the Appellant had demonstrated that he had  a
         family life with his parents, which had  existed  at  the  time  of
         their departure to settle in the United  Kingdom  and  had  endured
         beyond it, notwithstanding their having left Nepal when they did".

17. At paragraph 38 the judge noted that  it  was  for  the  Appellants  to
    satisfy her that family life existed at the time of separation and post-
    separation.  While the judge accepted that family life existed  at  the
    time of separation she could not be  satisfied  that  family  life  had
    existed since  separation.   The  judge  was  not  satisfied  with  the
    evidence as to financial support or as to frequency of contact  between
    the Sponsor and the Appellants. Accordingly the judge correctly engaged
    with the issue to be determined and came to a conclusion open to her at
    paragraph 39.

18. In conclusion, it is clear to  me  that  the  judge  engaged  with  the
    evidence before her to determine the  only  issue,  which  was  whether
    family life within Article 8 existed between the adult  Appellants  and
    their father and in particular whether, as highlighted in the  case  of
    Rai, the family life  which  existed  at  the  time  of  the  Sponsor's
    departure to settle in the UK endured beyond that.  The judge concluded
    on the basis of the evidence before her that it had not.   This  was  a
    conclusion open to her on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not disclose  a  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

