
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13935/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2019                  |On 25 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                SADRUL ISLAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, Counsel instructed by PGA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing is appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appeal was brought on human rights grounds.  It is the appellant's case
    that there was no public interest in his removal because  he  satisfied
    the Rules and was entitled to remain and in any event his removal would
    involve a disproportionate interference with  the  private  and  family
    life of him and more particularly his wife.

 2. The appellant has been identified as an IELTS cheat.  It  was  conceded
    in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  plainly  correctly,  that  the  evidence
    established a prima facie case  against  him.   However,  I  am  deeply
    concerned about the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal for  going
    on to be satisfied that the appellant was indeed a cheat.

 3. It was a feature of the Home Office's case  that  there  was  something
    suspicious or unsatisfactory about the appellant going to Portsmouth to
    take his language test when he was living in Stratford in East  London.
    The judge said "common sense tells me there must be centres  in  London
    more easily accessible and offering the test around that  time".  I  do
    not follow that all.  I have absolutely no idea how many  test  centres
    were available or how long an applicant had to wait for a test. If  the
    Secretary of State wanted to make anything of this point the  Secretary
    of State should have laid  the  necessary  evidential  foundation.   It
    cannot be a matter of judicial notice that test centres  are  available
    nationally or that waiting lists were uniformly short if indeed that is
    right.  I do not know if it is.

 4. Further, the appellant is said to have taken his test in February  2012
    yet at paragraph 37 of the decision and reasons the  judge  noted  that
    the appellant was unsure about whether a receipt had been obtained  and
    concluded "his answer that he is not sure  whether  he  got  a  receipt
    leads me to doubt his credibility". The judge accepted that any receipt
    may no longer be available.  I do  not  understand  why  it  should  be
    assumed that some seven years after the test was taken (it was  clearly
    taken by somebody) the appellant should  remember  whether  or  not  he
    received any receipt.

 5. The judge also seems to have taken it against  the  appellant  that  he
    made unsuccessful applications to remain as the  carer  of  his  uncle.
    Clearly if he had told lies in an earlier application or appeal hearing
    that could have been relevant  but  the  mere  fact  that  he  made  an
    application shows nothing more than a desire to remain lawfully in  the
    United Kingdom but finding that his circumstances do  not  satisfy  the
    rules.  It is  not  a  sign  of  dishonesty  to  make  an  unsuccessful
    application and to have an appeal dismissed.

 6. There is reference to the appellant having a crib sheet at his marriage
    interview.  On the face of it this is a  proper  reason  to  doubt  his
    integrity.  However, I note from the record that  at  the  second  page
    near the bottom the appellant was asked "why do you have a  crib  sheet
    in your [possession]?" to which the appellant is said to  have  replied
    "because Emma has a problem remembering things".

 7. There was no supplementary question and the answer on the face of it is
    quite bizarre.  The appellant was not interviewed with his  wife.   The
    crib sheet was never produced.  It is hard to see  what  the  appellant
    actually meant or what precisely was put to him.  It seems to  me  this
    is a weak reason to doubt his credibility.  Further, I note nothing  in
    the interview record to suggest the crib sheet was in any way  secreted
    and then discovered and if it was a document that would be of most  use
    to his wife there is no obvious reason why it should have been secreted
    by the appellant.  There are too many open and unresolved  issues  here
    for it to be a good reason to undermine his integrity. It may be that a
    good point is lurking but it has not been made.

 8. Further, there was an  unequivocal  finding  by  the  judge  that  "the
    appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship" (paragraph  48).
    The judge then went on to dismiss the appeal on human  rights  grounds.
    His approach there is, with respect, hard  to  understand.   The  judge
    made an unequivocal finding that "there are insurmountable obstacles to
    the appellant's wife living in Bangladesh".  The judge then went on  to
    be satisfied that family life cannot continue in Bangladesh.   He  then
    said "the central issue is whether the appellant should be required  to
    return to Bangladesh to make an application for entry clearance".   The
    judge appeared to find it satisfied that  the  appellant's  application
    was likely to succeed because the financial requirements  were  met  by
    reason of the appellant's partner being in receipt of  Disabled  Living
    Allowance.  That may be right.  I do not know.   However,  having  made
    that finding the judge went on to find that his departure  would  be  a
    proportionate interference because he could  make  an  application  for
    entry clearance and return.  It is not at all clear to me that that has
    been established.  On the judge's own findings this man is a cheat  and
    that will impact on the appellant's suitability.   Further,  the  judge
    was aware of that, in a way,  because  he  referred  to  the  appellant
    having "abused the immigration system; he has overstayed  and  obtained
    leave by deception and cheating in his ETS test".

 9. I do not understand why the judge dismissed the appeal or  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant would satisfy the requirements of the Rules
    or why he was satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  in  fact  dishonest
    although that was clearly the judge's conclusion.

10.  I  reflected   carefully   on   Mr   Tufan's   measured   submissions.
    Nevertheless, I find that the reasons given for finding  the  appellant
    to be dishonest are inadequate or, perhaps more  accurately,  explained
    inadequately.  This is not a case where the answer is  obvious.   There
    has to be a hearing of evidence and that is best done in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  I have decided that the only proper response here is to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and all its findings.  It
    is not pursued logically or clearly.  The appeal will be heard again in
    the First-tier Tribunal where all findings must be made again.

    Notice of Decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I allow  the  appeal  and  direct
    that the appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 October 2019                |

