
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13667/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th March 2018                    |On 15th March 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                   ALI [H]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by Maliks and
Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1985. He  arrived  in
       the UK in 2006 with leave to enter as a student. He then varied  his
       leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen called  Ms  Hobbs
       which was granted from 2009 to 2011. Prior to the end of this period
       of leave and following the breakdown of  his  relationship  with  Ms
       Hobbs he applied for leave to remain on the basis of his  Article  8
       ECHR rights. His application was refused and his leave as  a  spouse
       curtailed. His appeal against  this  decision  was  dismissed  in  a
       decision promulgated on 28th June  2011.  He  became  appeal  rights
       exhausted on 8th July 2011.

    2. In July 2011 the appellant met Ms  Najima  [H],  a  British  citizen
       residing and working in the UK, and they were married in an  Islamic
       ceremony in February 2012, and then a legally binding civil ceremony
       in  March  2013.  In  September  2013  the  appellant  submitted  an
       application for leave to remain based on his private life ties  with
       the UK and his family life relationship with his partner Ms [H].  He
       was refused without a right of  appeal  on  12th  October  2013.  He
       brought judicial review proceedings against this decision which were
       concluded when he was refused permission for judicial review  at  an
       oral hearing on 4th December 2014.

    3. On 25th August 2015 he was informed of his  liability  to  detention
       and removal by  the  respondent.  In  response  his  solicitors  put
       forward a statement of additional grounds in  September  2015  which
       was treated by the respondent as a human rights claim. In March 2016
       the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  was  certified  as   clearly
       unfounded.  The  appellant's  solicitors  then  sent  a   pre-action
       protocol letter threatening  judicial  review  action  against  this
       certification,  and  as  a  result  the  respondent   withdrew   the
       certification and decided to treat the further representations as  a
       fresh claim with a statutory right of appeal.

    4. The refusal of this fresh claim is set  out  in  a  decision  letter
       dated 17th May 2016. The appellant and his wife had a baby  daughter
       born in the UK in January 2017 who is a British  citizen  by  birth.
       The appellant's appeal against the decision was dismissed  on  human
       rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon in a determination
       promulgated on the 2nd March 2017.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       EM Simpson in a decision dated 5th October 2017 on the basis that it
       was arguable that the First-tier judge  had  erred  in  law  in  the
       consideration of  s.117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 (henceforth the 2002 Act).

    6. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law & Remaking

    7. The appellant argues in summary as follows.

    8. Firstly, it is argued, there was a failure to apply paragraph EX1(a)
       of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. This is a ground  which  is
       described  by  Judge  Simpson  in  the  grant   of   permission   as
       misconceived but permission is not explicitly refused on this basis.
       It is argued that it is irrelevant that the child was  not  born  at
       the date of application as this was not part of the requirements  of
       the EX1 paragraph, and further it is  argued  that  the  appellant's
       counsel wrongly appeared to accept this at the hearing.

    9. Secondly it said that there was a wrong legal approach to  s.117B(6)
       of the 2002 Act as it was found that despite this provision that the
       child was of a "young age" and  thus  her  best  interests  did  not
       outweigh the public interest in removal.  It is argued  that  having
       found that she was a British citizen and that the  appellant  had  a
       genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her that the  only
       question was whether it was reasonable to expect her  to  leave  the
       UK. It could not be found to be reasonable as the  respondent's  own
       guidance stated, at that time, that it was not reasonable to  expect
       a British child to leave the UK absent issues of  criminality  which
       are  clearly  not  present   here,   see   Immigration   Directorate
       Instructions Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family  Life
       (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10  Year  Routes  (August
       2015). If there was no public interest in  the  appellant's  removal
       then it was a material error of law not to find that his removal was
       a disproportionate interference with Article 8 ECHR,  and  therefore
       not to have allowed the appeal.

   10. Mr Duffy accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  but
       for slightly different reasons. He argued  that  there  had  been  a
       failure to deal with the issue of a new matter, i.e.  the  birth  of
       the child, properly and in accordance with s.85 of the 2002 Act, and
       then by dealing with the appeal under  s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act
       absent consent to the new matter being raised  as  he  believed  the
       refusal to look at paragraph EX1 of the Immigration Rules  indicated
       that perhaps there had been no consent to this matter being included
       in the appeal.

   11. I indicated that I found that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in
       law and would set out my reasons in writing,  as  I  have  now  done
       below. I invited the parties to make submissions on remaking. It was
       agreed that there was no  need  for  any  further  evidence  as  the
       factual matrix was not in dispute  and  had  no  altered  since  the
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

   12. Mr Duffy gave consent on behalf of the Secretary of  State  for  the
       new matter of the birth of the appellant's British citizen child  to
       be considered as part of this appeal.

   13. Mr Duffy then submitted that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed  as
       neither s.117B(6) of the  2002  Act  nor  the  materially  identical
       provision at EX 1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  had  any
       application to the facts of this case as there was no  "expectation"
       that the appellant's British citizen baby would leave the UK  as  on
       the facts of this case she would and could remain in the UK with her
       mother and primary carer who is also a  British  citizen.  The  word
       "expect" in s.117B(6)(b) had important independent meaning, and this
       was not fulfilled and the provisions therefore not  engaged  on  the
       appellant's facts.

   14. Mr Duffy argued that it was still necessary to do a  proportionality
       exercise to see if the requirement  that  the  appellant  return  to
       Pakistan to get entry clearance was Article 8 ECHR compliant.  There
       could be facts, as per Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40  where  this
       was not the  case.  In  this  case  it  was  proportionate  for  the
       appellant to go back to Pakistan and obtain entry clearance  without
       his daughter. There was no evidence of  any  long  delays  or  other
       onerous obstacles if this approach were taken. The appellant was not
       a refugee as in  Chikwamba.  This  position  was  reflected  in  the
       respondent's new policy, Family Migration Appendix FM  Section  1.0b
       Family Life (as a Partner or  Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10  Year
       Routes dated 22nd February 2018.

   15. Ms Akinbolu accepted that the appeal could no longer succeed on  the
       basis of the respondent's policy as this had now  been  changed,  so
       arguments based on SF and others (Guidance, post-2014  Act)  Albania
       [2017] UKUT 00120(IAC) were not relied upon. However she argued that
       the meaning contended for by the respondent  for  s.117B(6)  of  the
       2002 Act and paragraph EX 1(a) of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
       Rules was not correct. It did  not  reflect  the  wording  of  those
       provision or the question that the Upper  Tribunal  had  to  answer,
       which had been determined in cases such  as  Treebhawon  and  Others
       (NIAA 2002 Part 5A -  compelling  circumstances  test)  [2017]  UKUT
       00013 (IAC) and by the Court of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
       [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

   16. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I would allow the  appeal
       but that I would set my reasons out in writing.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    1. I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in the two ways.  Firstly,
       by failing to deal with the issue of a new matter given the birth of
       the appellant's child lawfully in accordance with Mahmud (s.85  NIAA
       2002 - "new matters") [2017] UKUT 488.

    2. Secondly, and if consent had been dealt with  and  granted,  I  find
       that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  the  treatment  of
       s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act at paragraph 27 of  the  decision.  It  is
       accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant and his  wife
       are in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  that  there  is  a
       child of the marriage, see paragraph  18  of  the  decision.  It  is
       clearly accepted that the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       parental relationship with his British citizen child. The  child  is
       unarguably a qualifying child. The only question that then arises is
       whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

    3. At the  time  of  the  decision  the  respondent's  applicable  2015
       guidance was clear that it would not have been reasonable to  expect
       this child to leave given the appellant's  lack  of  criminality  or
       other seriously prejudicial behaviour. Further the decision  of  the
       Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  finds  that
       removal of a qualifying child requires very  powerful  reasons,  see
       paragraph 49 of that decision. I find that this legal framework  has
       not been  acknowledged  and  used  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
       determining the appeal. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal  are
       that the appellant plays an active role in  his  child's  upbringing
       and that it is in the best interests of the child to live with  both
       parents, and that the appellant's spouse and  mother  of  his  child
       will not accompany him to Pakistan.

    4. In these circumstances I find that the  decision  errs  in  law  for
       failure to apply the correct legal frame work; a failure to consider
       material matters; and by considering immaterial matters such as  the
       outcome of a future entry clearance application (clearly anticipated
       to be positive by the First-tier Tribunal)  by  the  appellant,  see
       paragraph 27 of the decision.

Conclusions - Remaking

    5. The Court of Appeal has consider the meaning  of  s.117B(6)  of  the
       2002 Act in the case of MA (Pakistan) and  the  fourth  element  (as
       identified at paragraph 19 of the judgement), namely, "whether it is
       unreasonable to expect the child to leave" in  considerable  detail.
       At no point in this discussion is this  considered  to  be  anything
       other than a  hypothetical  question  focusing  on  the  concept  of
       reasonableness, which in turn was to be determined  by  the  factors
       relating to the child's best interests and public  interest  matters
       such as the criminal and immigration behaviour of the parents. At no
       point is the provision said to have  no  application  if  the  child
       would not or could not in fact leave.

    6. The interpretation argued for  by  Mr  Duffy  and  set  out  in  the
       respondent's new policy  is  not  one  supported  by  an  authority.
       Further it is not one which fits with the  natural  meaning  of  the
       words in the statutory provision, which is not drafted only to apply
       to children who can be forced or are expected to leave, but is  said
       to apply to qualifying children  who  in  turn  are  either  British
       citizens (all of whom naturally cannot be required to leave) and  to
       those who have lived in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  seven
       years. It would also put children without leave, who are  "expected"
       to leave in a better position, as they  would  be  able  to  utilise
       s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act to keep both of their parents in  the  UK,
       than those with British citizenship and with a  British  or  settled
       parent  able  to  care  for  them,  which  seems  a  most   unlikely
       parliamentary intention.

    7. I find, for these  reasons,  that  s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  is
       therefore available to the appellant and, as argued by Ms  Akinbola,
       that the exercise that I must perform  is  to  consider  whether  it
       would be unreasonable to expect the appellant's  daughter  to  leave
       the  UK  in  light  of  her  best  interests,  citizenship  and  the
       appellant's immigration history, following the test as laid  out  in
       MA (Pakistan). I turn to the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal:
       the appellant plays an active role in his child's upbringing but her
       mother is her primary carer as a 14 month baby; the  best  interests
       of the child are to live with both parents; and that the appellant's
       spouse and mother of his child will not accompany him to Pakistan. I
       give  appropriate  weight  to  the  appellant's  daughter's  British
       citizenship and her right to live in the UK. I find  that  it  would
       not be in her best interests to leave the UK.

    8. I now  balance  against  this  the  public  interest  factors.  This
       appellant has no criminal record. He has  overstayed  his  leave  to
       remain but entered lawfully with entry clearance, and has not evaded
       immigration control or used false identities. He has not always made
       successful application but there is no evidence before  me  that  he
       has made dishonest ones. His current application is one based on the
       accepted facts of a genuine marriage. Whilst giving  weight  to  the
       public interest in immigration control  I  do  not  find  he  has  a
       seriously detrimental immigration history.

    9. Taking all the material facts into  consideration  I  find  that  it
       would be unreasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  British  citizen
       daughter to leave the UK and as a result I find that he is  entitled
       to the benefit of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. It follows that I  find
       that there is no public  interest  in  his  removal,  and  that  his
       removal would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR  as  a  disproportionate
       interference with his right to respect to family life.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  human  rights
      grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  14th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination.

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award. I have  had
    regard  to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards   in
    Immigration Appeals. I have decided to make no fee  award  because  the
    appeal was allowed  on  the  basis  of  evidence  not  put  before  the
    respondent at the time of decision.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley                                    Date:  14th  March
2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






