
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13585/2019 (P)

                                                           HU/13587/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 August 2020                   |On 11 August 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                SYED ALI NAQI

                                 UMME RUBAB

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Mr M A Khan, Solicitor, Loxford Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellants by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 16
         April 2020 against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Abebrese, promulgated on 4 February 2020  following  a  hearing  at
         Taylor House on 6 January 2020.

      2. The appellants are a married couple and nationals of Pakistan  born
         on 20 August 1983 and 13 November  1992  respectively.   The  first
         appellant entered the UK on 18 September 2010 with entry  clearance
         as a student valid until 16 April 2012. On 5 April 2012  the  first
         appellant submitted an application for Tier 1 post study  leave  to
         remain however this was refused with an in country right of  appeal
         on 31 December 2012.  He  succeeded  in  his  appeal  against  this
         decision and obtained further leave on that  basis  until  6  April
         2019. On 5 April 2019, he submitted  the  present  application  for
         leave to remain outside the rules. Meanwhile, he  second  appellant
         entered on 13 December 2018 with entry clearance  as  a  dependant.
         She remained a dependant in the April 2019 application.

      3. When the appeal came before the judge in January at  Taylor  House,
         the  appellants'  representative  made  an   application   for   an
         adjournment on the grounds that  the  first  appellant  had  had  a
         medical emergency that morning and had been taken to  the  Accident
         and Emergency Department of Newham  University  Hospital.  Evidence
         from the hospital was provided to show that he was  being  assessed
         and was unable to attend the appeal hearing. The  second  appellant
         was said to have accompanied him to the hospital.

      4. The judge was not satisfied as to why the second appellant had been
         unable to attend the hearing. He did  not  accept  the  explanation
         that she had accompanied her husband because he had  not  yet  been
         diagnosed and because the hearing was important. He considered that
         the evidence from the hospital did  not  indicate  that  the  first
         appellant would be unavailable to attend the hearing if  time  were
         allowed for "her" to travel to the Tribunal. He, therefore, refused
         the application for an  adjournment  and  when  the  representative
         withdrew  from  the  proceedings  he  continued  on  the  basis  of
         submissions from the  respondent  and  subsequently  dismissed  the
         appeal.

      5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Osborne on the  grounds  that  the  judge  had  arguably  erred  in
         refusing the adjournment in respect of both appellants, that it was
         arguable that the attendance at hospital was an emergency and  that
         it was  reasonable  for  the  second  appellant  to  accompany  her
         husband.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      6. The matter would normally have been listed for a hearing  at  Field
         House but due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take precautions
         against its spread, this did not happen and directions were sent to
         the parties on 26  June  2020.  They  were  asked  to  present  any
         objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to make
         any further submissions on the error of law  issue  within  certain
         time limits.

      7. The Tribunal has received written submissions  from  both  parties.
         Both are content for the matter to be decided on the papers. I  now
         consider the matter.

      8. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      9. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and  to  all  the
         evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. I take the  view
         that a full account of the facts are set out in  those  papers  and
         that the issue to be decided is a narrow one. I have regard to  the
         importance of the matter to the  appellants  and  consider  that  a
         speedy determination of this matter is in their best  interests.  I
         am satisfied that I am able to fairly and  justly  deal  with  this
         matter on the papers before me and I now proceed to do so.

         Submissions

     10. The respondent's written submissions are dated 3 July 2020 and  the
         appellants'  submissions  are  undated  but  were  emailed  to  the
         Tribunal on 17 July 2020.

         Discussion and conclusions

     11. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the  submissions made by both parties. I am satisfied that for  the
         following reasons the judge's determination contains errors of  law
         and that his decision is in all respects unsustainable.

     12. The respondent fairly concedes in written  submissions  that  given
         the evidence from the hospital,  it  was  clearly  unfair  for  the
         hearing  to  have  proceeded  in  the  absence  of  the  appellants
         irrespective of whether the second appellant could have attended. A
         remittal of the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal is suggested.

     13. In brief reply, the appellants'  representatives  agree  with  that
         suggestion.

     14. I agree that a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is the only  way
         forward. Whatever the strengths or weaknesses of the  appeals,  the
         appellants were entitled to a fair hearing and they  have  not  had
         one. There was evidence from  Newham  Hospital  to  show  that  the
         appellant had arrived there at 08.41 and was awaiting diagnosis. It
         was reasonable that his wife had accompanied him and that she could
         not, therefore, attend the hearing. In considering the  adjournment
         application, the judge failed entirely to consider whether  it  was
         fair to proceed in the absence of the first appellant, whatever  he
         may have thought of the second appellant's desire to stay with  her
         husband until the problem had  been  diagnosed  and  resolved.  His
         reference to the first  appellant  travelling  to  the  hearing  is
         probably an error because he then refers to that individual in  the
         female gender (at 7). If  it  was  meant  to  refer  to  the  first
         appellant,   then   the   judge's   reasoning    is    even    more
         incomprehensible.

     15. I would note, particularly in view of the respondent's  concession,
         that it was unfortunate that the Presenting Officer at the  hearing
         did not take a similar approach to that now taken by the  Secretary
         of State. Had he done so and had he  not  opposed  the  adjournment
         request, there may well have been no need for these proceedings and
         no delay in the determination of the appeals.

     16. I would further note that the judge's determination does  not  show
         that adequate scrutiny was given to its  preparation.  It  contains
         numerous typographical errors and appears to have  been  considered
         with reference to a return to Bangladesh instead  of  Pakistan  (at
         11).

         Decision

     17. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  in  its
         entirety. The appeals are remitted to another judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing and for a decision to be made  on
         all issues.

         Anonymity

     18. There has been no request for an anonymity order at any stage and I
         see no reason to make one.

         Directions

     19. Directions for the hearing shall be provided in due course  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed


    R. Keki?


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 3 August 2020
