
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13840/2015
                                                               HU/13844/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 18th of December 2017       |27th February 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          AMTUL [K] - 1st Appellant
                        MOHAMMAD [K] - 2nd Appellant
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellants did not appear and were not
represented
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of India  and  are  wife  and  husband
    respectively. The first Appellant was born on [ ] March  1981  and  the
    second Appellant was born on [ ] August 1981.  They  appeal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mailer sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 14th of February 2017 who dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals
    against decisions of the Respondent dated 2nd of December  2015.  Those
    decisions were to refuse their applications for further leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom made on 8th of April 2015 pursuant to Article  8.
    The applications were based on the medical condition of their  child  A
    born on 14th of  December  2014.  The  first  Appellant  was  the  lead
    Appellant and I will therefore refer to her as the Appellant.  The  2nd
    Appellant was dependent upon her appeal.

The Appellants' Case

 2. The Appellants married on 12th of January 2007 and their first child  Y
    was born on [ ] September 2007 in India. The  Appellant  first  entered
    the United Kingdom as a student on 17th of February 2011 with leave  to
    remain until 29th of February 2012. She was granted a further period to
    remain as a student until 10th of April 2015. The 2nd Appellant entered
    the United Kingdom at the same time as her dependent and  was  included
    in her subsequent application. Their son Y entered the  United  Kingdom
    as the Appellant's dependent with leave until 10th of April  2015.  The
    Appellant gave birth to 2 daughters the first Al on [ ] September  2013
    and subsequently A on [ ] December 2014.

 3. The Appellant produced a letter from a consultant  paediatrician  dated
    3rd of July 2015 which diagnosed that A had a bifid renal pelvis  which
    drained into a single ureter which was dilated. Whilst A's kidneys were
    being investigated she had been maintained on a prophylactic antibiotic
    to avoid her developing a urinary infection.  This  was  not  a  kidney
    function problem as such but  rather  a  potential  structural  problem
    which was unlikely to have any  long-term  consequences  for  her.  She
    required monitoring by ultrasound scans to assess the drainage of urine
    from her right kidney. She was unlikely to need any other  surgical  or
    medical  intervention.  If  she  were  to  remain  in  United   Kingdom
    arrangements would be made  for  her  to  have  ultrasound  and  clinic
    appointments every 6 months.

 4. The Appellant also argued that the 2nd  Appellant  had  borrowed  money
    from moneylenders to pay for his mother's treatment and the amount  was
    increasing day by day because of interest. If  required  to  return  to
    India any money that her husband would make would be taken away by  the
    lenders.

 5. The Respondent refused the application. Although it was  accepted  that
    the first and 2nd Appellants had a genuine and subsisting relationship,
    as neither were British citizens they could not meet  the  requirements
    of section EX. 1(B) of Appendix  FM.  Neither  would  face  significant
    obstacles to their integration into India.  They  had  spent  29  years
    living in India before arriving in  this  country.  Y  was  5  when  he
    entered the United Kingdom and 7 years old at the date of  application.
    He was not a qualifying child. A had been born in  the  United  Kingdom
    but there was adequate medical treatment available for  her  in  India.
    Whilst the drug  she  was  receiving  in  this  country  had  not  been
    confirmed  as  being  available  in  India   there   were   alternative
    prophylactic antibiotics available there.

 6. The children would be returning to India with their parents  who  would
    be able to support them whilst they got used to  living  there.  Y  was
    currently enrolled in education in  United  Kingdom  but  there  was  a
    functioning education system in India which the children would be  able
    to enter. They would be returned to India as a family unit.

The Decision at First Instance

 7. The Judge noted that apart from medical documents produced up to 3rd of
    July 2015 no further evidence relating to A's current medical condition
    had been produced. This was notwithstanding the direction sent  to  the
    Appellant's  solicitors,  who  remained  on  the  record,  on  27th  of
    September 2016. No evidence  had  been  produced  to  substantiate  the
    allegations made by the Appellant that money was owed  to  moneylenders
    or that there was  a  possibility  of  such  moneylenders  harming  the
    family.

 8. The Judge considered the best interests of  the  children  noting  that
    there was no evidence of special needs for either Y or Al. As at 3rd of
    July 2015 A remained  well  and  was  not  suffering  from  any  kidney
    function problem but from a potential structural problem which was very
    unlikely to have any long-term consequences. The best interests of  the
    children were for them to continue  to  enjoy  both  their  family  and
    private lives as part of the family unit wherever they  may  be.  There
    would be adequate medical treatment available for  A  in  India  should
    such treatment be necessary.

 9. Both  parents  were  capable  of  being  employed,  the  Appellant  had
    completed a postgraduate diploma  course  in  United  Kingdom  and  was
    enrolled on an ACC a course for which she was granted further leave  to
    remain. She was unable  to  complete  the  course  on  account  of  her
    pregnancy. There was no assertion that either she or the 2nd  Appellant
    would be unable to obtain employment in India upon return. There was no
    evidence that the Appellant  had  no  other  family  members  including
    extended family members who would be unwilling or unable to assist  the
    family upon return.

10. The Judge's overall conclusion at [78] was that there would not be very
    significant obstacles to the Appellants' integration into India. Whilst
    removal might involve a degree of disruption to their private lives  it
    was proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  effective
    immigration control. There were no compelling circumstances in the case
    warranting a grant of leave outside the rules. He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

11. The Appellants appealed against this decision arguing that a letter had
    been sent to the Tribunal on 13th of February 2017 requesting that  the
    appeal should be considered on the papers as the Appellants  wished  to
    make submissions by furnishing arguments as well as  evidence,  on  the
    papers. The Appellants had not been provided with a date to submit  the
    documents and their request was ignored  as  the  decision  was  silent
    about  the  fact  that  a  request  had  been   made   by   new   legal
    representatives that the appeal should be considered on the papers. The
    Appellant was expecting to receive a response in relation to the letter
    however to his surprise he received a decision and reasons dated 6th of
    March 2017 refusing the appeal. The Judge should  have  considered  the
    request for the appeal to be heard on the papers.

12. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison on 20th  of  September
    2017. She found an arguable error of law that due to an  administrative
    error the Judge did not receive the written notification, sent  by  fax
    on the morning before the hearing, requesting that the Appellants would
    like their appeals to be considered on the papers with a view to making
    submissions. It was arguable that  had  the  Appellant's  request  been
    accepted and had they been given time  it  may  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome or to the fairness of the proceedings.

13. The Respondent replied to this grant of permission by letter dated 28th
    of September 2017. The burden was on the Appellants to show  that  they
    had taken the necessary steps for the purpose of the hearing.  A  last-
    minute fax did not justify the Appellant's lack of  attendance  as  the
    appeal was listed as an oral hearing. Simply relying upon a request  to
    have the hearing on  papers  was  not  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
    request would have been accepted. In any event the Judge had paid close
    attention to the evidence before the Tribunal and  had  given  detailed
    reasons. A different decision could not have been reached by the Judge.

The Hearing Before Me

14. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter was listed  before
    me for hearing on Monday, 18th of December 2017 at 10 AM and notice was
    sent out to  both  the  Appellant  and  her  solicitors  Lexmark  Legal
    Associates  ("Lexmark")  on  13th  of  November  2017.  The   Appellant
    responded to this grant of permission by letter dated 13th of  December
    2017 which stated: "I would like my appeal to be heard on the papers. I
    request the court to contact me on my above-mentioned  address.  Please
    contact me in case of any further queries".

15. When the matter was called on  for  hearing  before  me  there  was  no
    attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant. Although the Appellant had
    requested the appeal to be heard on the papers,  the  matter  had  been
    listed for hearing and in those circumstances it was not open  for  the
    Appellant to insist that the matter should be dealt with on the papers.
    I therefore heard brief submissions from the Presenting Officer  before
    taking the papers away to  prepare  my  decision.  She  relied  on  the
    Respondent's rule 24 response arguing that the Judge had looked at  the
    evidence. The grounds did not support what had happened in the case.





Findings

16. Notice of the hearing of the appeal before the First-tier was  sent  by
    letter to the Appellants and their then solicitors Wimbledon solicitors
    by letter dated 27th of September 2016. This letter indicated that  the
    appeal would be heard  on  Tuesday  the  14th  of  February  2017.  The
    Appellants were thus given almost 5 months' notice to prepare  for  the
    hearing. On 13th of February  2017  the  day  before  the  hearing  was
    scheduled to take place new solicitors Lexmark wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    asking for the appeal to  be  considered  on  the  papers.  The  letter
    written by Lexmark is on the court file. Nowhere does it state that the
    Appellants wish to have more time to submit further  evidence  or  make
    submissions.

17. It does not appear that this letter reached the  Judge  who  heard  the
    matter on 14th of February 2017 but it is difficult  to  see  why  that
    makes any difference. The letter of 13th of February from  Lexmark  did
    not contain an application for an  adjournment.  Even  if  it  had  the
    Appellants and their solicitors should not have proceeded on the  basis
    that any application for an adjournment would automatically be granted.
    If they had not heard that their case had been adjourned it  was  their
    duty to prosecute the case by attending on the day of the  hearing.  If
    they did not wish to attend the  hearing  as  the  letter  of  13th  of
    February 2017 appears to indicate, that was a matter for them but as  I
    have previously said, they cannot insist that the case be dealt with on
    the papers. That is a decision to be taken  by  the  Tribunal  and  the
    views of the Respondent may have to be canvassed.

18. It is not entirely clear why permission to appeal was granted  in  this
    case since the grounds of appeal do not  accurately  reflect  what  was
    sent to the Tribunal the day before the hearing. Even if the grounds of
    appeal were correct and there had been an application  for  more  time,
    there is no indication of what  further  evidence  or  submissions  the
    Appellants would have produced to the Tribunal. It is the case that the
    medical evidence had not been brought up-to-date  but  appeared  to  be
    almost 2 years old at the date of the First-tier hearing. However  that
    point does not assist the Appellants because  there  is  no  indication
    that A's medical condition has changed and that fresh medical  evidence
    would make a difference in this case.

19. It is significant that the Appellants' present representatives  Lexmark
    did not attend the hearing before me but instead  there  was  a  letter
    from the Appellant in person asking for her case to  be  considered  on
    the papers. There was no further evidence. There  was  no  request  for
    further time just as there had been no request for further time back in
    February  2017.  In  any  event  there  was  no  need  for  a   further
    adjournment. Judge Mailer gave a full determination dealing with all of
    the evidence which was before the Judge. There was no good  reason  for
    the absence of the Appellants and their representatives at the  hearing
    at first instance and nothing to  indicate  that  the  Judge  made  any
    material errors of law in his determination. The determination is fully
    reasoned and is based on the evidence presented to the Judge. The  only
    argument I have seen against the determination is that attached to  the
    grounds of onward appeal. I reject those grounds for the reasons  which
    I  have  set  out  above.  The  onward  appeal  falls  away  in   those
    circumstances. I dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals

Appellants' appeals dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 2nd of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 2nd of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

