



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:
                                                           HU/13418/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2020                           |On 16 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               Bhavikaben [P]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further to directions issued  by  the
Upper Tribunal on 18 September 2020.

The appellant is a national of India born on 16 May  1980.  She  arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 17 August 2007 on a  visit  visa  and  overstayed  her
visa. On 12 June 2019 she applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  her
private life and  on  the  basis  of  compassionate  circumstances.  In  the
application made on the  appellant's  behalf,  it  was  submitted  that  her
marriage had broken down and that she was the victim of  domestic  violence.
She had been subjected to violence since marrying her husband  in  1999  but
the problem had worsened over the past two years. Her husband suffered  from
alcoholism and he abused her physically and verbally. It was submitted  that
the appellant's mother was deceased and her  father  was  elderly.  She  was
unable to return to India as her remaining family members would  not  accept
her back into the family because she was separated from her husband.

The appellant's application was refused on  30  July  2019.  The  respondent
considered that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  Appendix
FM as she was separated from her husband and that she  could  not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules as  there  were
no very significant obstacles to  her  integration  in  India.  It  was  not
considered  that  the  domestic  violence  the  appellant  had   experienced
amounted to exceptional circumstance justifying a  grant  of  leave  outside
the immigration rules.

The appellant appealed against that decision. Her  appeal  was  heard  on  1
July 2020 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mehta. The judge noted  the  evidence
that the appellant's husband had been sentenced to 12  months'  imprisonment
in the UK and placed under a restraining order as a result of  his  violence
towards her. The appellant confirmed that  she  had  reported  the  domestic
violence to the police and to her  doctor.  She  and  her  husband  had  two
children, aged 16 and 18, who lived in India  with  her  husband's  parents.
They had left the children there when they came to the UK. Her father was  a
cancer patient and was looked after by her brother  in  India.  Her  brother
would not be able to support her financially.  Her  in-laws  would  probably
send her children to her if she returned  to  India  and  would  stop  their
support for them. She would not be able to find a job  in  India  and  would
face threats from her husband if he was sent back  there.  She  would  bring
shame on herself and her family if she got divorced from  her  husband.  She
would have no means of support in India.

The judge concluded that the  appellant  would  not  face  very  significant
obstacles  to  integration  in  India  and  that  she  could  not  meet  the
requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  immigration  rules.  The  judge
considered that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  disproportionate  in
breach of Article 8 and accordingly dismissed the appeal.

Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal  the  judge's  decision  to
the Upper Tribunal.

Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, on  19  August  2020,
on the grounds that it was  arguably  perverse  of  the  judge  to  find  no
insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  in  India  when
arguably the only family she had was her in-laws, whose son she  had  caused
to serve a prison sentence as a result of domestic  violence;  and  that  it
was arguably irrational to suggest that her two children, aged  18  and  16,
could support her when they lived with her in-laws.

The case was reviewed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  due  to  the  circumstances
relating to Covid 19. In a Note and Directions  sent  out  on  14  September
2020, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  indicated  that  she  had  reached  the
provisional view that the question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision involved the making of  error  of  law  and,  if  so,  whether  the
decision should be set aside, could be made without a  hearing.  Submissions
were invited from the parties.

Written submissions have been received on behalf of the appellant,  with  no
response from the respondent to the Tribunal's directions.

Although the grounds are  not  well  particularised  and  tend  towards  re-
arguing the case, I share the concerns of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  in
granting permission. It seems to  me  that  the  challenge  to  the  judge's
decision succeeds  in  particular  on  the  basis  of  the  judge's  failure
properly to engage with the evidence and the impact of that evidence on  the
consideration of the obstacles the appellant may face on  return  to  India.
The judge accepted that there had been domestic violence but  did  not  give
any detailed consideration to the evidence from  the  safeguarding  unit  of
the Metropolitan Police or to  the  supporting  letter  from  Aanchal  which
referred to the appellant's emotional vulnerability.  The  judge  considered
the appellant's evidence that she would not be able to access  support  from
her brother and father, but made no  actual  findings  on  that,  concluding
instead that she could be supported by  her  two  children.  However,  given
that they were 18 and 16, it seems to me  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
support in India was unrealistic.  Furthermore,  at  [35],  the  judge  held
against the appellant the fact of her  overstaying  on  the  expiry  of  her
visit visa but gave no consideration to her evidence  in  her  statement  at
[6] and [7] that she had had no choice in the decision to live  in  the  UK,
and was forced to accompany her husband.

For all these reasons it seems to me that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
appellant's circumstances on return to India was not a full and  proper  one
which comprehensively  engaged  with  the  evidence.  The  decision  is  not
sustainable and I therefore set it aside. The appropriate course is for  the
matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo  before
a different judge.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Mehta.



Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 19
November 2020
