
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13303/2019 (V)
                                                           HU/13305/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 May 2021                             |On 2 June 2021                  |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              1) MR EKRAJ LIMBU
                             2) MISS ANJU LIMBU
                                                                  Appellants
                                    -and-

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the  Appellants:     Mr  P  Saini,  Counsel  instructed  by  Gordon  and
                    Thompson solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Moon promulgated on 27 October 2020 ("the Decision").  By the Decision,
   the Judge dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's
   decisions dated 28 June 2019 refusing their human rights claims.  Those
   claims were made in the context of a decision refusing the Appellants
   entry clearance to join their parents who are settled in the UK.  Their
   father is a former Gurkha soldier.


2. The Appellants are a brother and sister now aged 42 and 39 years
   respectively.  Their father settled in the UK in August 2006.  He was
   joined by their mother in 2008.  Since then, the Appellants' parents have
   lived in the UK although they have travelled back to Nepal on an annual
   basis to visit the Appellants.


3. It is common ground that the Appellants do not meet the Immigration
   Rules for entry clearance as adult dependent relatives. It is also common
   ground that the Appellants do not fall within the Respondent's policy in
   relation to the dependents of former Gurkha soldiers.  The appeals
   therefore turn on the issue whether family life is engaged under Article
   8(1) ECHR.


4. The Judge accepted that the Appellants were financially dependent on
   their parents at the time that both their parents moved to the UK ([32]
   of the Decision).  However, he was not satisfied that they remained
   financially dependent as there was insufficient evidence of their
   outgoings ([33]).  In relation to emotional dependency, the Judge
   accepted that the Appellants' parents travel to Nepal each year to visit
   their children.  However, he did not accept that they maintained contact
   to the extent asserted between those visits due to lack of evidence.  He
   concluded that the Appellants had failed to show that they currently
   enjoy family life with their parents. He therefore concluded that Article
   8(1) was not engaged.


5. The Appellants appeal on the basis that the Judge has misdirected
   himself in law and in his consideration of the facts when assessing the
   question of family life between adult children and their parents.  They
   contend that the Judge applied too stringent a test.  They also say that
   the Judge failed to take into account the Appellants' dependency on their
   parents prior to 2006/2008 when they were continuing to live in the
   family home and failed to ask himself the right question namely whether
   that family life endured after that time.

6. Permission to appeal was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin as a
   First-tier Tribunal Judge on 8 December 2020 in the following terms so
   far as relevant:


         "...3.   The grounds are unarguable.  The judge found inadequate
         evidence of dependency prior to their former Ghurkha father leaving
         Nepal and inadequate evidence of their current circumstances to
         justify a finding of dependency now.
         4.   Furthermore, so far as that dependency is concerned, it is
         significant that the appellants have been living in Nepal without
         their father for 13 years before making this application.
         5.   Neither the grounds nor the Decision and Reasons discloser any
         arguable error of law."


7. Following renewal of the application for permission to appeal to this
   Tribunal, permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Kamara on 20 January
   2021 on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge had erred in his
   approach to Article 8(1) for the reasons set out in the grounds.

8. So it is that the matter came before me to determine whether the
   Decision contains an error of law and, if I so concluded, to either re-
   make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
   so.


9. The hearing took place remotely via Skype for Business.  There were no
   technical difficulties affecting the conduct of the hearing.


10. As the Respondent had not filed a rule 24 reply, Ms Everett indicated
   that she wished to set out the Respondent's position at the outset.
   Without objection from Mr Saini, I permitted her to do so.  She indicated
   that she had "some sympathy" with the Appellants' grounds for reasons
   which I explain below.  Having sought clarification of the basis of the
   concession, I accepted it.  I therefore indicated that I found an error
   of law and set aside the Decision in its entirety.


11. The Appellants made a rule 15(2A) application prior to the hearing
   before me which included evidence which will need to be taken into
   account in an evaluation whether the Appellants currently enjoy family
   life with their parents.  There will therefore need to be an entirely
   fresh assessment of the nature and extent of the Appellants' relationship
   with their parents.  Since that will involve starting again from scratch
   and will require a number of factual findings to be made, it was agreed
   that it would be appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
   tier Tribunal for redetermination.

12. I therefore found there to be an error of law in the Decision.  I set
   the Decision aside in its entirety and remitted the appeal to the First-
   tier Tribunal.  I indicated to the parties that I would give short
   reasons in relation to the error of law and next steps which I now turn
   to do.

DISCUSSION


13. Ms Everett accepted that there was an error of law in the Decision
   because the Judge had failed to set his consideration whether family life
   existed in context.  The Judge had to consider the position prior to the
   departure of the Appellants' parents.  As was pointed out in the grounds,
   the Judge had failed to take into account that, when earlier applications
   were refused in 2007 (in other words, just after the departure of the
   Appellants' father), the Respondent had not disputed that family life
   existed between the Appellants and their parents.


14. Ms Everett indicated that she was not prepared to concede the appeals
   outright.  She accepted that it would be open to another Judge to find
   that family life did not exist between the Appellants and their parents
   on these facts.  Equally, however, she accepted that, if a Judge placed
   the issue in the context which applies in Gurkha cases, beginning the
   evaluation with the position when the Appellants' parents left Nepal, it
   might well be open to another Judge to find in the Appellants' favour.



15. In short summary, the Respondent's concession is based on the Judge
   having found that family life did not exist because of the lengthy
   geographical separation of the Appellants from their parents.  That might
   be a relevant factor but could not be a sole reason.   The Judge had
   failed to assess the evidence in the right way and did not ask himself
   the right questions.


16. Whilst, as I have indicated, the length of the geographical separation
   of the Appellants from their parents might be a relevant factor when
   assessing whether family life continues to exist, I am persuaded that the
   Respondent is correct in her concession.  The Judge has determined the
   issue of emotional dependency based on that factor without taking into
   account the position as it was prior to the departure of the Appellants'
   parents in 2006/2008 and without due regard to the parents' visits to
   Nepal on a regular basis.

17. I do not necessarily read the Decision as having accepted that there is
   a continuing financial dependency but since that issue will need to be
   determined with the benefit of the further evidence advanced by the
   Appellants, I say no more about that.  In any event, the issue whether
   family life continues to exist depends on a holistic assessment of all
   the evidence and not solely on a finding that there exists either
   financial or emotional dependency or even both.  I do not for that
   reason, preserve any of the findings made in the Decision.

CONCLUSION


18. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that there is an error of law
   disclosed in the Decision. I do not preserve any of the findings.  I
   therefore set the Decision aside in its entirety.  For the reasons set
   out at [11] above, it is appropriate for the appeals to be remitted to
   the First-tier Tribunal as all factual findings will need to be made
   afresh.



   DECISION
   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moon promulgated on 27 October
   2020 involves the making of an error on a point of law. I therefore set
   aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
   hearing before a Judge other than Judge Moon.


   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 21 May 2021

