
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13286/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 19th May 2021                 |On the 21st June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                         the entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                            FERDOUSI AKTER NASRIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz , Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jesurum, Counsel on behalf of the respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals  with  permission  against  the
         decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bonavero  (hereinafter
         referred to as the "FtTJ") promulgated on the 19 November 2020,  in
         which the appellant's appeal against the  decision  to  refuse  her
         application for entry clearance to settle in the  UK  to  join  her
         husband and sponsor was allowed.


      2. The FtTJ did not  make  an  anonymity  order,  and  no  grounds  or
         submissions were provided for such an order to be made.

      3. The hearing took place on 19  May  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face- to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the sponsor so that he was able to hear  and  see  the
         proceedings being conducted. There were no issues regarding  sound,
         and no problematic technical problems were encountered  during  the
         hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. Whilst this is the appeal of the ECO  I  intend  to  refer  to  the
         parties as they were before the FtTJ.

      5. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh. There is no  dispute  as
         to the factual background of this appeal as set out in the decision
         of Judge Bonavero.

      6.  In an application made on 16 April 2019 the appellant applied  for
         entry clearance to enter the UK and settle  with  her  husband  and
         sponsor. The sponsor is a British citizen  and  in  April  2000  he
         married his 1st wife and together they had 3 daughters all of  whom
         are minors and are British citizens.

      7. On 20 September 2017 the sponsor's wife died. The sponsor took over
         the children's primary care and since that time  worked  part-time.
         His mental health suffered and there were concerns as to being able
         to meet the needs including the emotional needs  of  the  children.
         The sponsor wanted to remarry, and an arranged marriage took  place
         with the appellant on 31 August 2018. His daughters travelled  with
         him to the wedding and meet the appellant in  Bangladesh.  In  July
         2020 the appellant suffered a heart attack  remaining  in  hospital
         for a period of 4 days.

      8. On the 16 July 2019 the respondent  refused  the  application.  The
         Entry Clearance Officer (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "ECO")
         considered  the  application  under  Appendix  -FM  but  gave   the
         following reasons for refusing the application.

      9. The appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules as she could not meet the minimum income requirement.  It was
         accepted that she could meet the English language requirement.

     10. In respect of Article 8 the ECO set out that he was satisfied  that
         there  were   no   exceptional   circumstances   leading   to   any
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant or  the  sponsor
         which had  been  identified.  Whilst  it  was  suggested  that  the
         appellant's presence was  required  in  the  UK  to  care  for  the
         sponsor's children from his previous marriage it was noted that the
         children were not disabled or handicapped in any way.  The  sponsor
         continued  in  self-employment  whilst  the  children  remained  in
         education in the UK. He  had  been  able  to  establish  a  routine
         work/life/childcare balance in the UK by himself with support  from
         others and there was no indication that this could not continue. It
         was noted that the appellant's presence would be likely  to  result
         in further recourse to public funds. When considering whether there
         were any exceptional circumstances, the ECO was not satisfied  that
         any circumstances had been put forward  which  were  "exceptional".
         Any family life could be maintained by visits.  The  ECO  concluded
         that the application did not fall for a grant  of  entry  clearance
         outside of the rules.

     11. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         entry clearance came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  29
         October 2019. In a determination promulgated  on  the  19  November
         2019, the FtTJ allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.  At
         paragraphs [14]-[23] the FtTJ set out  his  findings  of  fact  and
         conclusions on the appeal.

     12. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal Judge observed that  there  was
         little dispute between the parties about the facts of the case  and
         that it was "the manner in which article 8  should  be  applied  to
         those facts " formed the a substance of the appeal before  him.  He
         further observed that the case on  behalf  the  appellant  was  not
         argued  primarily  on  the  basis   that   the   decision   was   a
         disproportionate breach of  her  article  8  rights  but  that  the
         decision would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the
         sponsor and the sponsor's children. At [16] the judge  referred  to
         the circumstances of the sponsor's children and  that  their  lives
         had been "coloured by tragedy and that they had lost  their  mother
         when they were very young". In respect of  the  sponsor  the  judge
         found that the children were now being looked after by their father
         alone and that he had been plainly affected by his 1st wife's death
         and as a result of had serious health problems. At [17]  the  judge
         set out the documentary evidence  in  support  of  the  appellant's
         claim which related to the circumstances of the children and  those
         of the sponsor which related to their best interests.

     13. The judge took into  account  that  the  girls  had  only  met  the
         appellant on one occasion at the time of their marriage and  whilst
         they had been in communication since that time  he  concluded  that
         the relationship remained superficial.

     14. The judge addressed the  issue  of  whether  it  was  in  the  best
         interests of the children for them  to  live  with  both  of  their
         parents at [19 - 20] and took into account that the  appellant  was
         not the children's natural  mother  and  that  it  was  not  always
         necessarily the position that the best interests  of  the  children
         were to live with a stepmother with  whom  they  only  had  limited
         contact.  Having  taken  that  into  account  and  looking  at  the
         evidence, the judge concluded that it would be the children's  best
         interests of the appellant to join them in the UK.  He  found  that
         the sponsor had done his best  look  after  children  that  it  was
         "plainly difficult look after 3 girls alone".  He  found  that  the
         family were united in the view that the appellant's presence  would
         be positive for them given the loss of their mother at a young  age
         and their father's recent heart attack, the  judge  found  that  it
         would be helpful for  the  children  to  have  the  opportunity  to
         develop their relationship with the appellant.

     15. As to whether or not family life could be established in Bangladesh
         and outside of the UK, the judge reached  the  conclusion  that  it
         could not for the reasons set out at [20] taking into  account  the
         children's British nationality and their length  of  residence  but
         also taking into account the trauma which they had been exposed  to
         and the  fact  that  they  were  all  in  full-time  education.  He
         therefore concluded that it would be in their  best  interests  for
         the appellant to be granted entry clearance.

     16. The judge then considered the proportionality of the  decision  and
         in the light of his finding that the family could not  be  expected
         to  relocate  to  Bangladesh  and  the   proportionality   of   the
         appellant's continued separation from the sponsor. The  judge  took
         into account the public interest considerations under S117A  and  B
         and at [22] concluded that in his judgement this was a  case  where
         the "compelling nature" of the  circumstances  were  such  that  it
         would be disproportionate to refuse the application. In respect  of
         section 117B(3) and the financial requirements, the judge  accepted
         the sponsor's evidence that his ability to support the family  been
         affected by the fact that he was the sole care of the children. The
         judge reached the conclusion  on  the  evidence  that  it  was  the
         appellant's presence which would be likely to  allow  him  to  work
         more hours and thus be in a position to earn sufficient income  for
         his family and thus it would follow that the entry of the appellant
         would not be a burden on the public finances.  At  [23]  the  judge
         concluded that it was "an unusual case in which 3 children affected
         have lived through considerable trauma". The judge found  that  the
         sponsor done his best look after his daughters alone, but this  had
         plainly affected his  physical  and  mental  health.  He  therefore
         concluded it would be to a disproportionate breach of their Article
         8 rights to refuse entry clearance to the appellant.

     17. He therefore allowed the appeal.

     18. Permission to appeal  was  issued  and  permission  to  appeal  was
         granted by FtTJ Chohan on 18 December 2020. The FtTJ stated:

             "When one considers the judge's decision as a whole, it may be
             open to argument that the judge erred in  finding  that  there
             are compelling or exceptional circumstances in this  case.  It
             is clear from the decision that  the  judge  had  considerable
             sympathy for the appellant and the children, but in  light  of
             the  judge's  findings  at  paragraph  17  and  18  that   the
             relationship between the appellant  and  the  children  remain
             somewhat superficial, I find there is  an  arguable  error  of
             law."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     19. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge
         Rintoul) issued directions on 5 January 2021. Upper Tribunal  Judge
         Rintoul reviewed the file and in his  directions  issued  indicated
         that the appeal should be  determined  without  a  face-  to-  face
         hearing and directions were given for  a  remote  hearing  to  take
         place and that this could take place via Skype.

     20. The hearing was therefore listed as  a  remote  hearing  with  both
         advocates providing their oral submissions.

     21. Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer appeared  on  behalf  of  the
         ECO.  He  relied  upon  the  written  grounds.  No   further   oral
         submissions were made.

     22. Mr Jesurum of Counsel who had appeared on behalf of  the  appellant
         before the FtTJ relied upon the further submissions sent on  the  4
         March 2021.

     23. In his oral submissions he submitted that the ECO's grounds centred
         upon paragraph  22  and  where  the  judge  stated  "the  appellant
         circumstances" however that would appear at 1st  glance  to  be  an
         error but that on any view the appellant's "circumstances" included
         the effect on those affected by the decision (applying  Beoku-Betts
         at paragraphs 43 - 44) and that the judge had  plainly  taken  into
         account the sponsor's heart  attack  and  the  family  bereavement.
         Alternatively, he submitted the word "appellant "was a slip of  the
         pen and the judge  clearly  intended  to  refer  to  the  sponsor's
         circumstances.

     24. Mr Jesurum submitted that there had been no challenge  the  law  or
         challenge to the facts and that the submission made  on  behalf  of
         the respondent essentially was  that  the  circumstances  were  not
         "compelling" however that was not a submission of law and  that  if
         the judge had considered the correct legal test taken into  account
         the relevant considerations it was open to the judge  to  make  the
         decision that he did.

     25. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my  decision  which  I
         now give.

Decision on error of law:

     26. The grounds advanced on behalf of the respondent to those  set  out
         in the written application made on 1 December 2020  and  are  those
         that are relied upon by Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent.  No
         further grounds or elucidation of those grounds have been provided.

     27. In essence they submit  that  firstly  there  are  no  particularly
         strong features in this appeal based on the lack of contact between
         the appellant and the children and that "the sponsor being a single
         parent with some health issues" is not "exceptional" (at paragraphs
         5 - 7), and the refusal of entry clearance is not disproportionate,
         and it is argued that it is not been shown there is family life and
         that  there  are  no  exceptional  circumstances  leading  to   any
         unjustifiably harsh consequences.

     28. Mr Jesurum on behalf of the appellant submits that  none  of  those
         submissions demonstrate an error of law in the decision of the FtTJ
         and that the assertion made that  there  is  nothing  "exceptional"
         about "the sponsor being a single parent with some  health  issues"
         is an assertion of fact and not law.

     29. Thus he submits that the  circumstances  of  the  sponsor  and  the
         children were relevant factors and that the  circumstances  of  the
         sponsor bringing up 3 children  alone  after  the  death  of  their
         mother and having suffered mental health problems and also a recent
         heart attack are  matters  of  weight.  Given  that  an  Article  8
         assessment is "fact sensitive "he submits that those are matters of
         weight for the factfinder and in this case the FtTJ.

     30. He further makes the point that the judge's  analysis  and  factual
         findings that the circumstances are "compelling" this can  only  be
         challenged  on  the  basis  of  the   ground   of   perversity   or
         irrationality and here there  is  no  such  challenge  advanced  on
         behalf of the respondent either in  the  grounds  or  in  any  oral
         submissions.

     31.  The  last  point  he  makes  is  that  even  if  the   Article   8
         proportionality assessment may be viewed as generous, that is not a
         ground of challenge.

     32. Having considered the grounds in the light of  the  submissions  of
         the advocates and the decision of the  FtTJ  I  consider  that  the
         submissions made by Mr Jesurum are persuasive. There was no dispute
         that the appellant could not meet the rules under  Appendix  FM  on
         the basis that the sponsor could not meet the  financial  threshold
         required (see paragraph 9) and therefore the thrust of  the  appeal
         was   whether   the   respondent's   decision   would   result   in
         "unjustifiably harsh consequences" (see paragraph 9).

     33. The FtTJ correctly identified the legal test  he  was  required  to
         carry out and identified at [15] that the  appeal  did  not  solely
         relate to the Article 8 rights of the appellant but also the effect
         of the refusal upon the relevant  family  members  which  were  the
         appellant's husband and sponsor but also the sponsors children  and
         therefore the appellant's stepchildren who were  "children  of  the
         family" (see paragraph 15). This was consistent with  the  decision
         of Beouku-Betts v SSHD [2009] AC 155 and  that  Article  8  appeals
         require analysis of all those affected by the  decision.  A  person
         outside of the UK may have a good  claim  under  Article  8  to  be
         allowed to enter the UK to join family members already there so  as
         to continue or develop existing family life (see SSHD v SS  (Congo)
         [2015] EWCA Civ 387. It is also the position that Article 8 imposes
         no general obligation on the state to facilitate the choice made by
         married couple to reside in it (see Huang at  [18]  and  Abdelaziz,
         Cabale and Balkandali v UK (1985) & EHRR 431. As  to  family  life,
         there was no dispute in the decision letter that the appellant  was
         married to the sponsor and that the relationship was a genuine  and
         subsisting one.

     34. When considering the circumstances of the family, the FtTJ observed
         that there was no dispute as to the factual circumstances  and  the
         evidence in support (see paragraph 14).

     35. The following factors were identified by the judge. The  children's
         lives had been "coloured by tragedy" having lost their mother  when
         they were very young in September 2017 (paragraph 16) and they were
         looked after by the sponsor's only. The sponsor had  been  "plainly
         affected  by  his  wife's  death  had  serious   health   problems"
         (paragraph 16). The sponsor suffered a heart attack  in  July  2020
         and had remained in hospital apart from his children for  a  period
         of 4 days. There were issues relating to  his  mental  health.  The
         factual evidence  referred  to  the  sponsor  having  struggled  to
         address the needs of the 3  children  and  was  worried  about  the
         impact upon them (see letter page  35/3/2019  from  family  GP  and
         referred to by the FtTJ at  paragraph  17).  The  letter  from  the
         health Centre dated 28/9/17 was consistent with that and there  was
         evidence of the family's referral (at page 32AB). Similar  evidence
         was set out at page 33 of the bundle referred to by  the  judge  at
         paragraph 17. The  children  themselves  were  reported  as  having
         stated they were looking forward to the  stepmother  the  appellant
         joining the family unit.

     36. Against that factual background, the judge considered  the  adverse
         factors identified which included the limited nature of the contact
         between the appellant and the children (at  [18])  along  with  the
         fact that the appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules and in
         particular the financial requirements (paragraph 9).

     37. The FtTJ addressed the best interests of the children concerned.  A
         section 55 consideration is capable of forming  a  factor  relevant
         proportionality (see GEN 3.1 - 3.3).  A  decision-maker  must  take
         into account as a primary consideration the best interests  of  any
         relevant child or children. A "relevant child" is  defined  in  GEN
         3.3.2 as "a person under 18 at the date of the application and  (b)
         it is evident from the information provided by the  applicant  they
         would be affected by the decision to refuse the application."

     38. Again the grounds do not challenge the "best interests  assessment"
         set out at paragraph [20] and the judge correctly  identified  that
         they ranked as a "primary consideration" but were  not  dispositive
         of the appeal. Having considered  the  factual  background  of  the
         appeal, he concluded that it  was  in  the  best  interest  of  the
         children for the appellant to join them in the UK. The judge  found
         that the sponsor had done his best to care  for  the  children  but
         that it had been "plainly difficult for him to  look  after  the  3
         girls alone". The judge took into account that all  family  members
         were "united in their view that the appellant's presence  would  be
         positive for them" alongside the loss of their mother  at  a  young
         age and their father's recent heart attack  the  judge  stated,  "I
         find it will be helpful for the children to have the opportunity to
         develop their relationship with the appellant." At [20]  the  judge
         found that family life could not be established  in  Bangladesh  as
         this would have the effect of uprooting the children from  the  UK.
         They were British citizens, and had always lived in the UK and  the
         FtTJ further  took  into  account  that  establishing  family  life
         outside of the UK would not be in their best interests as a  result
         of the "trauma to which they had been exposed". The Court of Appeal
         in Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925  indicated that one has to  look
         at the factors relied on in an objective sense rather than  on  the
         basis of what the appellant and/or the appellant's spouse  perceive
         to be the difficulties and that when determining  the  question  of
         whether return would  entail  "very  serious  hardship".  This  was
         consistent with the assessment made based  by  the  FtTJ  and  this
         assessment has not been challenged by the respondent.

     39. As Mr Jesurum submitted there is no legal error either advanced  in
         the grounds or that can be seen in the  best  interests  assessment
         carried out by the FtTJ.

     40.  The  issue  that  arises  from  the   grounds   relates   to   the
         proportionality of the decision. It is  here  that  the  respondent
         submits that there are "no particularly strong  features".  However
         in setting out in the grounds, they do  not  take  account  of  the
         factors identified by the judge in relation to the sponsor and  the
         children. While the  respondent  considers  the  sponsor  "being  a
         single parent with some health issues" is not exceptional, that was
         not the view of factual finding of the FtTJ.

     41. In addressing proportionality of the decision, the judge took  into
         account the public interest considerations listed in section  117B.
         As set out section 117A(2) (a) provides in mandatory terms that the
         "court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard in all cases to
         the considerations listed in section 117B. The judge  was  entitled
         to weigh in the balance that there was no dispute as to whether she
         met the English language requirements of Appendix FM as set out and
         reflected in section 117B (2).

     42. The grounds seek to challenge the reference made by  the  judge  to
         the decision in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC  58  and  his  judgment
         that the compelling nature of the appellant circumstances were such
         as to override the general normative guidance set  out  in  section
         117B(3).

     43. To consider that submission is necessary to set out the  nature  of
         the  challenge  to  paragraph  21.  The  respondent  advances   the
         challenge on the basis that this was  a  misdirection  because  the
         appellant had not shown that her circumstances were exceptional  so
         as to be exempt from the statutory requirements and that the  judge
         had not given any adequate reasons.

     44. Having considered the decision as a whole,  it  is  clear  that  at
         paragraph [22] the judge was seeking to make the point  there  will
         be cases where the weight attached the public interest will be less
         where the facts concerned are "particularly strong or as the  judge
         went on to stated [22] were "compelling".

     45. The reference to the decision in Rhuppiah concerned that set out at
         paragraph [49] where the court made reference to the  section  117B
         factors and that the  effect  of  the  provisions  cannot  put  the
         decision-maker in  a  "straitjacket"  and  concluded  that  section
         117A(2)(a) was a section  which  provided  the  limited  degree  of
         flexibility.

     46. The reference to section 117B (3) and the financial requirement  is
         then explained by the judge at [22]. From reading that paragraph it
         appears that he accepted the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that the sponsor's ability  to  support  the  family  was
         affected by his position as the sole carer of the children (as  set
         out his witness statement and evidence). It was open to  the  judge
         to reach a finding of fact that the appellant's presence  would  be
         likely to allow him to work  more  hours  and  therefore  be  in  a
         position to earn sufficient money and income for the family so that
         they were not a burden on the public  finances.  I  agree  with  Mr
         Jesurum that this was not a speculative finding but one  which  was
         based on sponsor's evidence which the judge plainly accepted.

     47.  Whilst  the  judge  referred  to  the  compelling  nature  of  the
         appellant's circumstances at [22], it is also clear as  Mr  Jesurum
         submitted that the judge was referring to the sponsor and those  of
         the children as well as the  appellant  and  that  was  plain  from
         reading paragraph 23.

     48. The judge concluded that he found the facts that  were  before  him
         when  considered together were "compelling" and  referred  to  this
         being a case which had "unusual facts" where there were 3  children
         whose best  interests  he  had  factored  into  the  proportionally
         assessment and who had been affected by "considerable  trauma"  and
         that the circumstances had had a serious adverse  effect  upon  the
         sponsor in terms of his physical and mental health. As family  life
         could not  be  established  in  Bangladesh  in  the  light  of  the
         children's circumstances, including their British  citizenship  and
         the trauma that they had  undergone,  that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance would lead to an unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  upon
         the appellant and her family members. That was in  accordance  with
         the decision in Agyarko,  that even when the requirements  are  not
         met an applicant may still be granted leave "outside the Rules"  on
         the basis of if the  consequences  of  refusal  are  "unjustifiably
         harsh".

     49. The judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons  for  reaching  his
         conclusion. The test of irrationality or perversity is  an  onerous
         one to meet and it requires the Tribunal to be  satisfied  that  no
         reasonable Tribunal properly directing itself  could  have  reached
         the finding or conclusion challenged. The fact that a Tribunal  has
         reached what might be characterised as a generous view, for example
         in  striking  the  balance  between  the  public  interest  and  an
         individual's circumstances under Article 8.2, does  not  in  itself
         necessarily establish an error of law.

     50. The point was made in Mukarakar v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  and
         approved by the Supreme Court in R (MM) (Lebanon) and Others v SSHD
         [2017] UKSC 10 at [107] where Lady Hale and Lord Carnwath (in their
         joint judgment) said this:

             "107. It  is  no  doubt  desirable  that  there  should  be  a
             consistent approach to issues of this kind at tribunal  level,
             but as we have explained  there  are  means  to  achieve  this
             within  the  tribunal  system.  As  was  said  in Mukarkar  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ
             1045, para 40 (per Carnwath LJ):


                  "... It is of the nature of such judgments that  different
                  tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may  reach
                  different conclusions on the same case ... The  mere  fact
                  that one tribunal has reached what may seem  an  unusually
                  generous view of the facts of a particular case  does  not
                  mean that it has made an error of  law  ...  Nor  does  it
                  create any precedent, so as  to  limit  the  Secretary  of
                  State's right to argue for a more restrictive approach  on
                  a similar case in the future. However, on the facts of the
                  particular case, the decision of the  specialist  tribunal
                  should be respected.""


     51.  As Mr Jesurum submits it has not been advanced on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State that the decision of the judge or  his  findings
         of fact were either irrational or perverse  and  in  light  of  the
         foregoing, the judge properly considered  the  appropriate  factors
         and made findings of fact based on the evidence before him. It  may
         well be that this was not the only outcome possible on the facts in
         this particular appeal but the FtTJ directed himself  correctly  in
         law and that his conclusion, even if properly characterised as  one
         that might be thought to be a generous one, does not  disclose  any
         legal error.

     52. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. The decision shall stand.


Notice of Decision.


     53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT
         shall stand.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated   10 June 2021.






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

