
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13605/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th November 2017                |On 13th December 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES
                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR SAMUEL AUGUSTUS WILSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Heybroek
For the Respondent:    Ms C Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, born on the 1st April 1973, is a citizen of Jamaica, and
    is male.  Although he is in fact the Respondent for the purposes of the
    appeal before us, this being an appeal by the Secretary of State, we
    will continue to refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
    Tribunal below.

 2. The background to the case is the Mr Wilson who has been in the UK
    since 2001 was convicted on his own plea on the 4th August 2013, the
    day that had been set down for trial when he pleaded guilty to an
    offence of occasioning actual bodily harm contrary to Section 47 of the
    Offences Act 1861.  That was on the basis that he had acted in
    excessive self-defence. That was a plea on the day of trial and
    accordingly attracted very limited credit from the Sentencing Judge.


 3. It is interesting to note that the facts that we have in relation to
    this are set out in the Court of Appeal Criminal Division's summary for
    an appeal against sentence, that is set out in paragraph 39 of the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.  As it is clear from there, and we do not
    have to repeat it verbatim, that somebody had gone to the appellant's
    house armed and with a Staffordshire Bull Terrier and the appellant
    then left the house causing injuries described as ".... a number of
    cuts to the scalp, hands and back.  It was fortuitous that the injuries
    inflicted were not considerably worse".


 4. In refusing the Appellant's application for further leave to remain on
    the basis of his family life the Secretary of State decided that he did
    not meet the suitability requirement because in paragraph 13 of her
    refusal letter she said this:

         "It is noted that you have previously received convictions for
         criminality.  These convictions were for offences relating to
         possession of a knife blade/sharp pointed article in a public place
         and assault occasioning actual bodily harm, for which you were
         sentenced on 18 November 2014 to imprisonment for 9 months by
         Maidstone Crown court.  Taking this into account it is deemed your
         presence in the United Kingdom is not conducive to the public good
         because your offending has caused serious harm, as well as the fact
         your criminal conduct makes it undesirable to allow you to remain
         in the United Kingdom."

    "Serious harm" is defined as follows:-


         "An offence that has caused serious harm" means an offence that has
         caused serious physical or psychological harm to a victim or
         victims, or that has contributed to a widespread problem that
         causes serious harm to a community or society in general."


    We note that paragraph 13 of the refusal letter makes no reference to
    the widespread problem to a community or society in general and pinned
    its colours firmly to the "serious harm" mast.

 5. We are entirely satisfied that not only was paragraph 13 of the refusal
    letter unreasoned in her claims and conclusion that there was serious
    harm, but even if there had been some form of reasoning that will not
    have withstood any rationality challenge.  There was a clear difference
    between a serious offence or behaving badly and the harm that it
    causes.  The injuries described by the Court of Appeal as we described
    a moment ago, we are more than satisfied, cannot be described as
    "serious harm".  The decision was therefore open to the Judge to make
    that the findings that were set out in his decision from paragraphs 36
    onwards.  It follows from that that the Appellant would meet the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM and that is a very weighty
    consideration in the proportionality exercise.

 6. The Judge was entitled to find on the basis that we have just outlined
    that the Appellant not having caused serious harm was suitable to
    remain and therefore removal would be a disproportionate interference
    with his article 8 rights and those of the family as well.  Accordingly
    the Secretary of State's decision was wrong, and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 13th December 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

