
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13148/2017
     HU/13152/2017
     HU/13157/2017
     HU/13159/2017
     HU/13169/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th September 2019                         |On 20th September 2019        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            HTG (fIRST APPELLANT)
                           AGH (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            MTG (tHIRD APPELLANT)
                           MTG (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                            ETG (fIFTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr F Aziz acting as agent for Lei Dat & Baig
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appealed against a decision of Judge Saffer (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 17th October 2018.

 2. The Appellants are Eritrean citizens.  The  first,  third,  fourth  and
    fifth Appellants are minors born 3rd January 2004, 26th September 2012,
    16th April 2011, and 19th January 2005 respectively.  Their ages as  at
    the date of this decision are therefore 15, 6,  8,  and  14.  They  are
    currently resident in Sudan.

 3. The second Appellant born 1st June 1986 is married to the Sponsor (SB),
    who is also an Eritrean citizen with refugee status in the UK.

 4. The biological mother of the  children  died  on  26th  September  2012
    giving birth to the third Appellant.  The  biological  mother  is  SB's
    sister.  Their biological father has played no part in the lives of the
    children and his whereabouts are unknown and have been  since  February
    2012.

 5. A court in Eritrea appointed the Sponsor as the legal guardian  of  the
    children on 1st November 2012.  It was after this that the Sponsor  and
    children left Eritrea and travelled to Sudan.

 6. In Sudan the Sponsor met the second  Appellant  AGH.   They  started  a
    relationship and married in Sudan on 6th October 2013.

 7. A court in Sudan appointed  the  Sponsor  the  legal  guardian  of  the
    children on 1st December 2013.

 8. The Sponsor left her husband and the children in Sudan and travelled to
    the UK arriving in 2014.  She was granted refugee status in the  UK  on
    10th March 2016.

 9. The Sponsor has given birth to a daughter in the UK, LD, born 17th  May
    2017.  Her husband is not the father.  He is aware of the relationship.
     The Sponsor in a witness statement dated 2nd August 2018 describes her
    pregnancy as being an  accident,  and  she  does  not  know  where  the
    biological father of her daughter is and has lost all contact with him.
     The biological father has never met his daughter and is  not  involved
    in her life at all.

10. The Appellants applied for entry clearance and  the  applications  were
    refused on 19th September 2017.  The appeals were heard by the judge on
    3rd October 2018.  The  judge  found  that  the  Appellants  could  not
    satisfy the  Immigration  Rules.   This  is  not  the  subject  of  any
    challenge.  It was accepted that SB and the second Appellant had met in
    Sudan and married there.  The judge accepted the  authenticity  of  the
    minor Appellants' birth and baptism certificates and  identities.   The
    judge accepted that the biological mother died while  giving  birth  to
    the third Appellant and SB is the  children's  aunt.   The  judge  also
    accepted that the biological father of the minor Appellants had  played
    no part in their lives.  It  was  also  accepted  that  SB  obtained  a
    guardianship order in November 2012.

11. The judge did not accept that evidence had been produced to  show  that
    SB had legally adopted the children and did not accept that  she  could
    be described as their parent for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.



12.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appeals.   The  Appellants  were   granted
    permission to appeal by Judge Blundell on 29th November 2018.   It  was
    submitted that the judge had materially erred by  failing  to  consider
    the compassionate circumstances in the case.  The  children  and  their
    "adoptive father" are  living  in  Sudan  as  refugees  with  temporary
    residence.  The children are young and vulnerable and need the  support
    of a maternal figure.

13. It was submitted that the Secretary of State's policy on family reunion
    provides that exceptional compassionate circumstances should  be  taken
    into consideration and in this case that had not been done and the best
    interests of the children had not been considered.

Error of Law

14. On 6th March 2019 I heard submissions from both parties in relation  to
    error of law.  The Respondent contended there was  no  material  error.
    On behalf of the  Appellants  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  grounds
    contained  within  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  read
    together with the grant of permission by Judge Blundell.

15. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my  conclusions
    are contained in my decision dated 10th March 2019, promulgated on 18th
    March 2019.  I found that the judge had erred in law and set aside  the
    FtT decision.  I set out below paragraphs 11-21 of my  decision,  which
    contain my conclusions and reasons for setting aside the FtT decision;

         "11. At the oral hearing Mr Aziz submitted that the judge had erred
             materially by regarding the Immigration Rules  as  a  complete
             code.  The judge should have regarded the rules as a  starting
             point.  The judge had  erred  by  not  considering  the  human
             rights aspect of the appeals.

         12.  Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 response.

         13.  The refusal of entry clearance is deemed to be a refusal of  a
             human rights claim.  Therefore the Appellants have a right  of
             appeal  pursuant  to  section  82(1)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).  There is only
             one Ground of Appeal  open  to  the  Appellants  and  that  is
             pursuant to section  84(2)  which  is  that  an  appeal  under
             section 82(1)(b) (refusal  of  human  rights  claim)  must  be
             brought on the ground that  the  decision  is  unlawful  under
             section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

         14.  I am persuaded that  the  judge  adopted  an  incorrect  legal
             approach when considering  Article  8  in  the  1950  European
             Convention.  As pointed out by the judge  granting  permission
             to appeal, the Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon)  [2017]  UKSC  10
             found (paragraph  67)  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  the
             starting point for consideration with reference to  Article  8
             but not the only consideration.

         15.  It was confirmed in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 at paragraph  52
             that the Immigration Rules do not comprise a complete code.

         16.  In my view, the correct approach in a human rights  appeal  is
             firstly to consider whether the relevant Immigration Rules can
             be  met.   That  is  an  important   but   not   determinative
             consideration.  If the Immigration Rules cannot be  satisfied,
             and in this case the judge was  quite  correct  to  find  they
             could not, then an application or an appeal may still  granted
             or allowed if there  exists  exceptional  circumstances  which
             would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  if  the
             application was refused or appeal  dismissed.   This  approach
             was confirmed at paragraph 48 of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

         17.  There must be a consideration of proportionality.   There  has
             been no adequate  consideration  of  proportionality  in  this
             case.  If children are involved there must be a  consideration
             of the best interests of children as a primary  consideration.



         18.  The judge  found  that  Article  8  was  engaged,  finding  at
             paragraph 21 that family life exists  between  the  Appellants
             and SB.  As I conclude the  judge  has  adopted  an  incorrect
             approach to consideration of Article  8,  and  not  adequately
             considered proportionality, including the  best  interests  of
             the children, I find that the decision is unsafe and  must  be
             set aside.

         19.  I do not find it appropriate,  having  considered  the  Senior
             President's Practice Statements at paragraph 7, to remit these
             appeals to the FtT.

         20.  There does need to be a  further  hearing  and  that  will  be
             before the Upper Tribunal.  There are some preserved  findings
             which were not the subject of challenge.  The finding that the
             Immigration Rules are not satisfied is preserved,  as  is  the
             finding that family life exists between the Appellants and SB.
              It is not in dispute that SB has refugee status.

         21.  The purpose of the next hearing will be to ascertain  whether,
             given  that  the  Immigration  Rules  cannot   be   satisfied,
             exceptional  circumstances  exist  which   would   result   in
             unjustifiably harsh consequences if the  Appellants  were  not
             granted entry clearance."

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 5th September 2019

16. At the commencement of the hearing I ascertained that  I  had  received
    all documentation upon which the parties intended to rely.  I made  the
    parties aware that the following documents were on file;

       . Respondent's bundle with ECM review 8th August 2018;

       . Appellants' bundle comprising 114 pages;

       . Appellants' supplementary bundle indexed 1-7;

       . Appellants' supplementary bundle indexed 1-4;

       . Appellants' supplementary bundle indexed 1-8.

17. Mr Aziz submitted a copy of the Home Office Family  Migration  Guidance
    on Appendix FM section 1.0a published on 1st April  2019,  pages  67-78
    which provides guidance on considering the best interests of  a  child,
    exceptional circumstances and unjustifiably harsh consequences.

18. I should mention that following the hearing and prior to my preparation
    of  this  decision  I  received  two  e-mails  from   the   Appellants'
    solicitors.  The first is dated 6th September 2019  which  states  that
    the Sponsor wishes it to be known that her eldest  child  currently  in
    Sudan speaks and understands English while the youngest child in  Sudan
    understands a little bit of English.  The  Sponsor  was  asked  at  the
    hearing what she is currently doing and she wished  to  make  it  clear
    that she is currently studying and seeking employment.  The  second  e-
    mail dated 10th September 2019 states that the Sponsor wishes it to  be
    known that if her husband and the children are granted entry  clearance
    she intends to  work  and  she  intends  the  family  to  become  self-
    sufficient.  Her husband has work experience as a chef so will not find
    it difficult to obtain employment in the UK.

19. The representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there
    was no application for an adjournment.  Both representatives  confirmed
    that it was accepted that the Immigration Rules could not be satisfied,
    and the purpose of the hearing was  to  ascertain  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances which would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences.

The Oral Evidence

20. The Sponsor gave oral evidence with the assistance of an interpreter in
    Tigrinya.  There were no difficulties in  communication.   The  Sponsor
    adopted as her evidence her witness statements dated  28th  June  2018,
    2nd August 2018, and 30th July 2019.

21. The Sponsor was questioned by both representatives.   I  have  recorded
    all questions and answers in  my  Record  of  Proceedings  and  it  not
    necessary to reiterate them here.  If relevant I will refer to the oral
    evidence when I set out my findings and conclusions.

The Oral Submissions

22. On behalf of the Respondent I was reminded that the  Immigration  Rules
    could not be satisfied.  I was asked to find  that  there  would  be  a
    significant public interest in not allowing these appeals,  as  if  the
    Appellants were granted entry clearance they  would  be  a  significant
    burden on the public purse.  It was submitted that they  could  make  a
    further  application  in  the  future  when  they  could  satisfy   the
    Immigration Rules.

23. Mr Tan submitted that the Appellants had been  living  in  Sudan  since
    2012 and were effectively settled there.   They  were  not  lacking  in
    facilities.  The Sponsor had confirmed that  her  husband,  the  second
    Appellant, has employment.  The Sponsor had  also  confirmed  that  the
    Appellants have access to internet and mobile telephone.  There are  no
    issues with health or education.

24. Mr  Tan  submitted  that  the  Appellants  had  not  demonstrated  that
    exceptional circumstances existed and  evidence  was  lacking  to  show
    there would be unjustifiably harsh consequences if entry clearance  was
    refused.  It was pointed out that the Sponsor could apply for a visa to
    go to Sudan.  She had confirmed in  evidence  that  she  had  not  made
    enquiries in relation to this.  There was no  objective  or  background
    evidence to show that the  Appellants  were  living  in  unsatisfactory
    circumstances.  It was submitted that the best interests of  the  minor
    Appellants would be to remain where they are  currently  living  as  it
    would seem that they are settled, having resided there since 2012.

25. Mr Aziz referred me to the Sponsor's witness statement dated 30th  July
    2019 as to what the circumstances in Sudan are like.  The  Sponsor  has
    never applied to go back to Sudan as there is conflict in that country.
     Her family have no status there and they are refugees.

26. The Sponsor had stated that her husband was working illegally.   I  was
    asked to find that separation of the family amounted  to  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences.  Mr  Aziz  pointed  out  that  the  Sponsor  has  a
    daughter in the UK.  She has no nationality.  Her biological father has
    no contact with her whatsoever.  The best interests of the child in the
    UK would be to remain in this country living with the Sponsor.

27. I was asked to allow the appeal on the basis that continued  separation
    of  the  Appellants  from  the  Sponsor  would  amount  to  exceptional
    circumstances which would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences.

My Conclusions and Reasons

28. The preserved  findings  are  that  the  Immigration  Rules  cannot  be
    satisfied.   The  Sponsor  has  established  family   life   with   the
    Appellants.  The Sponsor has refugee status in the UK.

29. I must decide whether the Appellants have demonstrated that exceptional
    circumstances  exist  which   would   lead   to   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences if they were not granted entry clearance.

30. The best  interests  of  children  must  be  considered  as  a  primary
    consideration, but not the  only  consideration  and  not  a  paramount
    consideration.  The best interests of children  can  be  outweighed  by
    other factors, depending upon the circumstances.

31. The best interests of the Sponsor's daughter born in the UK would be to
    remain with her mother.  I accept that the biological father is not  in
    a relationship with the Sponsor and has never seen his  daughter.   The
    daughter is not a British citizen, and does not have settled status  in
    the UK and is not a qualifying child in that she does  not  have  seven
    years continuous residence.  The Sponsor's statement refers to  her  as
    being born in 2018, but I am satisfied that the correct date  of  birth
    is 2017 as this is confirmed by the birth certificate.

32. The best interests of the child in the UK would be to remain in the  UK
    with the Sponsor.

33. The best interests of the minor Appellants would be to be brought up by
    both the Sponsor and second Appellant.  On balance, although I  do  not
    have comprehensive details about their life in Sudan, I  conclude  that
    their best interests would  be  served  by  living  in  the  UK,  where
    generally it is accepted that the standard of living is higher than  in
    Sudan.

34. In considering Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules  I  must  have
    regard to the  considerations  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Sub-Section  (1)  confirms  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.
     On this point it is significant that the Appellants cannot satisfy the
    Immigration Rules. Sub-Section (2) confirms that it is  in  the  public
    interest that persons seeking to enter the UK can speak English.  There
    is no evidence that the second Appellant who is  an  adult,  can  speak
    English.  The remaining Appellants are minors.

35. Sub-Section (3) confirms that  it  is  in  the  public  interests  that
    persons seeking to enter  the  UK  are  financially  independent.   The
    Sponsor is not financially independent.  She has never worked while  in
    the UK.  She is reliant on public funds.  I find that  on  arrival  the
    Appellants would not be financially independent.

36. I do not find that Sub-Sections (4), (5) and (6) of  section  117B  are
    applicable in this case.

37. I have not been provided  with  comprehensive  evidence  regarding  the
    circumstances of the Appellants in Sudan.  The burden of  proof  is  on
    the Appellants on a balance of probabilities.

38. The Appellants have refugee status in Sudan.  There is a  copy  of  the
    second Appellant's refugee certificate at page 68  of  the  Appellants'
    bundle which covers the period between July 2016 and July 2017.   There
    is no evidence that refugee status is no longer in existence.

39. It is clear that the Appellants have resided in Sudan since 2012.   The
    Sponsor confirmed they have their own accommodation and do  not  reside
    with anybody else.

40. The Sponsor also confirmed that the Appellants have access to  internet
    and mobile  telephone.   The  second  Appellant  has  employment  in  a
    restaurant.

41. No  evidence  has  been  submitted  to  indicate  that  there  are  any
    significant issues regarding health or education of the children.   The
    evidence  does  not  indicate  that  the  Appellants  are   living   in
    unsatisfactory circumstances.

42. I do not find that the Sponsor's latest witness  statement  dated  30th
    July 2009 proves that exceptional circumstances exist in  this  appeal.
    In that statement she states that she holds no status in Sudan and that
    she left there illegally.  The Sponsor has not, on her  own  admission,
    made any enquiries as to whether she would be granted a visa to  travel
    to Sudan to see her family.  She states in her statement that she would
    be unable to work, but it is clear on her own evidence that her husband
    has regular employment.  She fears being  arrested  and  sent  back  to
    Eritrea if she travels  to  Sudan,  but  has  adduced  no  satisfactory
    evidence to indicate that would be likely.   Her  family  have  refugee
    status.

43. She refers in her witness statement to the risk of being raped  if  she
    returns to Sudan, but has adduced no satisfactory evidence to  indicate
    that that is anything more than speculation.  No satisfactory  evidence
    has been submitted to indicate that any  of  the  minor  Appellants  in
    Sudan are encountering any problems in their environment.

44. The  Sponsor  confirms  that  she  has  made  friends  in  the  UK  and
    established a life  here  but  that  does  not  amount  to  exceptional
    circumstances.  A more relevant point is her daughter in the  UK.   The
    position is that insufficient evidence has been submitted in this  case
    to demonstrate the circumstances in which the Appellants are living  in
    Sudan.  From the evidence provided, it would  appear  that  the  second
    Appellant has employment, which is sufficient to pay for accommodation,
    and there  are  no  issues  surrounding  the  education  of  the  minor
    Appellants.  Evidence has not  been  submitted  to  indicate  that  the
    Appellants  are  at  any  risk  of  being  arrested  by  the   Sudanese
    authorities.  The burden  of  proof  is  on  the  Appellants,  and  the
    evidence in this appeal is lacking.

45.  Article  8  is  engaged.   The  refusal  of  entry  clearance  is   an
    interference with the family  life  that  exists  between  SB  and  the
    Appellants.   I  have  to  consider  whether   that   interference   is
    proportionate.

46. I have to consider, bearing in mind that the Immigration  Rules  cannot
    be satisfied, whether  the  Appellants  have  demonstrated  exceptional
    circumstances which would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences.  If
    entry clearance is refused either the family are going to be  separated
    with the Sponsor remaining in the UK and the Appellants in Sudan  until
    a further application for entry clearance is made.  Alternatively,  the
    Sponsor could return to Sudan.  I fully accept that she does  not  wish
    to take that course of action, but in the absence of evidence, I cannot
    find that either  of  those  options  would  have  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences.

47. I must take into account the public interest.  The Appellants would not
    be financially independent if they came to the UK.   They  would  be  a
    burden on the public purse.  The Sponsor has said that her husband  has
    qualifications as a chef, although no evidence  of  the  qualifications
    has been provided.  He may be able to find employment in the future  in
    the UK but that is speculation.  I accept he has found employment in  a
    restaurant in Sudan.

48. In my view, the weight that must be attached to the public interest  in
    this case outweighs the weight to be attached  to  the  wishes  of  the
    Sponsor and Appellants that the Appellants be granted entry  clearance.
    I do not find that it has been proved  that  exceptional  circumstances
    exist  which  would  bring  about  unjustifiably  harsh   consequences.
    Therefore the appeals are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.



Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.  This  direction  is  made  because  these
appeals involve minor Appellants.  The direction is made  pursuant  to  rule
14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 12th September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The appeals are dismissed.


Signed                              Date 12th September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
