
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13311/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2020                  | On 24 March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              AMADU HASSAN GBLA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P Singh, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this decision the appellant is referred to as the Secretary of State
    and the respondent is referred to as the claimant.

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal C H Bennett ('the  Judge')  promulgated  on  11
    November 2019 in which he allowed the claimant's  human  rights  appeal
    against the decision dated 9 July 2019 to refuse  his  application  for
    leave to remain on human rights  grounds  following  the  making  of  a
    deportation order on 7 January 2019.

 3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Boyes granted permission to appeal  on
    the one ground advanced by the Secretary of State namely that the judge
    failed to give adequate reasons.

Anonymity

 4. The judge did not issue an anonymity direction.  The  parties  did  not
    seek such a direction before me.

 5. In deciding not to issue a direction  I  observe  that  the  claimant's
    conviction and sentence were covered by both local and  national  media
    and his name and photograph, as well as  those  of  his  co-defendants,
    were published. I further note that the unsuccessful defence of one  of
    the claimant's defendant's, Ms. Angela Holland, as to her  having  been
    the victim of a serious sexual assault by the victim was disbelieved by
    the jury and such rejection was reported by the media.

Background

 6. The claimant is a national of Sierra Leone. The Secretary of State  has
    provided a copy of  the  claimant's  expired  Sierra  Leonean  passport
    confirming that the claimant was issued by the Dutch authorities with a
    'permit to stay' on 12 February 1990, when aged 6.

 7. At the hearing  before  the  Judge  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    challenge the claimant's evidence that he had entered  the  Netherlands
    when aged 3 and had resided in that country from  such  time  until  he
    relocated to the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  accepted  the  claimant's
    evidence on this issue at [28] of his decision.

 8. The claimant resided in the Netherlands with his uncle and  aunt  until
    they moved to  this  country.  He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependant of an EEA national exercising EEA treaty  rights  in  January
    1991, when aged 7. He was in the care of a  local  authority  from  the
    ages of 7 to 18 and was a former relevant child under the Children  Act
    1989 until he turned 21. The claimant was granted indefinite  leave  to
    remain in this country in May 2001.  He  had  therefore  been  lawfully
    present in this country for almost 29 years when he appeared before the
    Judge.

 9. He visited Sierra Leone on two occasions, firstly at some time in  2004
    or 2005 and again in 2007. On both occasions he travelled with his aunt
    and uncle undertaking charitable work and stayed  in  the  country  for
    approximately three weeks. He has a  son  in  this  country  though  he
    separated from his son's mother some  nine  months  after  the  child's
    birth in 2013. Since that time, he saw his son at weekends up until his
    imprisonment and now talks to him by telephone once a week from prison.
    His son was aged 6 at the date of the Judge's decision.

10. Between November 2006 and October 2018, the claimant accumulated eleven
    convictions arising from fourteen offences. Such offences  ranged  from
    possession of an offensive weapon, criminal damage  and  possession  of
    cannabis to failures to surrender to custody  and  failures  to  comply
    with the requirements of community orders. The majority of the offences
    resulted  in  the  imposition  of  conditional  discharges,  fines  and
    community penalties. On 5 February 2018 the claimant was  convicted  of
    battery  and  sentenced  to  four  weeks'  imprisonment.   After   this
    conviction the Secretary of State decided not to pursue deportation and
    issued the claimant with a warning letter.

11.  On  12  October  2018  the  claimant  was  sentenced  to  six   years'
    imprisonment  at  Chelmsford  Crown  Court  having  pleaded  guilty  to
    aggravated burglary. He had previously been convicted following a trial
    for theft in relation to the victim's motor car and was sentenced to  6
    months imprisonment concurrent.

12. By his sentencing remarks HHJ  Christopher  Morgan  observed  that  the
    claimant attended the home of the victim with his two co-defendants one
    of whom had informed the claimant  that  she  had  been  raped  by  the
    victim. A small axe and a lump hammer were carried by  members  of  the
    group. The victim was physically attacked, and money was extorted  from
    him. Items were taken from the victim's home and the victim's  car  was
    driven away.

13. At her trial, Ms. Holland repeated before the jury her allegation  that
    the victim had  raped  her  but  was  disbelieved.  In  sentencing  the
    claimant HHJ Christopher Morgan noted as to underlying events:

         'You, Miss Holland, had  formed  a  close  association  with  [TD].
         Someone that you had known for a  number  of  years.  It  is  quite
         apparent that when you would visit him, you and he would engage  in
         sexual acts. It is equally plain that  in  the  lead  up  to  these
         events, you had agreed with him to engage in sexual acts  for  some
         �50. Either to provide  accommodation,  as  he  understood,  or  to
         purchase some drugs, because you, at that time, were residing in  a
         house of your friend's, and so it came to  pass  that  you  visited
         [the victim] on that evening.

         There had been some disruption to arrangements, but you chose to go
         round there, and events then unfolded. It was your claim  that  you
         left without having performed any sexual act upon him, but returned
         because your mobile phone was left within his property and when you
         went in, you claim that  he  committed  a  serious  sexual  offence
         against you. He denied that, as he has always denied it, indicating
         to the jury that you had, in fact,  performed  oral  sex  upon  him
         during the course of the incident, and then, as it turns  out,  you
         returned to an address where your two co-defendants are and as  you
         have said and maintained throughout, having discussed  the  matter,
         pressure was applied to you to seek some form of self-justice.  You
         maintain that you simply went around to - with the other two  -  to
         ensure that they managed to persuade him to accompany  you  to  the
         police station where it was expected  that  he  would  confess  his
         guilt.

         It is quite plain on the evidence, as far as I am  concerned,  that
         the real intention was to go round, make the allegation and extract
         money out of him. As you say in your letter, you realise  that  now
         and you knew that if an allegation of a sexual nature was made,  he
         would be unlikely to report what, in fact, had happened to  him  by
         way of aggravated burglary and theft ... it  is  also  quite  plain
         that because of your need and the other's needs for drugs which you
         had consumed that night, both before and after your visit  to  [the
         victim], that you all anticipated that there would be drugs in  the
         property.'

14. As to the claimant, the sentencing judge observed:

         'It is said by the Crown that there  is  high  culpability  because
         there was significant planning. You went equipped with weapons  and
         they were present on entry. Well, it seems to me that whilst  there
         was some planning,  it  cannot,  in  this  case,  be  described  as
         significant. All of you had taken drugs. All  of  you,  I  suspect,
         were influenced, and not one of you had been capable of working out
         the significance of what you were about to do.

         ...

         The effect on [the victim] has been profound he has lost  his  home
         through no choice of his own and he had suffered,  he  says,  post-
         traumatic stress disorder.'

Hearing before the FtT

15. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hendon  Magistrates'  Court
    on 25 October 2019. The claimant was unrepresented. The Judge  recorded
    the claimant's oral evidence at [11(q)] as to  events  surrounding  the
    index offence as he understood them at the time:

         '[The claimant] was  sorry  for  having  offended.  He  had  become
         involved in the offence because [Ms. Holland] has returned  to  the
         house at which he had been living and had stated that she had  been
         raped. She had been upset. It has then emerged that  she  had  left
         her mobile telephone at [the victim's] home. He had gone  with  her
         and with [Mr. Wilson] to help her to get her mobile telephone back.
         It had not been his intention to extort money  from  [the  victim].
         But when he and the others had arrived at [the victim's] home, [the
         victim] had begun fighting.  At  the  time  of  the  offence,  [the
         claimant] had been under the influence of cocaine.'

16. As to the claimant's personal circumstances, the  Judge  accepted  that
    his father is dead and that he does not know  the  whereabouts  of  his
    mother, nor does he know of any  other  relatives  residing  in  Sierra
    Leone: [29(d), (e)].

17. Whilst acknowledging that  the  sentence  of  six  years'  imprisonment
    required the appellant to be considered under section  117C(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ('the  2002  Act')  and
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules alone, the  Judge  proceeded  to
    consider whether, save for the length of sentence, the  claimant  would
    have met the exceptional requirements established by  sections  117C(4)
    and (5) of the 2002 Act and paragraphs 399(a) and 399A of the Rules.

18. The Judge accepted that the claimant saw his son at the  weekend,  from
    Friday until Sunday, until his imprisonment: [30]. However,  I  observe
    that the claimant provided no evidence as to his son's nationality  and
    so did not establish by means of documentary evidence that his son is a
    British citizen. In any event, the Judge concluded that  there  was  no
    evidential basis for concluding that the hardship his son would  suffer
    by remaining in this country with his mother whilst  the  claimant  was
    deported would be unduly harsh  and  so  the  claimant  was  unable  to
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration  Rules:
    [33]. The claimant has not cross-appealed this finding.

19. Upon considering paragraph 399A of the Rules, the Judge found that  the
    claimant satisfied two of the three requirements: paragraph 399A(a) and
    (c). As to paragraph 399A(b), the Judge determined  at  [37]  that  the
    claimant was not socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
    Kingdom:

         '... It is apparent that, from c. mid  2015  until  December  2017,
         [the claimant] was not living as a law-abiding  citizen.  The  fact
         that a number of the offences  involved  failures  to  comply  with
         requirements of community orders is not,  so  far  as  'social  and
         cultural integration' is concerned, to the point. Consistently with
         the above guidance, 'social and cultural integration' requires that
         an individual complies with orders of the above  kind  as  much  as
         with the provisions of the  criminal  law  forbidding,  by  way  of
         example, theft, violence and disorderly conduct. By contrast, there
         is no evidence of [the claimant] having  been  involved  in  useful
         voluntary community activity and/or in sporting or other  clubs  or
         associations.  I am therefore not satisfied  that  he  is  properly
         categorised as being 'socially and culturally integrated' into  the
         United Kingdom.'

20. At [38], the Judge accepted that there are very  significant  obstacles
    to the claimant's integration on return to Sierra Leone.

         'I accept that [the claimant] left Sierra Leone when he  was  c.  3
         years old and has returned there on only 2 occasions on holiday, on
         each occasion for c. 3 weeks, in 2004  or  2005  and  in  2007.   I
         accept also that his father is dead and that he has no knowledge of
         any relatives living in Sierra Leone.  Specifically, I am satisfied
         that he does not know what has become of his mother (or whether she
         is still living, and if so where), he has had no contact  with  her
         since he was c. 3 years old and that he does not  know  whether  he
         has any brothers or sisters or other  relatives  living  in  Sierra
         Leone. And because I am satisfied that he left Sierra Leone when he
         was only c. 3 years old and has only returned for the 2 periods  of
         3 weeks (as above), I am satisfied that there are no  childhood  or
         school friendships which he could revive and that he has no friends
         in Sierra Leone.'

21. The Judge accepted that  the  claimant  does  not  speak  Creole,  that
    English is only nominally spoken in Sierra Leone, and having left  when
    aged 3 the claimant does not have familiarity with non-verbal  cues  or
    cultural norms in his home country. The Judge found, at [38(e)]:

         '... I am satisfied that, if [the claimant] were removed to  Sierra
         Leone, he would have no relatives or friends there  to  assist  him
         and would, and  at  the  very  least,  have  the  most  substantial
         difficulties  in  understanding  the  local  speech  and  of  being
         understood by those to whom he spoke. He would, I am satisfied,  be
         a 'stranger in a foreign land'.   In  these  circumstances,  I  am,
         additionally, satisfied that he has no realistic  understanding  of
         how life in Sierra Leone is carried on, no  realistic  capacity  to
         participate in life or to be  accepted  there  or  to  be  able  to
         operate on  a  day-to-day  basis.  In  these  circumstances,  I  am
         satisfied that he would be at the most substantial disadvantage  on
         the open labour market in Sierra  Leone.   His  position  would  be
         comparable with that of the appellant in AK (Sierra  Leone)  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 813.'

22. As the claimant is a foreign national criminal upon  whom  a  custodial
    sentence of over 4 years has been imposed, the Judge considered whether
    very compelling circumstances arose, as required under section  117C(6)
    of the 2002 Act and paragraph 398 of the Rules. Such consideration runs
    over 5 pages and the Judge found, inter alia, at [44(b)]:

         'I am satisfied that [the claimant's] case goes well beyond a 'bare
         case' of the kind described in paragraph 399A, even bearing in mind
         my conclusions in paragraph 37, that, because of his past offending
         behaviour,  he  is  not  properly  categorised  as  'socially   and
         culturally integrated' into the United Kingdom. The  factors  which
         lead to the conclusion that his case goes well beyond a 'bare case'
         of 'very significant obstacles' to integration  into  Sierra  Leone
         and that there are 'very compelling circumstances  over  and  above
         those described in paragraph 399 and 399A' are those which  I  have
         set out in paragraph 38, taken with the factual matters  identified
         in the extracts from the judgements in MK  (Sierra  Leone)  and  AK
         (Sierra Leone), which I have set out in paragraphs 24 and  25  and,
         crucially (in summary) that:

             (1)  he left Sierra Leone when he was c. 3 years old;

             (2)  apart from the two holidays, each of 3 weeks in  2004  or
             2005 and 2007, he has not  returned  to  or  lived  in  Sierra
             Leone;

             (3)  his father is dead, he has no news of his mother, has had
             no contact with her since c. 1986, does not  know  whether  he
             has any brothers or sisters and  there  are  no  relatives  or
             friends  whom  he  knows  and/or  who  might  assist  him   to
             integrate, to find employment and/or provide him with  a  home
             and/or a base on his arrival in Sierra Leone;

             (4)  there are no childhood or  school  friendships  which  he
             might seek to revive  (necessarily,  because  he  left  sierra
             Leone at the age of 3 before he could  have  formed  any  such
             friendships);

             (5)  he cannot  speak  or  understand  Creole,  or  any  other
             language of Sierra Leone and his English is not understood  by
             Creole speakers (or speakers  of  other  languages  of  Sierra
             Leone);

             (6)  he does not have the  familiarity  with  the  'non-verbal
             cues or cultural norms' which an adult who has lived in Sierra
             Leone for a substantial period of time would have;

             (7)  he will be at a very substantial disadvantage on the open
             labour market there and because of his

                  (i)  having no relatives or friends to assist him, and

                  (ii) inability to speak and/or understand Creole, and  the
                  corresponding  difficulties  which  Creole  speakers  (and
                  speakers of other languages in Sierra Leone) will have  in
                  understanding him,

             and because his history of employment in the United Kingdom is
             not likely to be of substantial assistance to him  in  finding
             employment in Sierra Leone, I conclude that he is  not  likely
             to be able to find employment, and;

             (8)  Sierra Leone's past history and its  present  substantial
             poverty.'

23. The Judge found that the claimant  had  acted  out  of  character  with
    regard to the index offence and accepted that he had not used drugs  in
    prison. He concluded that very compelling circumstances arose  in  this
    matter, over and above the exceptions established by paragraphs 399 and
    399A of the Rules.

Grounds of appeal

24. One ground of appeal is advanced by the respondent though two  elements
    are clearly identified as being raised:

         '7.  It is submitted that as the appellant is found not to meet the
             requirements of 399 and 399A that  the  FTTJ  has  misdirected
             himself in going on to consider very compelling circumstances.
              These must be 'over and above' the requirements  of  399  and
             399A, therefore those requirements must first  be  met  before
             any further consideration is to be conducted.

         8.   In any event, the FTTJ fails to make any  reasoned  assessment
             as to very compelling circumstances.  While he states at  [44]
             that he has in mind the very substantial weight which must  be
             given to the public interest he fails to perform any balancing
             exercise and leaps to finding at  [44]  that  the  appellant's
             deportation would be disproportionate.'

25. No Rule 24 response was filed by the appellant and no cross-appeal  was
    filed.

Decision on Error of Law

26. The first ground advanced by the Secretary of  State,  at  [7]  of  her
    grounds, possesses no merit. There is no  requirement  that  a  foreign
    national criminal sentenced to a custodial term of 4 years or more must
    meet the requirements of paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  Rules  before
    being permitted to seek to  establish  very  compelling  circumstances.
    Nicol J confirmed in Chege (section 117D: Article 8:  approach)  [2015]
    UKUT 165 (IAC); [2015] Imm. A.R. 850, at [27]-[28], that the purpose of
    paragraph 398 is  to  recognize  circumstances  that  are  sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh the public interest in deportation  but  do  not
    fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A. A foreign  national  criminal  can
    rely upon being able to satisfy either or both paragraph 399  and  399A
    when  seeking  to  establish  very  compelling  circumstances,  but  to
    outweigh the  public  interest  in  deportation  such  very  compelling
    circumstances must be  over  and  above  those  identified  within  the
    exceptions and so a holistic approach is adopted to the assessment:  NA
    (Pakistan) v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 662; [2017] 1 W.L.R. 207.

27. As to the second ground, I do not accept Mr Singh's contention  that  a
    failure to adopt the 'balance sheet' approach advocated by Lord  Thomas
    of Cwmgiedd in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2016] UKSC 60, [2016] 1 W.L.R. 4799 is a material error  of  law.  The
    Court of Appeal confirmed in AS v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 417; [2019] Imm. A.R. 759 that though it  is
    desirable for tribunals to structure their judgments  by  adopting  the
    'balance sheet' approach, it is not  fatal  if  such  approach  is  not
    followed, at [15]-[17].

28. The Secretary of State further asserts that  in  concluding  that  very
    compelling circumstances arose in this  matter,  the  Judge  gave  slim
    reference, at most, to the public interest and failed  to  engage  with
    the seriousness  of  the  offence.  It  was  accepted  that  the  Judge
    addressed the nature of the public interest consideration at  [18]-[19]
    and it was further referenced at  the  outset  of  [44].  However,  the
    Secretary of State's position is that no application  of  the  required
    weight can be observed within [44], with no express consideration being
    given to the starting point that the public  interest  'almost  always'
    outweighs countervailing considerations  of  private  life  in  a  case
    involving  a  serious  offender:  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
    Department v. KE (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA Civ 1382; [2018] 1 W.L.R.  2610,
    at [34]:

         'Therefore, as Lord Reed emphasises, whatever  the  seriousness  of
         the offences or length of sentence, the ultimate  question  is  the
         same - would deportation be in  breach  of  article  8  -  but  the
         sentence imposed affects the approach to the exercise of  assessing
         proportionality for article 8(2) purposes. If it is at  least  four
         years'  imprisonment,   any   decision-maker   must   attach   very
         considerable  weight  to  the  general  assessment  of  the  public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals, now  directly  adopted  by
         Parliament in statute, under which such  a  sentence  represents  a
         level of offending in respect of which the public  interest  almost
         always outweighs countervailing considerations of private or family
         life, only being outweighed by  countervailing  factors  which  are
         very compelling (see Ali at [46]). Where there is a challenge to  a
         decision  involving  the  article  8(2)  balancing  exercise  by  a
         decision-maker on behalf of the Secretary of State in an individual
         case, as I have already described, the court or tribunal must  give
         that general assessment substantial weight, because it is  endorsed
         by Parliament; and it must also take into account  -  but  no  more
         than take into account - the application of that general assessment
         to the facts of the specific case by  the  original  decision-maker
         (OH (Serbia)  at  [15(d)]).  As  independent  judicial  bodies,  on
         hearing a challenge to an executive decision in an individual case,
         it is the duty of the court or tribunal to make its own findings of
         the relevant  facts  and  then  make  its  own  assessment  of  the
         proportionality of the proposed deportation (Ali at [46]).'

29. It is appropriate to observe that the  Judge  adopted  an  impressively
    meticulous approach to his assessment of the oral evidence  before  him
    and to the accompanying documentary  evidence.  He  correctly  directed
    himself to the exacting test to be applied and it is  obvious  that  he
    took great care in undertaking his overall assessment. His decision and
    reasons run to 46 pages  and  his  assessment  as  to  very  compelling
    circumstances amounts  to  5  pages.  However,  the  relevance  of  the
    seriousness of the offence in the proportionality exercise  is  greater
    than simply noting the sentence imposed for the serious offence.  There
    is to be engagement with the principle that in making  the  seriousness
    of the offence the touchstone  for  determining  the  strength  of  the
    public  interest  in  deportation,  Parliament,  in  enacting   section
    117C(2), must have intended courts and tribunals to have regard to more
    than the mere question of whether the particular foreign  criminal,  if
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, would pose a  risk  to  United
    Kingdom society.  This  Tribunal  confirmed  in  MS  (s.117C(6):  "very
    compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC), at [49]-
    [52] that there is nothing in Hesham  Ali  that  requires  a  court  or
    tribunal to eschew the principle of general deterrence, as  an  element
    of  the  public  interest,  in  determining  a  deportation  appeal  by
    reference to section 117C(6).

30. I am satisfied, upon careful consideration of the  Tribunal's  detailed
    reasoning at [44], that the Judge materially erred  as  to  the  weight
    given  to  the  public  interest  in  the  proportionality  assessment,
    including the  weight  to  be  given  to  general  deterrence  and  the
    substance  of  the  criminal  offence,  in  this  instance  vigilantism
    involving the carrying of weapons, that was to be  weighed  along  with
    the claimant's personal circumstances.  Therefore,  despite  the  clear
    efforts of the Judge, I find that there is such material error  of  law
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal has to be set aside.

Remaking the decision

31. Mr. Singh indicated that if a material error of law were to  be  found,
    this would be an appropriate matter for  the  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision on the papers before it.

32. I addressed this issue with the claimant at the hearing.  I  sought  to
    provide as helpful an explanation as to proceedings as possible, but  I
    am satisfied that the claimant had not been aware that  if  a  material
    error of law were established, such as to require the setting aside  of
    the Judge's decision, then he would be expected to provide  submissions
    as to why his human rights appeal should be allowed. I decided that  it
    would not, in such circumstances, be just to proceed  to  remaking  the
    decision where the claimant was unable to adequately  engage  with  the
    remaking proceedings at the hearing before me.

33. I further observe the recent decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  CI
    (Nigeria) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ
    2027, which was handed down some 11 days after the Judge's decision was
    promulgated.  Though  the  appellant  did  not  challenge  the  Judge's
    decision before this Tribunal as to his social and cultural integration
    into the United Kingdom, a Judge now considering this appeal  would  be
    required to consider that a person's social  identity  is  not  defined
    solely by their social ties, but by familiarity with and  participation
    in  the  shared  customs,  traditions,  practices,   beliefs,   values,
    linguistic idioms and other local knowledge which situated a person  in
    a society or social group and generated a sense of belonging: Maslov  v
    Austria (1638/03) [2009] I.N.L.R.  47.  The  impact  of  offending  and
    imprisonment upon a person's integration in this  country  will  depend
    not only on the nature, frequency and duration of  the  offending,  but
    also on  whether  and  how  deeply  the  individual  was  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK to begin with. The  latter  requirement
    was not considered by the Judge and evidence should be heard  upon  it.
    The weight to be attributed to the fact  that  the  claimant  has  very
    little, if any, knowledge of any other environment  than  that  of  the
    United Kingdom is of importance: Akinyemi v. Secretary of State for the
    Home Department (No.2) [2019] EWCA Civ 2098. I am  therefore  satisfied
    that this matter should properly be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    and further oral evidence be presented and considered.

34. In such circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal should be  permitted  to
    undertake its proportionality assessment  in  the  round,  and  not  be
    required to commence on the basis of the Judge's initial assessment  of
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules.

35. The Secretary of State did not challenge the Judge's findings of  fact,
    and so the following findings are preserved:

      a. The claimant's immigration history and early life, at [29];

      b. Unduly harsh for the claimant's son to reside in Sierra  Leone,  at
         [32];

      c. The claimant is not in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
         his son's mother, at [34];

      d. The claimant has been lawfully present in this  country  since  the
         age of 7, at [35];

      e. The claimant does not speak or understand Creole, at [38(b)].

Notice of decision

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    11 November 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

37. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
    before any Judge other than  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  C  H
    Bennett.

38. Preserved findings of fact are detailed at [35] above.

39. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 23 March 2020
