
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13019/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2019                   |On 5 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Obiageli Anne Okoltu
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Faryl, instructed by MA Consultants
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Williams  promulgated  18.9.18,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 3.6.18, to refuse
    her application made on 14.12.17 for Leave to Remain in the UK  on  the
    basis of the 10 years long residence provisions under paragraph 276B of
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.10.18, on grounds 2 & 3 only, there being no arguable error  of  law
    in the refusal to adjourn in order to enable the appellant to  complete
    what she claimed would be 10 years' lawful residence.

 3. However, Judge Mailer considered it arguable that unfairness  may  have
    arisen in the failure of the judge  to  consider  potentially  relevant
    Home Office guidance that an application  can  be  granted  "if  it  is
    considered 28 days or less before the applicant completes the  required
    qualifying period, provided they meet all  the  other  rules  for  long
    residence," (Long Residence Version 5.0 April 2017).

 4. Judge Mailer also considered ground three arguable, on the basis of the
    appellant's contention that this was a de minimis case or, alternative,
    that the failure to complete the 10 years by some 14 days at  the  date
    of the promulgation was highly relevant to  the  Article  8  assessment
    outside the Rules.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Williams should be set aside.

The appellant's Immigration History

 6. It is necessary to first establish the appellant's immigration  history
    before considering whether  she  could  have  met  the  10  years  long
    residence requirement under the Rules, and, if not, how close she came.



 7. The appellant first came to the UK on 2.10. 2008 with  entry  clearance
    as a student. She was subsequently granted further leave as  a  Tier  1
    (Post Study) Migrant and later as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant.
    Her last leave expired on 30.1.13.

 8. Within extant leave, on 30.1.13, she applied for Leave to Remain  as  a
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur but this was refused on 5.3.14. Her appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal was  dismissed  on  23.8.17.  Her  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 23.10.17 and by the Upper Tribunal on 1.12.17, so that
    she became Appeal Rights Exhausted on 1.12.17.

 9. On 14.12.17 she made an out of time application for Indefinite Leave to
    Remain on the basis of 10 years long residence, which  was  refused  in
    the decision of the respondent (RFR), dated 3.6.18.

10. At the date of the RFR, the appellant had only been in the UK  a  total
    of 9 years, 8 months and 1 day. The respondent  accepted  that  pending
    the outcome of her appeals the appellant had section 3C leave but  that
    expired on 1.12.17, so that the total length of continuous lawful leave
    was only 9 years, 1 month, and 21 days, as explained in the RFR.

11. It was also accepted that as the out of time  application  of  14.12.17
    was submitted within 14 days of expiry of becoming ARE,  paragraph  39E
    of the Rules applied so as to  ignore  the  period  of  overstaying  in
    respect of the requirement under 276B(v) that an applicant must not  be
    in breach of immigration laws.

12. However, as explained in the RFR, the respondent considered that as the
    application was made out of time she cannot benefit from 3C  to  extend
    the period of continuous leave beyond 1.12.17, and  thus  she  did  not
    qualify under the 10 years'  long  residence  provisions  of  paragraph
    276B. The Secretary of State considered that it was not appropriate  to
    apply her discretion and consequently the application was refused under
    paragraph 276D.

13. The crucial issue in consideration of any error of law in the  decision
    of Judge Williams is  whether  the  appellant's  period  of  continuous
    lawful residence ended on 1.12.17 or whether  it  can  be  regarded  as
    extended further by operation of paragraph 39E  and  276B(v).  However,
    even if can be extended further, the continuous lawful residence  still
    had not reached the required 10 years by the date of the RFR on 3.6.18,
    as explained above.

14. This issue was recently litigated before Mr Justice Sweeney on  similar
    factual circumstances, see R (on the application of Ahmed) v SSHD (para
    276B - ten years lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 00010. At the outset  of
    the hearing, I drew this decision to the  attention  of  Ms  Faryl  and
    acceded to her request to put the case back in the list to allow her to
    consider the case.

15. On resumption of the hearing, Ms Faryl submitted that before the First-
    tier Tribunal the Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Richardson made the
    concession that the appellant had completed nine  years,  eight  months
    and one day of lawful residence in the UK on the basis of 39E. This  is
    recorded at [9] of Judge Williams' decision but with respect to both Mr
    Richardson and Judge Williams, if such a concession was  made,  it  was
    made in error of law.

16. The definition of "lawful residence" is found in paragraph 276A(b):

    "276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE(1)...

    (b)  "lawful residence" means residence which is  continuous  residence
    pursuant to:

         (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

         (ii) temporary admission within section 11  of  the  1971  Act  (as
         previously in force), or immigration bail within section 11 of  the
         1971 Act, where leave to enter or remain is  subsequently  granted;
         or

         (iii)    an exemption from immigration control, including where  an
         exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a  grant
         of leave to enter or remain."

17. This makes it clear that lawful residence  means  continuous  residence
    which was pursuant  to  existing  leave  to  enter  or  remain;  or  to
    temporary admission within s.11 of the 1971 Act where leave to enter or
    remain was subsequently granted; or to an  exemption  from  immigration
    control (including where an exemption ceases to apply it is immediately
    followed by a grant of leave to enter or remain). The appellant had  no
    "lawful  residence"  after  1.12.17  as  she  had  no  existing  leave,
    temporary admission or exemption  from  immigration  control.  She  was
    without leave at all from that date.

18. 276B sets out a series of requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence in  the  UK.
    It is clear from the structure of paragraph 276B, read  with  paragraph
    276D,  that  sub-paragraph  (v)  represents  one   of   a   number   of
    supplementary requirements in addition to the primary requirement under
    sub-paragraph (i)(a) that the applicant has to have  had  at  least  10
    years continuous lawful residence in the UK.

19. 276B(v)  does  not  alter  the  requirement  to  demonstrate  10  years
    continuous lawful residence and does not provide an  exception  to  the
    clear  requirement  of  276B(i)(a).  276(v)  sets  out  an   additional
    requirement, which does not qualify any other pre-existing  requirement
    in the Immigration Rules, such that even if a person has had  at  least
    10 years continuous lawful  residence  in  the  UK,  he  would  not  be
    entitled to indefinite leave to remain if he was in the UK in breach of
    immigration laws, unless one of the  exceptions  in  sub-paragraph  (v)
    applied. The appellant cannot rely on 39E for any  purpose  other  than
    meeting the requirement in 276B(v). It does not and cannot  extend  the
    period of continuous lawful residence as defined in 276A(b). It follows
    that any concession made to the contrary in the First-tier Tribunal was
    in error of law even if erroneously accepted by Judge Williams.

20. Given the definition of "lawful residence" in paragraph 276A(b) and its
    effect as explained above, Ms Faryl's  submission  that  the  Applicant
    could meet the first  requirement  under  paragraph  276B(i)(a)  cannot
    succeed. In the circumstances, I  reject  the  argument  that  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 276B, the appellant should be treated as  if  she
    had leave to remain and thus to be in "lawful residence."

21. It is obvious from the foregoing that the appellant  could  never  have
    met the requirements of 276B at all. To the extent Judge  Williams  may
    have erred in finding otherwise, that error  is  not  material  to  the
    outcome of dismissal of the appeal.

Ground 3: De Minimis & Relevance to Article 8

22. Whilst I accept that the appellant came within a year of completing the
    required 10 years' continuous lawful residence, it was not a  shortfall
    of 14 days as contended for by the appellant, but more than  3  months.
    There is nothing to suggest that the Secretary  of  State  should  have
    exercised her discretion in those circumstances.

23. I also accept that the extent to which  an  applicant  might  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Rules  is  highly  relevant  to  any  article  8
    proportionality balancing  exercise.  However,  the  judgments  of  the
    Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq)  and,  R  (on  the  applications  of
    Agyarko and Ikuga) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
    UKSC 11,  and the subsequent judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  EEA
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ
    239, show that Article 8 must now be considered in the light of changes
    made to the legislative  scheme  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  -  in
    consequence of which, the appellate scheme is no longer  based  on  the
    premise that a person may fail under the Immigration Rules, but succeed
    under Article 8 on appeal. Courts and Tribunals  are  also  obliged  to
    follow sections 117A - 117D (above) - which include the provision  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when their immigration status is precarious, as was  that  of
    the appellant.

24. There is no arguable case that the respondent's decision prejudiced the
    Applicant's private or family life in a manner sufficiently serious  to
    amount to a breach of Article 8. I am satisfied  that  the  Applicant's
    Article 8 claim was also bound to  fail.  Acquiring  9  years  and  one
    month's lawful residence does not bring the appellant anywhere close to
    meeting the requirements.

25. In all the circumstances, and for the reasons explained above,  I  find
    that there is no error of law in the decision of  Judge  Williams.  Any
    error there may have  been  was  not  material  to  the  outcome  of  a
    dismissal of the appeal.

Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the
                    appellant's  appeal  stands  and  the   appeal   remains
                    dismissed.

     Signed DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.








Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.


     Signed DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
