
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13759/2017
                                                HU/13768/2017, HU/13769/2017
                                                HU/13770/2017, HU/13771/2017
                                                               HU/13772/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th October 2018                         |On 14th February 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                 SM & OTHERS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. O L Atugbe,
For the Respondent:    Mr. A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  SM and his dependants
      are granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No report of
      these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This
      direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings being
      brought for contempt of court.


   2. The appellants are all citizens of Pakistan.  SM is the husband of ST,
      the second appellant, and the father of QA (born 18.06.96),  NA  (born
      06.06.03), FS (born 05.12.04)  and  MA  (born  18.04.07),  the  third,
      fourth, fifth and sixth appellants.  SM entered the UK on 16th October
      2017 as a visa exempt official of the Pakistani government.  His  wife
      and children appear to have arrived in May 2008, with leave to  remain
      in the UK until 8th October 2011.  SM  and  his  family  were  granted
      further leave to remain until 11th August  2012,  and  on  9th  August
      2012, they made an in-time application for leave to remain outside the
      immigration rules.  That application was refused on 30th October  2013
      and an appeal against that decision was dismissed on 8th  April  2014.
      The family had exhausted their rights of appeal, when  an  application
      for permission to appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 29th May
      2014.


   3. On 14th March 2016, SM and his  family  again  applied  for  leave  to
      remain in the UK, outside the immigration rules.  That application was
      rejected on 29th July 2016  because  the  correct  Immigration  Health
      Surcharge had not been paid.   A  further  application  for  leave  to
      remain on the basis of family and private life was made by SM, NA,  FS
      and MA on 17th August 2016.  By that time, QA was over the age  of  18
      and  she  made  a  separate  application  in  her  own   right.    The
      applications were refused for the reasons set out in  decisions  dated
      12th October 2017.  The decisions attracted  an  in-country  right  of
      appeal.  The appeals were heard by FtT Judge Tully on  15th  May  2018
      and dismissed for the reasons set out in  a  decision  promulgated  on
      22nd May 2018.  It is that decision that is now  the  subject  of  the
      appeal before me.


The decision of FtT Judge Tully


   4.  The family's immigration history is set out at paragraphs [2] to  [3]
      of the decision.  At paragraph [2], the Judge summarises  the  reasons
      given by FtT Judge Pickup in his decision  promulgated  on  8th  April
      2014, for dismissing the previous appeal.  The Judge  noted  that  FtT
      Judge Pickup had made a "... finding that [SM] had submitted  a  false
      document in support of the application, lied about  his  work  history
      and the Judge also dismissed the appeal on Human Rights grounds.".


   5. At paragraph  [4]  of  the  decision,  FtT  Judge  Tully  records  the
      concession made by the appellant's representative that "... because it
      was proposed that the family be removed as a unit there was no  impact
      on family life.  She  accepted  that  the  only  arguable  ground  was
      private life.".  At paragraph [9], the  Judge  notes  that  she  heard
      evidence from SM, ST and QA, and that in reaching  her  decision,  she
      had regard to the evidence including the appellant's 426-page  bundle.
      The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [14] to
      [53] of the decision.


   6. FtT Judge Tully had referred to the previous decision of FtT Judge
      Pickup, at paragraph [2] of the decision.  However, in reaching her
      decision, FtT Judge Tully considered for herself the evidence now
      relied upon by SM which was said to undermine the previous finding
      made by FtT Judge Pickup that SM had used a false document in support
      of an application, and lied about his work history.  At paragraph [17]
      of her decision, FtT Judge Tully considered the payslips and bank
      statements relied upon by SM, but found that the evidence produced did
      not undermine the findings made by FtT Judge Pickup.


   7. At paragraph [19], FtT Judge Tully noted that the appellants had
      entered the United Kingdom lawfully but that the employment of SM that
      gave rise to that entry, had terminated in October 2011. She noted
      that FtT Judge Pickup had considered the appellants' human rights
      claims, and concluded that the removal of the family as a family unit
      would not be in breach of their human rights. In reaching that
      decision, FtT Judge Pickup had had regard to the best interests of the
      children.


   8. At paragraph [20] of her decision, FtT Judge Tully records that in
      evidence, SM ultimately accepted that he knew in 2014 that he had no
      lawful basis to remain in the UK, but decided to remain because his
      children were at school. The Judge referred to the other applications
      made by SM and found, at [20], that "... the appellants in this case
      have, in full knowledge of their legal position, played a waiting game
      and made multiple repeat applications in a cynical attempt to
      frustrate their removal from the UK.  I find that this severely
      damages their credibility."


   9. At paragraphs [21] to [30], FtT Judge Tully considered whether the
      appellants are able to meet the private life requirements set out in
      paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules. For the reasons set out at
      paragraphs [21] to [28] of her decision, the Judge found that SM, ST
      and QA cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  The Judge
      did not accept having considered the evidence, including the evidence
      regarding the health of QA, that there would be significant obstacles
      to the three adults reintegrating into life in Pakistan, a country
      where they have family and of which they have cultural and linguistic
      knowledge.


  10. The Judge then turned, at [29], to consider the position of the three
      minor children, NA, FS and MA, noting that they were 13, 11 and 9 at
      the date of the application. The Judge noted that each of those
      children had been in the UK for over seven years at the date of the
      application. She noted however that the children would be returning to
      Pakistan as part of a close family unit, with extensive family support
      from both immediate and extended family. The Judge found that the
      children have a reasonable if not fluent, command of Urdu.  The Judge
      stated:


         "They are young and at an age where they would be likely to adapt
         to linguistic changes as did the 3rd appellant when she was brought
         here from Pakistan at a similar age. In any event English is a
         language that is widely used in Pakistan. The appellants cannot
         very well argue that they could not reasonably adapt to life in
         Pakistan because they elected to bring the older child [QA] to the
         UK at a similar age. She attended an English speaking school as a
         native Urdu speaker and they are keen to impress upon me the level
         of her integration since. I cannot see how it is right that they
         can say on one hand that it was acceptable to bring [QA] to the UK
         when she was 11 and she has integrated and formed a valuable life
         here when they had no family here, she had no language skills, but
         on the other say that it would be impossible for the other 3
         children to do what effectively is the same in reverse.   They are
         arguably in a better position as they have extensive family in
         Pakistan and are able to speak Urdu. None of the 3 children has any
         health issues and I do not accept that it would be unreasonable for
         them to return to the country where they were born and whom they
         are nationals, with the family unit. I deal with their education
         below and will not repeat those issues here save to say that the
         findings apply equally to the Rules."


  11. Having found that the requirements of the immigration rules cannot be
      met, the Judge addressed the Article 8 claim outside the rules, by
      reference to the five stage test referred to by the House of Lords in
      Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, at paragraphs [31] to [53] of her decision.
      The Judge found that the decision to refuse leave does not impact upon
      the family life of the appellants, because they will be removed
      together as a family unit.  The Judge accepted however that they enjoy
      a private life and that the decision to refuse leave, will interfere
      with that private life.  The Judge noted at [33], that the question is
      whether the decision is proportionate. The Judge referred, at [36], to
      the options that may be open to QA as an adult. Insofar as the three
      younger children are concerned, the Judge stated, at [38] and [39] as
      follows:


         "38. ... I accept that the three younger have been in the UK for a
         long time (well over 7 years) and would have little real memory of
         being in Pakistan. I have taken due regard of the time they have
         been here and that this is not their decision but that of their
         parents.  However this is not a situation that envisages them
         returning unsupported. They would be with their parents and
         siblings; they are a close family unit. They would also have
         extensive extended family including grandparents, aunts and uncles
         for support on return. They would have the advantage of getting to
         know extended family better and access to the culture of their
         birth country on return. There is nothing in the evidence before me
         that shows that the family suffered any real hardship in their
         lives before they came to UK and the first appellant was clearly
         able to secure prestigious employment with the Consulate. In my
         view it would be wrong to assume that life in Pakistan is somehow
         automatically less favourable than in the UK. There is nothing in
         the evidence before me to suggest that this family led anything
         other than a normal family life before they came.


         39.  They would be leaving behind friends and the support networks
         they have established here and I accept that his would be difficult
         for them particularly for the older two children (now 13 and 14).
         However many families move around the world for employment or
         family reasons, as did this family when [QA] was a similar age.
         They are clearly a family who are willing to make changes in life
         and they themselves considered that this would be a decision that
         was suitable for [QA] a similar age. They are a large family and
         would have siblings to support each other until they made new
         friends; they would simply be making a reverse trip. They speak the
         language in Pakistan and would have the advantage that the extended
         family (presumably there are cousins) who could ease their
         introduction. They would no doubt have access to social media to
         maintain contact with friends."


  12. The Judge had already rejected the claim that the family would be
      without financial support upon return to Pakistan and noted, at [41],
      that there was no credible evidence to suggest that the children could
      not access education in Pakistan. The Judge found that it would be
      reasonable for the youngest child who was about to start high school,
      to start his secondary education in Pakistan, and that he "is at an
      age where he would adapt.".  The Judge noted, at [42] and [43], that
      the consequences would be more significant for NA and FS, who are more
      advanced in their education, but in the end, concluded that each of
      the children would be able to continue their education in Pakistan and
      would have an extensive support network available to them.


  13. The Judge referred to the public interest considerations now set out
      in s117 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  At paragraphs
      [47] and [48],  the Judge stated as follows:


         "47. In my view the public interest argument in this case is
         significantly enhanced by the actions of the first two appellants.
         Although they came to the UK legally in 2007 and 2008, when their
         leave expired they made an application to stay in 2013 on an
         entirely false premise. They lied to the court about the entire
         basis for that application and attempted to deceive the court by
         using a forged document. Although Judge Pickup appears to have laid
         the blame for that at the door of the 1st appellant, the 2nd
         appellant must have known that the document was false because it
         related to her husband's employment; she must have known when he
         stopped working at the Consulate. She was complicit in the fraud. I
         do not accept that either is of good character because they have
         been willing to deceive in order to obtain an advantage to which
         they were not entitled.


         48.  Furthermore when they had taken full advantage of the appeal
         process and they knew that they had no basis to stay, they did not
         leave as they ought to do. They made a calculated decision to
         remain in the UK, in full knowledge that they had no basis of stay,
         because they wanted the children to continue to benefit from a
         state education to which they were no longer entitled. There is no
         right to education in Human Rights law; it is not the
         responsibility of the UK to educate any child. The appellants came
         to the UK knowing that their leave was dependent on the appellant's
         employment and would have to return after it ended, even if this
         meant disrupting the children. This was presumably a factor they
         took into account when they decided to come. Those who abuse the
         state education system in this way contribute to the over
         stretching of public resources and disadvantage those who need, and
         are entitled to the limited educational resources available. It is
         very much in the public interest that people who have manipulated
         the immigration system to the extent that these appellants have,
         are not rewarded for their actions; it encourages others to do the
         same. It would no doubt seem perverse to the public mind that an
         appellant can stay illegally in the UK with the express intention
         of securing free education for their children to which they are not
         entitled, and then rely on the fact that they have done so to avoid
         removal. The fact that children are facing removal this age is down
         to the calculated decision taken by the 1st and second appellant to
         remain illegally after their previous appeal was dismissed. I do
         bear in mind however that these are the actions of the parents and
         not the children affected by this decision and it would be wrong to
         punish the children for their actions."


  14. Having considered other relevant factors, at paragraph [53] of her
      decision, FtT Judge Tully stated:


         "I have weighed all the factors in this case carefully. The most
         significant factor in the appellants' favour is undoubtedly the
         best interests of the children. In Zoumbas v SSHD UKSC it was held
         that there was no "irrationality in the conclusion that it was in
         the children's best interests to go with their parents to the
         Republic of Congo". No doubt it would have been possible to have
         stated that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests
         of the children that they and their parents stayed in the United
         Kingdom so that they could obtain such benefits as health care and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a higher
         standard than would be available in the Congo. But other things
         were not equal. They were not British citizens. They had no right
         to future education and health care in this country. They were part
         of a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an
         age when their emotional needs could only be fully met within the
         immediate family unit. In Zoumbas it was established that this was
         one factor but not a trump card. Whilst I have found that it would
         not be in the best interest of [NA] to be disrupted at this precise
         stage of her education, this is not a trump card. There are weighty
         factors in this case that sway the public interest argument against
         the appellants.


The appeal before me


  15. The grounds of appeal relied upon by the appellants criticise the
      decision of FtT Judge in a number of respects.  The appellants submit
      that the Judge erred in making her decision, "without considering the
      best interests of the children".  It is said that the Judge did not
      apply s55 of the 2009 Act, and failed to apply the principles set out
      by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania).  It is said that the Judge also
      erred by giving little weight to the fact that the children will face
      hardship if removed to Pakistan, particularly as the youngest child
      was a one-year-old when he came to the UK. The appellants also contend
      that the Judge failed to consider the "statement of the Supreme Court
      in Zoumbas -v- SSHD [2013] UKSC that a child should not be blamed for
      matters for which it is not responsible.". The appellants claim that
      the Judge erred in her conclusion that it was in the children's best
      interests to go with their parents, and removal from the UK will not
      be in breach of their private life.


  16. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Scott Baker on 22nd
      August 2018.  Although not a ground of appeal directly advanced by the
      appellants, FtT Judge Scott Baker noted as follows:


         "The judge had, in part, considered the best interests of the
         children at [34] to [44] and at [45] to [53] considered the
         applicability of section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002 but crucially failed to make discreet findings with
         reference to section 117B(6) which was applicable as the children
         had been resident in the UK for a period in excess of seven years
         and were therefore qualifying children.


      The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the decision of
      FtT Judge Tully involved the making of a material error of law, and if
      the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


  17. On behalf of the appellants, Mr Atuegbe adopted the skeleton argument
      sent to the Tribunal on 26th October 2018.  Taking the lead from the
      observations made by FtT Judge Scott Baker when permission to appeal
      was granted, the appellants submit that FtT Judge Tully did not in her
      decision, consider s117B(6), even though it was mentioned in paragraph
      [45] of the decision.  Mr Atuegbe submits that in reaching her
      decision, the Judge did not have sufficient regard to the fact that
      the children are qualifying children for the purposes of s117B(6) of
      the 2002 Act.  As to the decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)
      & Others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, Mr Atuegbe submits that FtT Judge
      Tully did not consider, as required under s117(6)(b), whether it would
      be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.


  18. The appellants submit that the Judge erroneously focused upon the poor
      immigration history of SM, the use of deception in an earlier
      application, and the availability of support in Pakistan. The
      appellants submit that the best interests of the children were not
      properly considered and they submit that the proper approach to such a
      case is that set out by the President, Mr Justice Lane, at paragraphs
      [31] to [34] of the decision in MT and ET (child's best interests: ex
      tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).  It is said that here,
      the children have been in the United Kingdom for over 10 years and do
      not have any direct ties to Pakistan, especially the younger children.
      QA has established herself quite well in the United Kingdom and she
      has legitimate expectations to carry on with her studies here, having
      completed her GCSEs here. NA has been here for more than half of her
      life, even though she is not yet 18 years.  She too is looking forward
      to taking her GCSEs at some point soon.  It is submitted that although
      the parents have a poor immigration history, that is not sufficient to
      render the removal of the family, reasonable.


  19. In reply, Mr Tam submits that in reaching her decision, FtT Judge
      Tully carefully considered the requirements to be met by an applicant
      for leave to remain on the grounds of private life, under paragraph
      276ADE of the immigration rules. At paragraph [29] of her decision, in
      addressing the position of the three minor children, the Judge noted
      that the children have been in the UK for a period of at least 7
      years.  She noted that that was a matter that weighs in their favour.
      In that paragraph, the Judge goes on to consider whether it would be
      reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom. It was
      open to the Judge to conclude that the appellants do not meet the
      requirements for private life under paragraph 276ADE. Mr Tan submits
      that the same reasoning must apply to any consideration of the public
      interest under s117B(6).  Under the immigration rules and the statute,
      the question for the Judge is whether or not it would be reasonable to
      expect a child that has lived continuously in the UK for seven years,
      to leave the UK. He submits that any failure to make express reference
      to s117B(b) later in the decision, is immaterial. The Judge was
      plainly aware that the children had each been in the United Kingdom
      for over 7 years, and there is a reflective consideration of the best
      interests of the children throughout the decision.  Mr Tan submits
      that decisions such as this are entirely fact sensitive, and although
      it is correct to note that the longer a child has been in the United
      Kingdom, the stronger the ties, that is not to say that there is any
      particular cut-off point.


Discussion


  20. I reject the claim that the Judge erred in making her decision without
      considering the best interests of the children, or by failing to apply
      the principles set out by the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  and
      considering  the  best  interests  of  the  children  as   a   primary
      consideration. It is plain that the Judge had regard to the duty under
      s55 and the best interests of the children.  The Judge noted, at [19],
      that FtT Judge Pickup had previously considered the best interests  of
      the  children  in  his  decision  and  the  appellants  were   refused
      permission to appeal, because the Article 8 rights of the  family  and
      the bests interests of the children had been adequately  addressed  by
      FtT Judge Pickup.  At paragraph [34] of her decision, FtT Judge  Tully
      refers to the "body of caselaw addressing the significance of the best
      interests of children" affected by  a  decision  of  this  nature  and
      refers to the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania),  noting
      that the best interests of a child shall be a  primary  consideration.
      At paragraph [44], the Judge noted  that  the  best  interest  of  the
      children affected, whilst a primary consideration,  is  not  the  only
      consideration.  At paragraph [53], the Judge went as far  as  to  note
      that the "..most significant  factor  in  the  appellants'  favour  is
      undoubtedly the best interests of the children.".  In my judgement, in
      reaching her decision, the Judge clearly considered the best interests
      of the children as a primary consideration. At paragraph [54]  of  her
      decision, the FtT Judge concluded:


         "Weighing all of the factors which I have outlined above and taking
         into account the children's best interest as a primary but not the
         only factor, I do not accept that the evidence before me shows that
         the appellants' circumstances are such that they outweigh the
         public interest argument in refusing them leave to remain."


      That conclusion was plainly one that was open to the Judge on the
      evidence.


  21. I also reject the claim that the FtT Judge erroneously focused upon
      the poor immigration history of SM, and the use of deception in an
      earlier application, essentially blaming the children for matters for
      which they are not responsible.  The Judge noted, at [38], that she
      had taken due regard of the time that the children have been in the UK
      and that this is not their decision but that of their parents.  At
      paragraph [48], the Judge noted that the fact that children are facing
      removal at this age is down to the calculated decision taken by SM and
      ST to remain illegally after their previous appeal was dismissed. The
      Judge states that she had borne in mind however that "..these are the
      actions of the parents and not the children affected by this decision
      and it would be wrong to punish the children for their actions.".


  22. I accept the submission made by Mr. Tam on behalf of the respondent.
      The written grounds of appeal amount to nothing more than a
      disagreement with the findings of the Judge that were properly open to
      her.


  23. The Judge refers at paragraph [45] of her decision to the public
      interest considerations set out in s117B of the 2002 Act.  I accept
      that in considering the Article 8 claim outside the rules at
      paragraphs [46] to [53] of the decision, the FtT Judge does not
      expressly refer to s117B(6) of the 2002 Act, and does not expressly
      refer to the children as qualifying children.  The question for me is
      whether any omission to make discreet findings in respect of the
      public interest consideration set out in s117B(6), is material to the
      outcome of the appeal.


  24. In KO (Nigeria) and Others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, a decision handed
      down on 24th October 2018, Lord Carnwath, with whom Lord Kerr, Lord
      Wilson, Lord Reed and Lord Briggs agreed, referred to paragraphs
      276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules, and s117B(6) of the 2002 Act.
      Having referred to the requirement that appears at paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules, he stated, at [7]:


         "It will be seen immediately that the substance of this provision,
         in particular the seven year criterion and the "reasonableness"
         tests, appears identical to that  of section 117B(6), taken with
         the definition of "qualifying child"


  25. At paragraphs [17] to [19], Lord Carnwath stated:


         "17. As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated the substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in the context
         of the right of the parent to remain. I would infer that it was
         intended to have the same effect. The question again is what is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705,
         [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the subsection to
         import a reference to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets
         out a number of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B(6) is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification being that the
         person relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above) seems
         to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the context of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of the parents may become indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain. The point was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245 :


             "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
             one has to address the question, 'Why would the child be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as this
             there can only be one answer: 'because the parents have no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the question in any
             other way strips away the context in which the assessment of
             reasonableness is being made ..."


         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of children in the context of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in
         EV (Philippines) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


             "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis that the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has no
             right to remain, but the other parent does, that is the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. If
             neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect the
             child to follow the parent with no right to remain to the
             country of origin?"


         To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in the real world in which the children find
         themselves.


  26. Although the conduct of the parents is not directly relevant to the
      public interest consideration set out in s117B(6), the record of the
      parents may become indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing
      to have a right to remain here, and having to leave. It is only if it
      would not be reasonable for a child to leave the UK that s117B(6) of
      the 2002 Act may give the parents a right to remain.


  27. At paragraph [29] of her decision, FtT Judge Tully considered the
      position of the three younger children under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv),
      having noted that each of them has been in the UK for over 7 years.
      In the end, having considered relevant factors including the family
      support available to them, financial support available to the family,
      the languages they speak, their respective ages, their health, and
      education, that she did not accept that it would be unreasonable for
      the children to return to Pakistan.  The Judge noted in the balance
      that that was the country where each of them was born, of which they
      are nationals, and to which they would be returning as a family unit.
      That was, in my judgement, a finding and conclusion that the Judge was
      entitled to reach having had regard to the best interests of the
      children as a primary consideration.


  28. In considering the Article 8 claim outside the rules, the FtT Judge
      stated, at [35] and [36]:


         "35. ... in this case the children concerned have been brought up
         to date on a day to day basis by their parents since they were born
         and in my view it is very much in the children's interests that
         this continues. There is no suggestion that this arrangement would
         be affected by the decision; they will be removed a family unit.


         36.  In this case it is arguable that the family life of the
         children concerned will be enhanced by return to Pakistan because
         they will be given the opportunity to be immerse themselves in the
         family life of their extended family all of whom live in Pakistan."




  29. At paragraphs [37] to [43] of her decision, FtT Judge Tully addressed
      matters relevant to an assessment of whether it would be reasonable to
      expect the children to leave the UK.  She properly noted that the
      children are in no way to be held responsible for their parent's
      misconduct, but as has been said repeatedly, the children are not a
      "trump card".  As Lord Carnwath states, a "real world" view must be
      taken.  In the real world, families move countries and continents all
      the time, frequently so that the parents can find, or continue with
      work.  It is clear from a careful reading of the decision of the FtT
      Judge that she considered the particular circumstances of this family,
      in the real world.


  30.  In my judgement, a careful reading of the decision of FtT Judge Tully
      as a whole establishes that she was mindful throughout that the
      children had lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven years or
      more, with their parents.  She did not accept that it would be
      unreasonable for them to return to Pakistan with their parents.  The
      seven year criterion and the "reasonableness" test, in paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules is identical to that in section 117B(6) of
      the 2002 Act.  As Lord Carnwath confirmed in KO (Nigeria), section
      117B(6) incorporated the substance of the rule without material
      change, but this time in the context of the right of the parents to
      remain.


  31. Where the parents are expected to be is plainly relevant since it will
      normally be reasonable for the children to be with them. As Lord
      Carnwath stated, at paragraph [18] in KO (Nigeria), the record of the
      parents may become indirectly material.  Here, FtT Judge Tully was
      careful to recognise that it would be wrong to punish the children for
      their parents' actions. The parents' conduct was relevant in that it
      meant that they had to leave the country. It was in that context that
      the Tribunal should consider whether it was reasonable for the
      children to leave with them.  The appellants claimed that the best
      interests of the children would have been for the whole family to
      remain here. In the context where the parents had to leave, the
      natural expectation would be that the children would go with them, and
      there was nothing in the evidence to suggest that that would be other
      than reasonable.  In my judgement, FtT Judge Tully had correctly
      considered whether it would be unreasonable to expect the children to
      leave the UK.  She carefully considered the evidence before her, and
      treated the best interests of the children as a primary consideration.


  32. The appellants do not identify any additional factor that would be
      relevant under s117B(6), that FtT Judge Tully had not already
      considered when determining whether the requirements of paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv) could be met.  Absent any error in the Judge's approach
      or a finding that it would be unreasonable to expect the children to
      leave the United Kingdom, in my judgement, any omission by the FtT
      Judge to expressly consider s117B(6) of the 2002 Act, is immaterial.


  33. It follows that in my judgment, the decision of the FtT Judge is not
      infected by a material error of law and I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


  34. The decision of the FtT Judge is not infected by the making of a
      material error of law and the appeal against the decision of FtT Judge
      Tully is dismissed.


  35. An anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date          28th December 2018


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



 TO THE RESPONDENT


 FEE AWARD


      I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.




     Signed                                  Date              28th
December 2018


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







