
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13038/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 January 2017                         |On 6 February 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE SUPPERSTONE
                             JUDGE H J E LATTER


                                   Between

                          MR JEROME GARFIELD BROWN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Pinder
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Holmes on 10 November 2016 against the decision promulgated on
    21 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke allowing the  appellant's
    appeal against the refusal by the respondent to grant him further leave
    to remain, and to make a decision to deport him to Jamaica.

 2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica and his  date  of  birth  is  12
    January 1975.  He first entered the UK on 3 February 2001 as a  visitor
    with leave to remain until 31 July 2002.  On 10 May 2002 he  married  a
    British citizen.  There were subsequent grants of leave  to  remain  as
    the spouse of a settled person.

 3. On 24 September 2004 at Reading Crown Court the appellant was convicted
    of supplying a controlled drug  Class  A  crack  cocaine  and  Class  A
    heroine and he was sentenced to five years' imprisonment varied to four
    years' imprisonment on 27 July 2005.  On 13 March  2006  the  appellant
    was served with a notice of decision  to  deport  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 17 May 2006.

 4. Following applications for reconsideration the Court of  Appeal  on  10
    July 2008 quashed the determination and ordered reconsideration.  On  1
    December 2008 his appeal was dismissed and on  1  May  2009  he  became
    appeal rights exhausted.  On 14 May 2009 the appellant failed to report
    and was listed as an absconder.  He was later arrested  on  3  November
    2010 and served with a deportation order which was later accepted as an
    application to revoke his deportation order of 5 August  2011  and  his
    appeal was allowed in a determination promulgated on  3  October  2011.
    On 24 February 2012 the appellant was granted discretionary leave valid
    until 24 August 2012.  On 22 August 2012 he made a further  application
    for leave which was granted until 17 April 2014.  On 15 April 2014  the
    appellant made a further leave to remain application which was  refused
    by the respondent on 23 November 2015.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke records his starting point to  be  the
    recent decision of Johnson which concludes that when a foreign offender
    has been convicted of an  offence  of  at  least  four  years  and  has
    successfully appealed on human rights grounds this does not prevent the
    respondent from relying on the conviction for the purposes of paragraph
    398A of the Immigration Rules and Section 117C of the 2002 Act  if  and
    when he reoffends, even if the later offence results in less than  four
    years' imprisonment.  However the appellant has not reoffended.   Under
    paragraph  398A  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
    outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above  those  described  in  paragraph  399  and
    paragraph 399A.  In Johnson at paragraph 27 this Tribunal  (Mr  Justice
    Turner and Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan) said as follows:

         "We recognise the possibility of an appellant  being  sentenced  to
         four years' imprisonment as a young man and subsequently succeeding
         in his appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  and  thereafter  leading  a
         blameless life for the following 40 or 50 years  until  the  second
         short  period  of  imprisonment  triggers  the   consideration   of
         paragraph 398A.  In such a case however  the  significance  of  his
         earlier sentence would have receded  to  the  point  of  its  being
         immaterial to the  consideration  of  what  should  happen  to  the
         appellant following his  second  conviction.   We  see  this  as  a
         paradigm example of the very compelling circumstance sufficient  to
         protect the appellant against expulsion."

 6. Ultimately in our view in each case it is a question of  fact  for  the
    judge to decide whether the very  high  threshold  of  very  compelling
    circumstances has been met.   Judge  Clarke  found  there  to  be  very
    compelling circumstances in that it was now over ten  years  since  the
    appellant had committed the  two  offences  in  2002  and  he  had  not
    committed any further offence taken together with his successful  human
    rights claim resisting deportation earlier.

 7. With regard to the determination promulgated on 3 October  2011,  being
    the decision of Immigration Judge Hembrough  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal, which remains unchallenged by the respondent, the appellant was
    granted two periods of discretionary leave to remain.  At paragraph  14
    of his decision Judge  Clarke  summarises  the  findings  made  by  the
    Tribunal in that earlier decision:

         "The marriage was subsisting, the offence was very  serious  and  a
         deportation  decision  was  in  accordance  with  the   law.    The
         deportation decision amounted to a  substantial  interference  with
         his right to a family life and that of his wife and the children of
         the family.  It would be unreasonable for the wife or  any  of  the
         children of the family to relocate to  Jamaica  to  preserve  their
         family life with the appellant, if deported the appellant would  be
         excluded for at least ten years from the date  of  the  order  then
         there is little prospect of the family in the UK would be  able  to
         afford to visit him.  The appellant had shown genuine  remorse  for
         his  offending  behaviour  and  there  was  a  low  risk   of   him
         reoffending."

 8. Judge Clarke continues at paragraph 15 to state that the  Tribunal  was
    satisfied in the five years since the deportation order was  made  that
    necessity  and  public  interest  in  the   appellant's   removal   had
    diminished.   Judge  Clarke  accepted  these  findings  of   fact   and
    considered there was no reason to depart from them.

 9. Further, since the determination of Judge Hembrough the  appellant  has
    two additional children albeit since December 2015 he and his wife have
    separated.  Judge Clarke  accepted  the  appellant  sees  his  children
    almost daily and is heavily involved in their daily lives.

10. At paragraph 18 Judge Clark reminds  himself  of  the  public  interest
    deterrence and public revulsion against such crimes as those  committed
    by the appellant.  However he observed  that  the  appellant  has  been
    granted two periods  of  discretionary  leave  to  remain  and  he  has
    rehabilitated himself and there is no reason to depart from the earlier
    findings made by the previous Tribunal.

11. The Secretary of State submits that Judge Clarke  materially  erred  in
    law in how she has undertaken the assessment of whether the appellant's
    human rights claim in the light of the deportation order is made out.

12. Mr Melvin who appears for the Secretary  of  State  contends  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge does not set out anywhere that  in  order  to
    succeed the appellant needs to show "very compelling circumstances over
    and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".   However  Judge
    Clarke does not set out anywhere that this is the test she has applied.
     She has failed to make any findings on either paragraph  399  or  399A
    and has therefore failed properly to  consider  the  question  of  very
    compelling circumstances through the prism of the Rules.

13. Furthermore Mr Melvin submits Judge Clarke has failed to identify  what
    it is that is specifically very compelling in this case.   The  passage
    of time whilst a factor has been treated as determinative despite  that
    being in large part attributable to  the  appellant's  own  actions  in
    absconding for eighteen months  after  he  lost  his  appeal  in  2008.
    Nowhere does the judge engage, Mr Melvin submits,  in  an  analysis  of
    what weight is given to the public interest in deporting the  appellant
    given that the Rules themselves show where the balance is struck.

14. The Secretary of State contends that it is materially wrong to say that
    the public interest in deportation is considerably weakened due to  the
    passage of time.  The appellant continued an appeal until 2009 and then
    absconded.  The public interest has not weakened by passage of time and
    given that Section 117C classes the appellant as a foreign criminal  it
    cannot be said that the public interest has weakened.

15. In our judgment Judge Clark did apply the correct test  as  to  whether
    there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.  The judge noted that the offences remain very
    serious and there  remains  the  public  interest  in  deterrence,  see
    paragraph 12.

16. In our view the judge was entitled to find on the evidence  that  there
    was no reason to  depart  from  the  earlier  findings  made  by  Judge
    Hembrough.  It is clear that the judge was aware  that  the  Rules  had
    changed since the hearing before Judge Hembrough.

17. Further in our view on the evidence the judge was entitled to take into
    account the events that had occurred since  that  earlier  decision  in
    particular the two grants of further leave and the ten year period that
    had by then elapsed since the convictions with the appellant  remaining
    out of trouble.  Implicit in the judge's findings is that it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the appellant's children to remain in the  UK  without
    their father.

18. For the reasons we have given we do  not  consider  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in this case.  Accordingly this appeal fails.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Supperstone


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Supperstone

