
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13274/2017
                                                               HU/11985/2017
                                                               HU/11956/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 July 2021                               |On 28 September 2021          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                               BUSHRA SALEEMI
                           MUHAMMAD IQBAL SALEEMI
                              ASFANDYAR SALEEMI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr K. Forrest, instructed by Norman Lawson & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan.  They are members of the same
    family.  Together with another family  member,  they  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  on  26
    September 2017 refusing to grant them leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the grounds of their family  life.   Judge  Doyle  dismissed
    their appeals, although he allowed  the  appeal  of  the  other  family
    member. Permission to appeal against Judge Doyle's decision was refused
    by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  by  this  Tribunal,  but  the  latter
    decision was reduced by the Court of Session following Eba proceedings.



 2. There was then a hearing  before  us  in  order  to  determine  whether
    permission to appeal should be granted.  On 12 March 2021 we issued our
    decision granting permission to appeal, and directing  the  appellants'
    representative to file and serve perfected grounds of  appeal,  dealing
    with the issues which the permission hearing had identified as central.
     Mr Forrest complied with those directions,  and,  also  in  accordance
    with directions, Mr Lindsay  has  filed  a  response  to  Mr  Forrest's
    grounds.

 3. The first and second appellants are husband and  wife.   They  are  the
    parents of the third appellant, who was born on 18 May 1999.  They  are
    also the parents of his older  sister,  who  was  the  other  appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  She is about two years  older.   There
    is also another member of the family, an older brother.

 4. All five entered the United Kingdom with leave on 23 August 2019.   The
    eldest child returned to Pakistan in 2012, studied medicine there,  and
    is now qualified as a doctor, working in Pakistan.   The  other  family
    members remained in United  Kingdom.   In  November  2013,  during  the
    currency of existing leave, they applied for  an  extension  of  leave.
    That application was refused.   They appealed  but  were  unsuccessful.
    Their appeal rights  were  exhausted  by  24  April  2015.   They  have
    subsequently been remaining in the United Kingdom without leave.   They
    were served with notices of liability to  removal  in  September  2016,
    which prompted an application for leave to remain on  4  October  2016.
    That was rejected, and there appears to have  been  no  appeal  against
    that decision.

 5. The present application was made on 2 May 2017.  It  was  made  by  the
    parents; the third appellant and his sister were encompassed within  it
    as dependant children.  It was, as we have said, refused.   The  appeal
    hearing was before Judge Doyle on 31 July 2018.  He took  into  account
    the documentary evidence.  The first and second appellants gave no oral
    evidence before him, and the appellants' representative said that  "the
    focus of the case rests on the third and fourth appellants" (that is to
    say, the children).  The judge noted the history as set out above.   He
    noted the absence of particular evidence about  the  parents'  life  or
    attachment to  the  United  Kingdom.   He  noted  the  history  of  the
    children's education in the United Kingdom.  They both had  outstanding
    careers at school.  Both had  the  prospect  of  studying  medicine  at
    university in Scotland.  The third appellant had not begun his  course.
    His sister, despite her lack of leave, had already completed two  years
    at Glasgow University.  Amongst the other relevant facts that he  found
    was that the appellants before him had no source of income  and  relied
    on the charity of friends and family for support.

 6. Concentrating, as he  was  invited  to  do,  on  the  position  of  the
    children, the judge concluded that because, and, as he made clear, only
    because of the daughter's  current  educational  history,   being  well
    established on her degree course, it would be  unreasonable  to  expect
    her to leave the United Kingdom.  So  far  as  concerned  her  brother,
    however, the judge was not persuaded that it would be  unreasonable  to
    expect him to leave the United Kingdom.  Whilst allowing  his  sister's
    appeal, therefore, he  dismissed  the  third  appellant's  appeal,  and
    dismissed the appeals of his parents, as they were  said  to  raise  no
    additional issues.

 7. The appeal of the third appellant before us depends on  the  terms  of,
    and the relationship between, two separate provisions that  share  some
    vocabulary.  Paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides  as
    follows:

       "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
       grounds of private life

          1. 276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for
             leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are
             that at the date of application, the applicant:
                 1.(i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
                  Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-
                  LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and
                  (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on
                  the grounds of private life in the UK; and
                  (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
                  (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived
                  continuously in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting
                  any period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable
                  to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or
                  (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has
                  spent at least half of his life living continuously in the
                  UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
                  (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or
                  above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there
                  would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to go
                  if required to leave the UK."

 8. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  provides,
    so far as relevant to this appeal, as follows:

                "117A Application of this Part

               1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
                  determine whether a decision made  under  the  Immigration
                  Acts-

                   a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                      family life under Article 8, and

      a) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights
         Act

                            1998.

    (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or  tribunal
    must (in particular) have regard-

                   a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                      117B




         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         ...

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-




              a)  the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

              b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
                 United Kingdom."

 9. The point raised by Mr Forrest about the interaction between these  two
    provisions is that they both depend on  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect a person to leave the United Kingdom, but the judge  dealt  with
    them  in  different  ways.   In  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE   (and
    remembering, as always, that his reference to the "fourth appellant" is
    a reference to the third appellant before us), he said this:

         "11. (a) The first, second and third appellants  accept  that  they
         cannot meet the requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.   It  is
         argued that the fourth appellant meets  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv).  The respondent accepts that  the  fourth  appellant
         was under 18 years of age at the date of  application  and  at  the
         date of application had lived in the UK for more than seven  years.
         That concession is not  sufficient  to  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iv).   It  is  for  the  fourth  appellant  to
         establish that it is not reasonable for him to leave the UK.

         (b) What is argued for the fourth appellant is that because he  has
         had the benefit of primary and secondary education in  the  UK  and
         because he is an intelligent young man  with  great  potential,  he
         cannot return to Pakistan.  In oral evidence it was argued that the
         fourth appellant's  removal  would  prevent  him  from  pursuing  a
         qualification as a doctor.

         (c) The first appellant qualified as a  doctor  in  Pakistan.   The
         fourth appellant's brother left the UK in 2012 and qualified  as  a
         doctor in Pakistan.  The fourth appellant has sufficient  secondary
         school qualifications to obtain an offer of a place  at  university
         to study medicine in the UK.  There is no reliable evidence  placed
         before me to suggest that  the  appellant  cannot  pursue  tertiary
         education in Pakistan.  On his own evidence  the  fourth  appellant
         speaks Urdu and Punjabi as well as English.

         ...

         (e) What is pled for the fourth appellant does not engage the  test
         of reasonableness.  What is pled is that the fourth appellant wants
         to pursue tertiary  education  in  the  UK.   He  has  not  started
         tertiary education.  His case is different to  that  of  the  third
         appellant because he is not engaged in education at the moment.  He
         is at a junction in his  life  where  he  can  embark  on  tertiary
         education, either in the UK or in Pakistan, but  removal  does  not
         interrupt a course of education."

10. In relation to s 117B, the judge said this:

         "(a) The appeals for the first and second appellants are pled as if
         they are dependent  upon  the  appeals  of  the  third  and  fourth
         appellants.  I am referred to MA (Pakistan), PD (Sri Lanka), and MT
         & ET.  In the simplest of terms, what is pled is that the third and
         fourth appellants should succeed because they had been  in  the  UK
         for more than seven years and are  immersed  in  the  UK  education
         system.   If  I  allow  the  appeals  for  the  third  and   fourth
         appellants, then the appeals for the first  and  second  appellants
         must be allowed - but there is a flaw in that argument.

         (b) The  flaw  in  the  argument  is  that  the  third  and  fourth
         appellants are adults.  There is no reliable evidence of  a  degree
         of dependency which would create family life between the first  and
         second appellants and the third and fourth appellants.   The  third
         and fourth appellants are gifted, intelligent, young adults capable
         of independent living.  Neither the third nor the fourth  appellant
         is a qualifying child.  Notwithstanding the  length  of  time  that
         they have been in the  UK,  they  are  not  children;  they  cannot
         therefore be qualifying children.

         (c) The first and second  appellants  cannot  succeed  because  the
         third and fourth appellants are not children.  Family  life  within
         the meaning of article 8 of the 1950 convention is not  established
         for any of these appellants.  Even if I am wrong  and  family  life
         exists between the four appellants, then the respondent's  decision
         is not a disproportionate breach because all  four  appellants  can
         return to Pakistan together and adhere to each other."

11. It can thus be seen that, in relation to paragraph  276ADE,  the  judge
    treated the third appellant as a child, but for the purposes of s 117B,
    he treated him as an adult.  In detail, Mr Forrest's perfected  grounds
    are as follows:

         "Errors in law: the FTT erred:-

         2.1 FIRST: in concluding that the appeal  "...did  not  engage  the
         test of  reasonableness..."  (paragraph  11(e)  in  decision  dated
         6/8/18) because it has  not  identified  the  applicable  test  for
         reasonableness since (a) it did not apply the correct test or if it
         did (b) it gave no reasons why it applied this test:-

         (a)  Correct test:

            . as at the date of the application (17th May 2017) the  fourth
              appellant satisfied two of the  requirements  in  Immigration
              Rule 276 ADE(1)(iv) (having lived in the UK for more  than  7
              years and being  under  the  age  of  18).   Whether  it  was
              reasonable to expect him to  remain  in  the  UK  (the  third
              requirement of IR 276ADE(1)(iv)) was clearly engaged;

            . Section 85(4) NIAA 2002 did not entitle the FTT to take  into
              account matters arising after the date of the decision  (such
              as the fact that the fourth appellant by that time  was  over
              18) because its terms are not consistent with  other  primary
              legislation (eg Section  117B(6)(b)  NIAA)  which  deal  with
              whether it would be reasonable to expect a child to leave the
              UK.

         (b)  No/insufficient reasons:

            . Esto (which is denied) the FTT applied the  correct  test  to
              the assessment of reasonableness, it erred in not stating why
              it  did  so.   Its  reasoning  consists  of   one   paragraph
              (paragraph 11(f)) in  which  it  says  the  fourth  appellant
              "...has failed to establish that it is unreasonable to expect
              him to leave the UK..." (even though  it  earlier  (paragraph
              11(e))  says   he   does   not   "...engage   the   test   of
              reasonableness...") because he has family in Pakistan who are
              doctors and he has been educated in the UK.

            . That it was necessary to state reasons  why  it  applied  the
              test it did was particularly important because  (a)  applying
              the approach it did meant that  the  best  interests  of  the
              fourth appellant as a child (as at 17th May  2017)  were  not
              considered;  and  (b)  there   have   been   several   recent
              authorities from the  Supreme  Court  (KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
              [2018] 1 WLR 5273) and the Court of Appeal (MA  (Pakistan)  v
              Upper Tribunal [2016] 1 WLR 5093; Runa v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ
              514) about  what  is  reasonable  in  relation  to  expecting
              children to leave the UK (considerations  in  each  of  which
              included discussion of IR276ADE(iv)).  It is clear from these
              that a detailed fact sensitive enquiry is called for in every
              case.

            . The FTT did not carry out such an enquiry.  It did  not  need
              to if the fourth appellant was not a child - at the  relevant
              time - but since it is not clear why  or  on  what  basis  it
              concluded that the test for reasonableness was  not  engaged,
              and what the correct test was, it erred in law.

         2.2 SECOND: in concluding that the appeal fails for the reasons set
         out in paragraph 16 (in particular16(b)) because it has treated the
         fourth appellant as an adult on the basis that as at both the  date
         of the respondent's decision and the date of the Hearing before the
         FTT, he was over 18 years old:-

            . Although such an approach  may  be  consistent  with  Section
              117B(6)(b) NIAA 2002, it is inconsistent with  the  issue  of
              when it becomes reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK.

            . There is an inherent inconsistency between the provisions  of
              Section  117B(6)(b)  and  IR  276ADE(1)(iv):  at  least   the
              Immigration Rule identifies a time as at which the person  is
              a child in relation to his/her DOB as  at  the  date  of  the
              application.        There       is       no        equivalent
              qualification/explanation as to how Section 117B(6)(b) is  to
              be interpreted.

            . On that basis, the fourth appellant could  be  treated  as  a
              child for the purposes of  IR276ADE(1)(iv)  but  not  Section
              117B(6)(b)."

12. In his oral submissions, and in the skeleton arguments supporting them,
    Mr Forrest expanded at some length on a different matter,  that  is  to
    say the demands of article 8 outside both the Rules and s 117B.  But we
    must first look at the points actually raised by his grounds.

13. So far as concerns paragraph 276ADE, Mr Lindsay accepted that the third
    appellant fell to be considered as under the age of 18  years,  because
    he was under that age when the application was made.  As we  understand
    it, the same position was taken by the Presenting Officer before  Judge
    Doyle, and it is perfectly clear that Judge Doyle applied the paragraph
    in that way.  He regarded the third appellant as a person under the age
    of 18, who had spent more than seven years in the United  Kingdom.   As
    he said, the only question was whether it was reasonable to expect  him
    to leave the United Kingdom.

14. He analysed the evidence before him on  that  issue.   He  reached  the
    conclusion that it did not point to  the  third  appellant's  departure
    being unreasonable.  Even if it be  argued  (and  it  was  not  argued,
    either before us  or  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  that  at  the
    particular  point  of  application  or  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision, different factors ought to be taken into account in assessing
    reasonableness than applied at the  date  of  the  hearing  before  the
    judge, there was no evidence before the judge supporting the conclusion
    he sought.  It seems to us that for all the reasons the judge gave, the
    third appellant simply failed to establish his case.  The evidence  did
    not show that it was unreasonable to expect him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom: on the contrary,  the  evidence  showed  that  it  was  wholly
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.

15. Turning to paragraph 117B(6), the judge  declined  to  enter  into  the
    apparently  identical  question   of   reasonableness,   because   that
    subsection did not, in his view, apply.  Although, as we noted  at  the
    permission hearing, the treatment of the third appellant as a child for
    the purposes of the Rules and an adult for the purposes of  the  Statue
    might raise an arguable issue, we are satisfied that the judge  applied
    both provisions correctly.  The difference between them arises because,
    whereas the Immigration Rules are the provisions by which the Secretary
    of State makes decisions on application, s  117B  applies,  as  s  117A
    makes clear, not  to  the  Secretary  of  State  but  to  "a  court  or
    tribunal".  Inevitably, in an immigration appeal, a court  or  tribunal
    will be reaching a conclusion later in time than that  reached  by  the
    Secretary of  State  by  the  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Section 117B is phrased in the present tense.  There is  no  suggestion
    that what is to be considered is an issue  of  reasonableness  at  some
    date previous to that on which the court or tribunal is  applying  Part
    5A.  The judge was therefore right to treat the third appellant as  not
    a child for the purposes of s  117B(6).   The  third  appellant  failed
    under the rules, because the evidence did not support his case; and  he
    failed under the Act because the provisions in question did  not  apply
    to him.  The judge made no error in either  of  those  aspects  of  the
    appeal.

16. We turn finally to the more general arguments raised by Mr  Forrest  at
    the hearing, despite the particularity of his perfected grounds.   They
    are to the effect that  the  judge  erred  in  not  taking  a  holistic
    approach to article 8, looking at all the circumstances of the  family,
    determining whether family life existed  between  the  members  of  the
    family that were appellants before him, and assessing whether article 8
    demanded that they all be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.   Mr
    Forrest submitted that the allowing of the elder sister's appeal had an
    impact on whether  the  other  appellants'  appeals  should  have  been
    allowed for these reasons.

17. Quite apart from the point that that argument is not  contained  in  Mr
    Forrest's grounds of appeal, it faces formidable  difficulties  because
    of the way in which the appeals have  been  conducted  throughout.   An
    argument  that,  despite  the  provisions  of  the  Statute   and   the
    Immigration Rules, article 8 requires  that  members  of  a  family  be
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, needs to be based  on  a  full
    treatment of the circumstances  of  all  the  members  of  the  family,
    whether in the United Kingdom or  not.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    presented with four family members, and told about a fifth.  There  was
    evidence about the circumstances of the two younger appellants.   There
    appears to have  been  no  evidence  about  the  circumstances  of  the
    parents, other than that they were without means of financial  support.
    There was no evidence of the nature of the relationship  between  them,
    beyond the assumptions that can be made arising out of their membership
    of the same family.  In particular, there was no reason  for  supposing
    that the parents needed to be with their younger adult children  rather
    than with their older adult child in Pakistan; there  was  no  evidence
    that difficulties would be caused if the  three  appellants  before  us
    went to Pakistan leaving their capable and highly educated daughter  in
    the United Kingdom for as long as she  remained here; and there appears
    to have been no evidence at all of any personal or other contacts  that
    any members of the family have made during the considerable  period  of
    time that they have  been  in  the  United  Kingdom,  other  than  with
    educational  establishments.   Certainly,  Mr  Forrest  pointed  to  no
    evidence in any of these categories in making his submissions.  Indeed,
    the absence of evidence from the parents was to an extent underlined by
    his making an application under Rule 15(2A)  to  adduce  such  evidence
    before us.  As Mr Lindsay pointed out,  nothing  in  the  new  proposed
    evidence could help to establish an error of  law  by  the  judge.   We
    entirely agree.

18. The truth of the matter is that even if the judge had devoted a section
    of his decision to this issue, which had not featured  in  evidence  or
    argument before him, he would have been bound to reach  the  conclusion
    that there was no basis for saying that any member of  the  family  had
    article 8 rights going beyond those for which provision had  been  made
    by the Statute and the Rules.

19. For the foregoing reasons we find that Judge Doyle made no error in law
    in reaching his conclusions.  There is no basis  for  interfering  with
    his decision.  The appeals  of  the  three  appellants  before  us  are
    dismissed.



                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 21 September 2021
