
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/13557/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On May 4, 2018                            | On May 11, 2018                 |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                              MR DANIEL AIWUYOR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel, instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order in this appeal.

 2. The appellant  had  made  an  application  for  entry  clearance  under
    paragraph 352D HC  395.  The  respondent  refused  his  application  on
    October 22, 2015 and grounds of appeal were lodged on December 9,  2015
    with the Tribunal. The appeal was thereafter listed before Judge of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Smith  on  June  13,  2017  and  in  a   decision
    promulgated on June 21, 2017 the  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 352D HC 395 but  concluded  the
    public interest outweighed his right to be given entry clearance.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on July 4, 2017 and the matter was
    then considered by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hodgkinson  on
    December 29, 2017 who found it arguable there had been an error in  law
    for the reasons raised in the grounds of appeal.

 4. The matter came before me on the above date  and  Mr  McVeety  accepted
    that the Judge had erred by finding the appellant was not  a  minor  at
    the date of decision and he also accepted that the Judge had  erred  by
    finding the public interest required entry clearance to be refused even
    though the Immigration Rules were met.

 5. However, Mr McVeety submitted that any  reconsideration  would  had  to
    consider  whether  that  Immigration  Rule   had   been   met   because
    unfortunately when making her finding at paragraph 27 of  her  decision
    the Judge had stated, "having considered the evidence before  me  I  am
    satisfied to the lower level of proof that the  appellant  and  sponsor
    lived together between 1989 and 2004."

 6. The standard of proof in an appeal of this nature is on the balance  of
    probabilities which is not the "lower level of proof".

 7. Mr Holmes sought to persuade me  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    outright because the respondent had  not  challenged  anything  in  the
    Judge's decision.

 8. I pointed out that as the only appealable decision was the human rights
    decision the  only  party  who  could  appeal  that  decision  was  the
    appellant because the Judge had dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 9. Mr Holmes submitted that the respondent should have put a  response  in
    writing raising this issue but I  pointed  out  that  Rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 clearly  states  that  a
    party responding to a permission to appeal may file a  response.  There
    is no mandatory requirement for this to be done but in the event that a
    response was filed the onus is on the filing party to comply with  Rule
    24(3) of the 2008 Rules.

10. I indicated to Mr Holmes that I was not persuaded that  the  respondent
    could have either appealed  a  decision  or  was  required  to  file  a
    response.

11. Having found the Judge's approach amounted to an error  in  law  I  was
    obliged to set the decision aside and either remake it or adjourn for a
    further hearing.

12.  In light of the fact the FTT Judge had applied the wrong  standard  of
    proof in her decision I indicated that the Tribunal would need to  make
    a finding on whether paragraph 352D HC 395 was met-applying the correct
    standard of proof.

13. Both Mr McVeety and Mr Holmes submitted that findings would had  to  be
    made afresh because of my ruling and both  invited  me  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Having found there was  an  error  in  law  in  which  the  Judge  also
    inadvertently applied the wrong standard of proof I remit the  decision
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

15. Any Judge  hearing  this  appeal  should  concentrate  on  whether  the
    Immigration Rules were met, applying the correct standard of proof.  It
    appears conceded by the respondent that if that Rule was met then  this
    appellant should succeed under article 8 ECHR bearing in mind it  is  a
    family reunion case.

    DECISION

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

17. I set aside the decision.

18. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  Judge
    other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal EMM Smith.


Signed                              Date May 5, 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
