
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13315/2015
                                                             & HU/13317/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 April 2019                      |On 4 April 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                    M M Y
                                    F M Y
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms E Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are sisters and citizens of Eritrea with dates of  birth
    of 21.9.98 and 19.7.00, respectively. They presently live in Uganda.

 2. This is their appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Asjad promulgated 13.6.17, dismissing their linked appeals against  the
    decisions of the Secretary of State, dated 10.11.15,  to  refuse  their
    application for entry clearance to settle with their mother and sponsor
    in the UK.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Peart  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    28.11.17. However, when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted permission to  appeal  on
    9.5.18.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. The applications were refused following consideration of paragraph  297
    of the Immigration Rules and the requirement of sole responsibility for
    the  appellants'  upbringing.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the  appellants,
    relying on the previous appeal decision of Judge Birk to  that  effect.
    Neither was the Entry Clearance Officer satisfied that there  were  any
    serious and compelling family or other considerations making  exclusion
    of the appellants undesirable.

 6. Judge Asjad also relied on the decision of Judge Birk and a large  part
    of the decision is given over to setting out the Devaseelan principles.
    At [8] Judge Asjad took Judge Birk's decision as the starting point and
    observed at [9] that the issue in the two appeal is  the  same,  namely
    sole responsibility. However, the way in which Judge  Assad's  decision
    is drafted it appears that consideration was given  only  to  the  more
    recent evidence referenced at [10] rather than considering the issue in
    the light of the evidence as a whole.

 7. What the grounds specifically complain of is that Judge  Asjad  clearly
    erred at [20] in stating that he could not take post decision  evidence
    into account when the amendments to s85(4) of the 2002 provide that the
    judge may take such evidence into account. The evidence in question was
    the assertion that Mr [W], with  whom  the  two  appellants  previously
    lived, left Uganda  for  Canada  in  2016,  by  which  time  the  elder
    appellant had turned 18.

 8. The Rule 24 reply, dated  25.7.18,  suggests  that  error  as  to  what
    evidence the judge could consider was immaterial to the outcome of  the
    appeal, as the judge would also have to take into account that  as  the
    elder appellant had turned 18 she was able to  take  on  responsibility
    for her younger sister. However, it is not clear that these issues were
    canvassed at the appeal hearing.

 9. I reject  Ms  Rutherford's  submission  that,  having  found  that  the
    appellants  failed  to  demonstrate   that   the   sponsor   had   sole
    responsibility for them, it was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to  make  a
    finding as to with whom the sponsor shared responsibility. It does  not
    necessarily follow. The burden was on the appellants to demonstrate the
    sponsor had sole responsibility for them and once the judge found  that
    was not made out on the balance of probabilities it was  not  necessary
    to go further and consider if someone else shared  responsibility,  and
    if so, who.

10. However, the judge having accepted that the  sponsor  had  visited  the
    appellants in Uganda on  three  occasions  and  that  the  sponsor  was
    financially supporting them, I find  that  the  failure  to  take  into
    account the departure of Mr [W] was a material error of law in that  it
    was  clearly  relevant  to  the  overall  picture  of  the  appellants'
    circumstances and the issue of sole responsibility. I do not accept the
    submission that because one of the appellants had reached the age of 18
    the matter of Mr [W]'s absence  was  not  material.  These  issues  are
    interlinked and required a careful assessment.

11. In the circumstances, I find an error of law in the decision  of  Judge
    Asjad such as to require it to be set aside and the  issued  determined
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

13. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

15.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Birmingham;

16. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

17. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Asjad and Judge Peart;

18. An interpreter in Tigrinya will be required.



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: the outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


