

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13719/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                  |
|On 18 February 2021                          |On 03 March 2021             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               MD NAZRUL ISLAM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr O Ceallaigh instructed by Lexwin Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Melvin Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Morris ('the Judge') promulgated on the  22  January
        2020 in which she dismissed the appellant's appeal on human  rights
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed  application  by  the
        Upper Tribunal on 30 June 2020, the operative  part  of  the  grant
        being in the following '
        2.   It is accepted that the appellant's leave expired on 18  April
             2018. He had, by then, been lawfully resident in the UK for  9
             years and 3 months. It is also accepted that he  made  further
             applications for leave - out of time - on 1  May  2018  and  6
             September 2018. The later varied the former. It  appears  that
             it was  not  decided  before  the  appellant  made  a  further
             application for leave on 30 January 2019. What is said by  the
             respondent is that both  1  May  2018  and  6  September  2018
             applications were "voided" on 31 December 2018. The  appellant
             contends that was not the effect. There was no power to "void"
             either application. The second application  varied  the  first
             application and that varied application  remained  outstanding
             until it was itself a varied by the application on 30  January
             2019, the refusal of which gave rise  to  the  appeal.  It  is
             accepted none of this can give the appellant further leave  in
             order to meet the 10 year long residence  rule  in  para  276B
             following R(Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  1070.  But,  it  is
             said, it is relevant in assessing the appellant's art 8  claim
             and a 'near miss' argument.


        3.   Whilst the 'near miss' argument may ultimately not prevail, it
             is arguable that the immigration history  of  the  appellant's
             applications may have been misunderstood and  applied  by  the
             judge. The appellant's grounds are arguable.


Error of law


     3. The Judge noted the appellants immigration history at [16 - 17]  in
        the following terms:


        16.  It is agreed between the parties that  the  Appellant  entered
             the United Kingdom as a student on 18 January 2009 with  leave
             valid until 30 April 2012. It is accepted that  the  Appellant
             was granted further periods of leave to remain until 28 August
             2015. On 23 June 2015, he made an application and was  granted
             leave to remain until 14 July 2018. On  20  August  2017,  his
             leave was curtailed. On 28 July 2017, he made  an  application
             which was refused on 4  March  2018.  On  20  March  2018,  he
             applied for an Admin Review and this was completed,  with  the
             decision maintained, on 16 April 2018. Mr Malik submits  that,
             pursuant to Appendix SN, the effective date of service of that
             decision was 18 April 2018. I accept that submission.


        17.  On 1 May 2018, the Appellant made an application for leave  to
             remain outside the Immigration Rules and Mr  Malik  calculates
             that from 18 April 2018 to 1 May 2018 is less  than  14  days.
             That calculation is clearly correct. The application made on 1
             May 2018  was  voided  on  31  December  2018  and  a  further
             application made on 6 September 2018 was  also  voided  on  31
             December 2018. Despite Mr Malik  stating  during  the  hearing
             that he did not challenge what is said in the decision letter,
             which included the voiding, in submissions he sought to  argue
             in the absence of the actual notice, the application made on 6
             September 2018 was still pending when the Appellant  made  his
             application on 30 January 2019. I reject that submission.  The
             very clear oral evidence of the Appellant was that he knew  of
             the voiding on 31 December 2018. That evidence may be contrary
             to the contents of his witness  statement,  but  it  was  very
             clear oral evidence and I accept it.  Further,  the  Appellant
             was not asked in re-examination how he  became  aware  of  the
             voiding and Appendix SN sets  out  various  ways  in  which  a
             notice may be given. I further reject the submission  made  by
             Mr Malik that the Respondent had been put on notice  that  the
             issue of service of  the  notice  was  to  be  raised  at  the
             hearing. It is not a ground of appeal and if  such  notice  is
             alleged to have been provided to the Respondent by  virtue  of
             the Appellant's witness statement, I repeat here what  is  set
             out above, that statement only became the  Appellant's  signed
             witness statement at the hearing.


     4. At [19 - 20] the Judge writes:


        19.       By reason of all the matters set out above, I  find  that
             the Respondent was correct to conclude  that  the  Appellant's
             lawful leave ended when the Admin Review was completed  on  16
             April 2018, although I accept the submission made by Mr  Malik
             that the data should be viewed as 18 April 2018 as I have  set
             out above. By 18 April 2018 the Appellant had  completed  nine
             years  three  months  continuous  law  residence.   The   next
             application made on 1 May 2018 does not assist  the  Appellant
             to show 10 years continuous lawful residence.


        20.  By reason of the matters set out above, the applications  made
             by the Appellants on 1 May 2018 and 6 September  2018  do  not
             assist in establishing ten years continuous  lawful  residence
             but, if I am wrong as to the above, I find  that  the  voiding
             such applications on 31 December 2018 also fails to  establish
             10 years continuous lawful residence.


     5. The Judge considered the matter pursuant to article 8 ECHR  on  the
        basis of  the  appellant's  private  life  in  United  Kingdom  but
        concluded that the factors relied upon by  the  appellant  did  not
        outweigh the public interest in maintaining  effective  immigration
        control. These findings, set out between [22-24], are as follows:


        22.  The appellant has given no evidence of any family life  beyond
             that which he has with his wife and child.  Such  family  life
             would be maintained upon removal to Bangladesh. I am persuaded
             to accept that the Appellant has a private life by  reason  of
             the number of years he has been here, although  there  was  no
             evidence led as to such private life. For the purposes of this
             decision,  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the  Respondents
             decision would interfere with any such private life  and  have
             consequences of such gravity  as  to  potentially  engage  the
             operation of Article 8. I find that such interference would be
             in accordance with the law and would  have  a  legitimate  aim
             and,  indeed,  it  was  not  argued  to  the  contrary.  That,
             therefore, leaves the question of proportionality.


        23.  Pursuant to Section 117 B, little weight should be given to  a
             private life that is established by a person at  a  time  when
             the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully or at any  time
             when a person's immigration  status  is  precarious.  For  the
             entire duration of the  Appellant's  presence  in  the  United
             Kingdom, that presence has been precarious, if  not  unlawful,
             since he knew that his presence in the United Kingdom depended
             upon being given leave to do so. The Appellant does  not  meet
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules and it  is  accepted
             that there would be no significant  obstacles  to  integration
             into Bangladesh.  The  Appellant's  wife  and  child  are  not
             British citizens and the Appellant has family  in  Bangladesh.
             He also mentions in his witness statement, which he signed  at
             the hearing, that he has skills and  qualifications  which  he
             has been able to use in the United Kingdom. He has a  Master's
             of Business Administration in Marketing Degree and a  Graduate
             Diploma in Business Management, and  a  Diploma  and  Advanced
             Diploma in Business Studies. I bear in mind the length of time
             that the Appellant was lawfully  in  United  Kingdom  and  the
             lengths of time  that  he  has  been  present  in  the  United
             Kingdom. However, the Appellant does not meet the requirements
             of the Immigration Rules.


        24.  By reason of all the matters set out above  and  having  taken
             account of the evidence as a whole, which I do,  I  find  that
             the Respondent's decision is not disproportionate. I find this
             to be a case where all the factors do not outweigh the  public
             interest accordingly, the  appeal  is  dismissed  because  the
             decision is not unlawful under Section 6 of the  Human  Rights
             Act 1998.


     6. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge erred
        in treating him as having made two applications which  were  voided
        on 31 December 2018, which amounts to legal error, and  in  failing
        to consider the appellant's argument that this was  a  'near  miss'
        case pursuant to article 8 ECHR.
     7. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24  response  in  reply  to  the
        grant of permission and appellant's grounds writes:


        Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb grants permission in this renewed
        application finding it arguable that whilst the appellant accepts
        that none of his various applications made on 1 May 2018, 6
        September 2018 and 30 January 2019  can count towards his long
        residence application [276B] following R(Ahmed) v SSHD [2019 EWCA
        Civ 1070 it is argued that his immigration history should be taken
        into account when considering Article 8.

         Judge Grubb notes that "Whilst the 'near miss' argument may
        ultimately not prevail it is arguable that the immigration history
        of the appellant's applications may have been mis understood and
        applied by the Judge."

        The GoA argue that the FtT erred in law in that;
        Ground 1 Argues that FtT erred I it's consideration of the voided
    applications
        Ground 2 argues that the FtT erred when considering the main thrust
        of the arguments being that this was a near miss case.

         It is respectfully submitted that an error in law needs to be
        material to the outcome of this appeal. Whether or not the
        decisions were able to be voided or not, as the appellant now
        accepts, is not material to the issue before the FtT which was
        whether he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules in order
        to succeed in his appeal or whether there were Exceptional
        circumstances that warranted a grant of leave outside of those
        Rules.


        It is clear that neither of the voided applications had any
        prospect of success as Mr I would not have met the requirements for
        ILR or paragraph 276 B at the time of those applications.

        The Grounds of appeal do not assert that the judge has erred
        because the appellant met the Rules (276B) or Appendix FM or 276
        ADE or that there are exceptional circumstances present in this
        appeal which the judge has mistakenly omitted or mis-interpreted.

        It is respectfully submitted that it is trite law that the "near
        miss" argument is not one that can be successful before the courts
        without more.


        It is submitted that Grounds of appeal have no merit and are not
        material to the outcome of this appeal.


Error of law

     8. In relation to the assertion the Judge erred by finding two of  the
        appellants applications had been voided, and the submission of Mr O
        Ceallaigh that this was unlawful as they had ben varied,  reference
        has been made to the respondent's guidance, 'Validation,  variation
        and withdrawal of applications  Version  3.0'.   Although  dated  1
        December 2020 it was not suggested it did not represent the correct
        legal position in relation to the power to vary an  application  at
        the relevant date. From page 18 it reads:

Varying an application made in the UK.

An applicant can vary the purpose of an application at  any  time  before  a
decision on the application is served. Any  application  submitted  where  a
previous application has not  yet  been  decided  is  a  variation  of  that
previous  application.  An  applicant  can   only   have   one   application
outstanding at any one time. See Variation  of  an  application  for  leave:
example scenarios.

If the applicant wishes to vary the purpose of their application, they  must
complete the specified form and meet all the requirements  of  paragraph  34
of the Immigration Rules for the variation to  be  valid.  If  an  applicant
writes to request a variation of an  application  but  does  not  submit  an
application form, you should write back to them confirming  that  they  must
complete  a  specified  form  and  tell  them  which  form  to   use.   See:
Requirement: a specified application form.

When the original and variation applications are made online, the  applicant
will have paid 2 fees. You must refund the fee for  the  first  application.
If  both  applications,  or  the  second  application,  are  on  paper,  the
applicant must pay the difference between  the  original  fee  and  the  new
higher fee and you should write to them to tell  them  what  the  difference
is. See: missing fees.

Where an EU national or their family member varies  a  previous  application
made under the Immigration Rules with that of an application  under  the  EU
Settlement Scheme for either settled or pre-settled status, the fee for  the
first application should be refunded and  only  the  second  fee  should  be
retained.

Where a dependant is included as part of an  original  application  that  is
later varied, they can be included in  the  variation  application  if  that
application allows dependants to be included. If  not,  and  the  dependants
have not submitted an application in their own right, then  you  must  write
to  the  dependants  on  the  application  confirming  that   the   original
application has been varied, that they are not  included  in  the  variation
application and that their original application has fallen away. You  should
tell the dependant that they should now make a  separate  application.  See:
specified application forms.

If a dependant was not included in the original  application,  they  can  be
added to the variation application; however, their date of application  will
be the date of the variation application and not the date  of  the  original
application.

A valid variation of purpose will look like  a  new  application.  You  must
check the caseworking system to see if an earlier application  exists  which
has not yet been decided. This will tell you whether the new application  is
a variation of an existing application or a new application. If it is a  new
application  you  must  consider  whether  it  can  be  made.  Guidance   on
applications made while a person is on section 3C leave can be found in  the
3C guidance.

If an applicant submits an application to vary, but a decision  has  already
been made on the original application, you must write to them and tell  them
that the application will be treated as a new application.

Date of application: original application

The date of application for paper applications sent by post by  Royal  Mail,
including Parcel Force, is the date of posting  that  is  indicated  on  the
tracking information, or if not tracked, on the postmark on the envelope.

The date of application for postal applications delivered by courier is  the
date it is delivered to the Home Office.

If the envelope in which the application was posted is missing,  or  if  the
postmark is illegible, you must take the date of posting to be at least  one
working day before it is received. You must take the date of  processing  on
the payment contractor's stream  sheet  as  the  date  the  application  was
received. If there is also accompanying correspondence with the  application
that matches the likely date of posting,  and  that  date  is  earlier  than
postage date calculated using the above method, you must take  this  earlier
date as the application date.  If  you  are  unsure,  you  must  accept  the
probable date most favourable to the applicant.

The date of application  for  an  online  application  is  the  date  it  is
submitted using the online process.

If you withdraw a decision to treat an application as  invalid  and  instead
accept it as valid, the date of application is the date the application  was
originally made.

If an application, or variation, was previously rejected as invalid and  the
applicant then submits a valid application,  the  date  of  application,  or
variation, is the date the valid application is submitted.

Date of application: application to vary

Where an application is varied, the application date  remains  the  date  of
the original application. This is relevant to whether an applicant  has,  or
will have, section 3C leave. For further information see: Leave extended  by
section 3C (and leave extended by section 3D in transitional cases).

Where a variation application is made in accordance with paragraph 34E,  the
date the variation application is made is  the  date  to  be  used  for  the
purposes of assessment against the rules.

Variation of an application for leave: example scenarios

An applicant can only have one application outstanding  at  a  time,  except
for one very specific exception as set out in example scenario 4 below,  and
where one application is a human rights or protection  claim.  See:  Varying
an  application  for  leave  to  remain.  When  an  applicant   submits   an
application for leave followed by another application for leave, the  second
application will either be a variation of the first application,  or  a  new
application. The examples below explain how this works.

Example scenario 1

An applicant submits application A in time. They then submit  application  B
before application A has been decided, but after the applicant's  leave  has
expired when the applicant  transitioned  to  3C  leave.  As  the  applicant
transitioned  to  3C  leave  and  a  decision  has  not  yet  been  made  on
application A, application B is automatically considered as a  variation  of
application A. The date  of  application  is  the  date  application  A  was
submitted.

Example scenario 2

An applicant submits application A in time. They then submit  application  B
before application A has been decided, whilst they still have extant  leave.
An applicant cannot be granted more than one type of leave at a time.  Where
2 applications have been submitted whilst the applicant  has  extant  leave,
the second application will be  considered  as  a  variation  of  the  first
application.  The  date  of  application  is  the  date  application  A  was
submitted.

Example scenario 3

An  applicant  submits  application  A  out  of  time.  They   then   submit
application B before application A has been decided. An applicant cannot  be
granted more than one type of leave at a time.  Where  2  applications  have
been submitted out of time, the second application will be considered  as  a
variation of the first application. The date  of  application  is  the  date
application A was submitted.
Example scenario 4

An applicant submits application A in time. They transition to 3C leave  and
application A is refused, and  the  decision  is  served  with  a  right  of
appeal. The applicant then submits application B, whilst still on  3C  leave
(for example, before the time limit to appeal has ended) In  this  scenario,
if application B is a human rights claim or protection claim, application  B
must be decided. If application B is any other type of application, then  it
must be returned as void as there is no longer an application to  vary.  For
further information on 3C leave, see: Leave  extended  by  section  3C  (and
leave extended by section 3D in transitional cases).

Example scenario 5

An applicant submits application A (either in or out of  time).  Application
A is refused and the decision is served,  with  a  right  to  Administrative
Review.  The  applicant  then  submits  application  B.  The  submission  of
application B brings the administrative  review  period  and  therefore  any
period of 3C leave, to an end.  Application  B  cannot  be  a  variation  of
application A, because the  decision  on  application  A  has  already  been
decided. Application B should be considered as a new application.

     9. Reference is also made  in  the  case  to  paragraph  34BB  of  the
        Immigration Rules which states:


        Multiple Applications

        34BB      (1) An applicant may only have one outstanding
               application for leave to remain at a time.
               (2) If an application for leave to remain is submitted in
               circumstances where a previous application for leave to
               remain has not been decided, it will be treated as a
               variation of the previous application.
               (3) Where more than one application for leave to remain is
               submitted on the same day then subject to sub-paragraph (4),
               each application will be invalid and will not be considered.
               (4) The Secretary of State may give the applicant a single
               opportunity to withdraw all but one of the applications
               within 10 working days of the date on which the notification
               was sent. If all but one of the applications are not
               withdrawn by the specified date each application will be
               invalid and will not be considered.
               (5) Notice of invalidity will be given in writing and served
               in accordance with Appendix SN of these Rules.

    10. In relation to the relevant applications said by the Judge to  have
        been voided,  one made on the 1 May 2018 and the  other  on  the  6
        September  2018,  as  no  decision  had  been  made  on  the  first
        application when the second application was made, I find  there  is
        merit in Mr O Ceallaigh' s submission that the  second  application
        should have been treated as a variation of the  first  application.
        The third application made on the January 2019 will also have stood
        as a variation of the second application.
    11. The grounds assert this error is material as  the  Judge  concluded
        that after the appellant's leave  expired,  he  made  a  series  of
        failed applications before the application  of  January  2019,  and
        therefore failed to consider the appellant's argument that his  was
        a "near miss" case.
    12. Even if the Judge was wrong to conclude the two varied applications
        had been "voided" that  does  not  establish  legal  error  in  the
        Judge's findings at [19 - 20] set out above. It  was  not  disputed
        before the Upper Tribunal that the appellant had  only  established
        nine years and three months continuous lawful residence rather than
        the requisite 10 years continuous lawful period required under  the
        Rules.
    13. The Judge did consider article 8 ECHR as noted above.
    14. In relation to a 'near miss' argument, the  appellant  relies  upon
        the decision in SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387  in  which
        it was held that the fact that a case was a 'near miss' in relation
        to satisfying the requirements of the rules  would  not  show  that
        compelling reasons existed requiring the grant of the  LTE  outside
        the rules. If  a  claimant  could  show  however  that  there  were
        individual interests at stake covered by Article 8, which gave rise
        to a claim that compelling circumstances  existed  to  justify  the
        grant of leave outside the rules, the fact  that  the  case  was  a
        'near-miss' might be a relevant  consideration,  which  tipped  the
        balance in his or her favour. Where a claimant submitted that there
        was a reasonable prospect that he or she  would  soon  be  able  to
        satisfy the requirements of the rules, the Secretary of  State  was
        not obliged to take  that  into  account.  It  was  fair  that  the
        claimant should wait until the circumstances had changed  and  then
        apply rather than attempting  to  jump  the  queue  by  asking  for
        preferential treatment outside the rules in  advance.  Richards  LJ
        noted that in certain of the appeals,  the  respondents  said  that
        improvements in the position of their sponsors were on the horizon,
        so that there appeared to be a reasonable prospect  that  within  a
        period of weeks or months they would in fact be able to satisfy the
        requirements of the Rules. Richards LJ said that "Generally, it  is
        fair that the applicant should wait until  the  circumstances  have
        changed and the requirements in the Rules are  satisfied  and  then
        apply, rather than attempting to  jump  the  queue  by  asking  for
        preferential treatment outside the Rules in advance".
    15. This is not a case where  it  was  made  out  the  appellant  could
        satisfy the requirements of the Rules within a short period of time
        or one in which the  nine-month  shortfall,  when  added  to  other
        matters taken into account by the Judge, was sufficient to  warrant
        the appeal being allowed. As Mr Melvin submitted  this  was  not  a
        small shortfall but a considerable gap of some nine months.
    16. The near miss argument was never determinative and could not be  in
        law.
    17. There was reference made before the Upper Tribunal to the fact  the
        appellant's wife had given birth to a second child but  that  is  a
        post hearing development and does not, of itself, support a finding
        of legal error.
    18. The Judge clearly took into account  the  statutory  provisions  of
        section 117 B of the 2002 Act and it has not been shown  the  Judge
        erred in concluding there will be no  disruption  with  the  family
        life recognised by article 8 of this family  unit.  The  issue  was
        that  of  their  private  life.  The  Judge   in   concluding   any
        interference with the private life was proportionate and  justified
        took into account the number of years the appellant has been in the
        United Kingdom; although  noted  the  appellant  had  not  led  any
        evidence as to the nature of his private life.
    19. The finding by the  Judge  that  there  were  no  very  significant
        obstacles to integration into Bangladesh is a  finding  within  the
        range of those available to the Judge on the  evidence.  The  Judge
        clearly considered the arguments in this case and only when  having
        done, and having undertaken the balancing exercise, found this is a
        case in which all the factors relied upon by the appellant did  not
        outweigh the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
        immigration control.
    20. The appellant has failed to establish this is  a  decision  outside
        the range of those available to the Judge or  a  decision  that  is
        unreasonable or unsafe on the facts upon which proper weight  could
        be placed. I find any error identified in the grounds, in  relation
        to the finding application had been 'voided', is  not  material  to
        the decision to dismiss this human rights appeal.

Decision

    21. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 22 February 2021












