
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/13877/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th November 2018                    |On 14th January 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              ZAHEER AHMED KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr F Aziz (Maidstone Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State in relation to a decision of Judge Atkinson  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 25th July 2018.   For  the  sake  of
    continuity and clarity I will continue to  refer  to  Mr  Khan  as  the
    Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent  in  this
    judgment.

 2. Judge Atkinson was hearing the appeal of a Pakistani  citizen  born  on
    15th November 1975 who had arrived in the UK on 29th August 2007 as the
    spouse of Shazia Khan with a visa valid until August 2009. Prior to the
    expiry of that leave the Appellant applied for further  leave  and  was
    granted discretionary leave until October 2013 followed  by  a  further
    grant of discretionary leave, outside the Immigration Rules until  23rd
    May 2017.

 3. On 17th May 2017 the Appellant made an application for indefinite leave
    to remain outside the Rules.  That  application  was  refused  on  18th
    October 2017 and was the subject of the appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant had made his claim on human  rights  grounds.  He  relied
    upon his relationship with his wife and  also  an  established  private
    life in the United Kingdom.

 5. Judge Atkinson's decision indicates that the  Appellant  accepted  that
    there had been difficulties in his marriage because his  wife  had  not
    conceived a child. It was said that  his  wife,  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, was too upset to  provide  documentation  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's application.

 6. The Secretary of State refused the application on the  basis  that  she
    was not satisfied that the Appellant had demonstrated that  his  family
    life with his wife was continuing, which had  been  the  basis  of  his
    earlier grant of discretionary leave. The Secretary of  State  noted  a
    lack of  satisfactory  documentation  relating  to  the  couple  having
    cohabited in the period after 2010 including from 2014 onwards and that
    the documents that had been  submitted  were  inconsistent  as  to  the
    Appellant's address. Additionally,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    granted leave on the basis of  the  Appellant's  private  life  as  the
    Appellant did not meet the ten-year period required.

 7. The  Judge  accepted  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  the  lack  of
    documentation and inconsistencies with regard to his address.  He found
    the Appellant to be a credible witness and allowed the appeal on  human
    rights grounds.

 8. It was accepted the Appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 9. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had  found  the
    relationship between the Appellant and his wife to  be  subsisting  and
    that they continue to live together despite a total absence of evidence
    from the Appellant's wife. The Appellant's spouse had not attended  the
    hearing or provided any witness statements to support  the  Appellant's
    assertion with regards to difficulties  in  their  marriage  which  the
    Judge  had  accepted.  Although  the   Appellant   had   been   granted
    discretionary leave previously, based  on  his  relationship  with  his
    wife, this had not been demonstrated appropriately before the Judge.

10. The Judge granting permission to appeal noted that the main reason  for
    the Respondent's refusal of the application was that the Appellant  had
    failed  to  meet  the  evidential  burden  of  establishing  that   his
    relationship with his wife, the basis of his previous grants of  leave,
    was still subsisting. The Appellant's wife had neither given  evidence,
    provided a  statement  nor  submitted  any  documents  to  support  the
    Appellant's case.   The  Judge  found  it  arguable  that  the  Judge's
    conclusion that the marriage was subsisting was perverse.

11. Having carefully considered the evidence that was before the  Judge,  I
    agree that in the complete absence of any evidence from the Appellant's
    wife to support  the  Appellant's  the  claim  that  the  marriage  was
    subsisting  the  Judge's  acceptance  of  the  Appellant's  unsupported
    evidence was an error of law.  His  conclusion  was  not  supported  by
    evidence. That being the reason for the  appeal  having  been  allowed,
    that error is clearly material. Mr Aziz did not seek to argue otherwise
    with any force.

12. It was agreed by both parties that the appropriate action was for me to
    set aside the Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal   in  its
    entirety and remit the matter to that Tribunal to be heard  by  another
    Judge de novo.

Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the extent that the Decision  and  Reasons  is
    set aside and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full
    rehearing before any Judge other than Judge Atkinson at Manchester.

    There having been no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal not having made one, I  see  no  justification  for
    directing anonymity and do not do so.










Signed [pic]                            Date 3rd January 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

