
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13240/2017
                                                               HU/13312/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 October 2018                            |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                             Mrs SHAHNAJ RAHMAN
                           Mr SHEIKH MUSLEH UDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Acharyas, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born on 1 April 1979 and 10
    February 1982.  They are married and have two children who were born on
    8 June 2011 and 12 June 2015.

 2. On 27 June 2016 the appellants made a human rights application seeking
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis of their private and family
    life.  The application was refused by the respondent on the basis that
    the suitability requirements under the Immigration Rules were not met
    as Educational Test Service (ETS) had identified that the first
    appellant had used deception in an English language test and that in
    any event there were insufficient reasons under Article 8 (either
    within or outside the Immigration Rules) to grant leave to remain.  The
    appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where their appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Phull.  In a decision
    promulgated on 25 June 2018 the judge dismissed the appeal.  The
    appellants are now appealing against that decision.

    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge firstly considered the deception allegation and found that
    the respondent had not discharged the burden of establishing that the
    first appellant had engaged in fraud.

 4. The judge then considered Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and
    concluded that the requirements were not met.  The judge found that the
    appellants would not face very significant obstacles integrating into
    Bangladesh.

 5. With regard to Article 8 ECHR outwith the Rules the judge focused on
    the appellants' eldest child, who at the time of the hearing had lived
    her entire life of almost seven years in the UK.  At paragraphs 39 to
    42 the judge stated:

         "39. Turning to the best interests of the appellant's eldest child
             [] I find, as follows.  She was born in the UK and it is
             accepted that she has visited relatives once in Bangladesh
             with her parents.  At the date of hearing she was 3-weeks from
             her 7th birthday.  It is not in dispute that she has language
             and speech problems, as supported by the letters from her
             doctor and speech therapist.  The evidence is that she started
             nursery in September 2014 and Dallows Primary School in
             September 2015.

         40.  The school says that she is able to follow instructions
             involving ideas or actions.  Dr Gupta at the Edwin Lobo School
             in his assessment of 18 August 2016 says that, '... [her]
             understanding of English and Bengali were assessed when she
             first came to the clinic.  Her skills in both languages were
             considered to be at a similar level'.  In her letter of 5
             April 2017 the speech therapist says that, '[the eldest child]
             has progressed with her language and is able to use a range of
             simple sentences with a subject + verb + object structure'.

         41.  I find that whilst [the eldest child] has speech and language
             skills she is improving as supported by the letters considered
             above.  I find the evidence satisfies that her parents have
             also been supporting her to practice her language skills.

         42.  I find although the appellant and his wife want [the eldest
             child] to remain in the UK and continue receiving the support
             of speech therapists, the evidence is that her circumstances
             are not exceptional because she is making progress in her
             speech and language.  She receives help from her parents to
             practice the speech exercises.  There is nothing to suggest
             that she cannot access speech therapy support in Bangladesh or
             continue receiving help from her parents.  I find that she can
             continue to practice the skills she has learnt, with the
             support of her parents in Bangladesh, in the same way as she
             does in the UK.  For all these reasons, I find it is
             reasonable for [the eldest child] to leave the UK with her
             parents.  They can help her adapt to her new surroundings and
             with the extended family in Bangladesh.  Whilst there may be
             some disruption in her life, I find it is in her best
             interests to be with her parents and sibling, as a family
             unit.  I find she is young enough to adapt and her parents are
             in the best position to help her settle".

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 6. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred by failing to
    consider whether it would be in the eldest child's best interests to
    move to Bangladesh and by not having regard to the difficulties she
    would face or to her educational needs.  It was also argued that the
    judge erred by failing to adequately consider the impact on the
    appellant's family in the UK.

 7. Mr Acharyas, on behalf of the appellants, argued that the judge erred
    by failing to give proper consideration to the fact that the
    appellants' eldest child was about to turn seven when the hearing took
    place, and had turned seven before the decision was promulgated.  He
    maintained that MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 makes clear that
    where a child has lived in the UK for over seven years there must be
    powerful reasons if leave to remain is not to be granted and he
    maintained that there were no such reasons advanced by the judge in
    this case.  He also argued that the judge failed to adequately consider
    the eldest child's age, length of time in the UK, education in the UK
    and the extent and nature of her linguistic difficulties.

 8. Ms Isherwood argued that the submissions of Mr Acharyas were different
    to the grounds of appeal, but that in any event the judge had given
    proper consideration to the eldest child's age, time spent in the UK,
    and all factors raised by Mr Acharyas.

Analysis

 9. The appellants' eldest child had been in the UK for over seven years
    when the decision was promulgated.  She therefore was a qualifying
    child under Section 117D(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

10. Under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act where, as in this appeal, a
    person is not liable to deportation and has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child the public interest will
    not require their removal where "it would not be reasonable to expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom".  Accordingly, the central issue
    for the judge to determine was whether it would be reasonable to expect
    the appellants' eldest child to leave the UK as part of a family unit
    in the context of her parents having no right to be in the UK and also
    leaving the UK.

11. Although the judge has not specifically referred to Section 117B(6), it
    is clear that he has applied his mind to the "reasonableness" test when
    considering the proportionality of the appellants' oldest child leaving
    the UK.  In both paragraphs 42 and 44 the judge stated that he found
    "it reasonable for [her] to leave the UK with her parents".  I
    therefore do not accept that the judge failed to apply the test in
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

12. Nor do I accept that the judge's analysis of reasonableness was
    inadequate because of a failure to consider relevant factors such as
    age, duration in the UK and education.  It is apparent from paragraphs
    39-42 of the decision (as quoted above) that in determining the
    reasonableness of the eldest child leaving the UK and moving with her
    family to Bangladesh the judge had regard to a range of factors,
    including:

         a)   that she was born in the UK (Para 39)

         b)   her age (para 39)

         c)   that she had been in the UK for almost seven years (para 39)

         d)   that she has speech and language problems and receives ongoing
             support in the UK (paras 39 - 41)

         e)   that she is supported by her parents (paras 41 and 42)

         f)   the absence of evidence speech therapy could not be accessed
             in Bangladesh (para 42)

         g)   the presence of extended family in Bangladesh (para 42)

         h)   her parents' familiarity with Bangladesh and ability to help
             her settle there (para 42).

13. Mr Acharyas submitted that the judge failed to take into account the
    appellant's eldest child's age, education and time spent in the UK.
    However it is clear from paragraphs 39-42, as summarised above, that
    consideration was given to the these factors.

14. Having correctly recognised that the applicable test is
    "reasonableness" and having, in the assessment of reasonableness,
    considered a range of factors that were focussed on the circumstances
    of the appellants' eldest child (rather than the conduct of the
    appellants), it was open to the judge (and consistent with the recent
    Supreme Court judgment in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53) to conclude that it
    was reasonable to expect the appellants' eldest child to leave the UK
    with her family.  The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 7 November 2018               |

