
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13812/2016
                                                HU/13792/2016, HU/13797/2016
                                                               HU/13803/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2016                  |On 7 February 2017                   |
|Ex tempore decision                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             Mr Timoor Azam Lone
                           Mrs Kiran Taimoor Lone
                           Miss Fizza Taimoor Lone
                          Miss Indelah Taimoor Lone
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Taimoor Azam Lone in person
                    assisted by Mr Qadir, McKenzie friend.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 17 August 2016 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  B  Lloyd  dismissed  the
    appellants' appeals against the refusal of the Secretary  of  State  to
    grant the family leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration Rules, pursuant to the  partner  and  parent  route.   That
    decision followed a hearing at Columbus House in Newport  on  8  August
    2016 in which the judge had been asked by the appellants  to  determine
    the merits of the case on the papers.  Therefore, this is a case  where
    none of the adult appellants  elected  to  give  oral  evidence  or  to
    explain their situation in any more detail than that appearing  in  the
    documents that had been filed.

2.   An application for permission to appeal the  decision  of  Judge  Lloyd
    was lodged raising a number of grounds.  On 16 November 2016 permission
    to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Froom  in  the
    following terms:

         "Permission to appeal is granted because it is  arguable  that  the
         First-tier Judge made a material error in assessing the appeals  on
         the basis that the child appellant, Fizza, had only been in the  UK
         for the last three years.  Whilst the First-tier Judge  did  record
         she was born in the UK in 2008 at paragraph 4 and referred later to
         the family residing in the UK for seven years [paragraph 34], it is
         clear the First-tier Judge found that paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  was
         not met in the case of Fizza  because  he  wrongly  calculated  her
         length of residence.  The refusal letter accepted she had lived  in
         the UK for seven years as at the date of application.  As a  result
         of this the First-tier Judge did not ask himself the key  question,
         which was whether it was reasonable for her to leave the UK.   This
         is a less demanding test than that of whether it  would  be  unduly
         harsh.  The grounds may be argued."

3.   Before the Tribunal this morning Mr Lone has  appeared  assisted  by  a
    McKenzie friend, Mr Qadir.  Ms  Isherwood  appears  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  It was accepted  by  this  Tribunal  at  the  very
    beginning of the hearing that in  paragraph  17  of  the  determination
    under challenge  Judge  Lloyd  has  made  a  factual  error.   In  that
    paragraph the judge makes the following findings:

         "In relation to the third and fourth  appellant,  they  have  lived
         continuously in the UK for the last three years at the time of  the
         application but not for at least seven years.  The third and fourth
         appellants  on  the  face  of  the  evidence  fail  to   meet   the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules."

    The child Fizza is the third appellant, Indelah is the fourth appellant
    but no issue arises in relation to the Indelah.

4.   Had that been the only reference in the decision to  the  ages  of  the
    children or duration of their stay in the United Kingdom  it  may  have
    been that this hearing would have been a lot shorter than it  has  been
    this morning, but that is not the case.  As Ms Isherwood mentioned,  at
    the early part of the decision under challenge Judge Lloyd sets out the
    position in relation to the children and states at paragraph 2: "At the
    time of the hearing the two children are 7 and  4  respectively."   The
    parents' dates of birth are then given.

5.   In paragraph 4 the judge notes that the third  appellant  was  born  in
    the UK on 26 November 2008 and the fourth appellant was born in the  UK
    on 10 April 2012 and there is no finding in the document that either of
    those appellants have left the UK  for  any  period  of  time  for  the
    purposes of settling elsewhere or even  visiting  family  in  Pakistan.
    The judge was therefore fully aware of the date of birth of  the  third
    appellant in the United Kingdom and the age of that appellant, which is
    also stated in the grant  of  permission,  a  matter  conceded  by  the
    Secretary of State in the decision notice.  Although  there  is,  as  I
    say, error in paragraph 17 it is not an error of  fact  to  the  extent
    that the judge failed to take into account the actual circumstances  of
    this child.

6.   The more  serious  error  arguably  arising  in  paragraph  17  of  the
    decision is where the judge goes on to say that "on  the  face  of  the
    evidence the third and fourth appellants fail to meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)" but only if that statement meant  that  the
    judge had failed to consider the relevant provisions of that paragraph.
    However, I find this is not the finding that is made by the judge.  The
    judge clearly states: "On the face of the evidence they  fail  to  meet
    the requirements  of  276ADE(1)(iv)".   This  is  a  finding  that  the
    appellants had failed to discharge the burden of proof upon them to the
    required standard to show that they can meet that requirement  of  that
    Rule.

7.   That Rule, as is conceded before the Tribunal today and in the  appeal,
    in fact has two parts.  The first part is  that  the  individual  child
    must have lived in the United Kingdom for at least seven years and  the
    second part is that it must not be  reasonable  on  all  the  facts  to
    expect the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  clearly
    records in the decision that the appellants' case was that it  was  not
    reasonable in the circumstances to expect Fizza  to  leave  the  UK  to
    return to Pakistan with her family.

8.   It cannot be said that this is a case in  which  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the best interests of the children as  they  are  specifically
    referred to at paragraph 28 of the determination under challenge.   The
    finding by the judge in the following terms: "On any analysis the place
    of the children is with their parents wherever they  are  and  wherever
    they have to pursue their future lives" and that the  adult  appellants
    had not shown any disproportionate impact upon the  children  and  that
    there were no other matters which could be relied upon to conclude that
    the principles of Section 55 would be breached by the family's  removal
    to Pakistan, is a finding that was fully open to the judge on the basis
    of the evidence the judge was asked to consider.

9.   At the outset of the submissions Mr Qadir  was  asked  by  me  in  some
    detail about the facts that he asserted the judge failed to  take  into
    account in coming to the overall assessment and I shall refer  to  some
    of those shortly but, at this point, I wish to refer  to  one  specific
    submission made that the judge erred in that the child's views were not
    taken into account.

10.  The judge clearly considered all  the  documentary  evidence  that  had
    been made available and makes a specific statement to  that  effect  in
    the decision under challenge.  This is a judge who is not only  a  very
    experienced  fee-paid  judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   in   the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber but also a judge who  holds  a  salaried
    position within  the  Employment  Tribunal  based  in  Birmingham  and,
    therefore, is a judge of  some  considerable  experience  in  terms  of
    judgecraft, the  consideration  of  evidence,  and  also  the  need  to
    carefully balance that evidence when coming to a decision.

11.  It is accepted that there is a letter purportedly written by  Fizza  in
    the papers before the judge but the judge was clearly  aware  that  the
    child was only 7 years of age and in the family jurisdiction there  has
    been considerable work undertaken in past years  to  ascertain  when  a
    child's views are matters on which weight can be  placed  by  a  court,
    which is based in some respects upon whether a child has the ability to
    understand the need to tell the truth and the  emotional  understanding
    of a child in relation  to  the  issues  in  account.   In  the  family
    jurisdiction that is an issue that commonly arises in terms of visiting
    rights or when issues of where a child shall live arise.  Neither issue
    is relevant to this case, but it has not been made out that  a  7-year-
    old is able to understand the intricacies of  a  case  of  this  nature
    although I do accept that a 7-year-old may be capable of saying "I wish
    to stay in the United Kingdom, I wish to stay in my school and  I  wish
    to stay with my friends". That was, however, a matter  that  the  judge
    did take into account but did not find that the wishes of any member of
    this family were determinative, as I shall refer to  shortly,  or  that
    the content of that letter showed that the best interests of the  child
    were anything other than as assessed by the judge.

12.  Guidance on the approach the  judge  was  required  to  take  has  been
    provided in case law and I refer very briefly to it  and  I  say  'very
    briefly' because the Supreme Court in two very  recent  decisions  when
    looking at Article 8 matters do seem to suggest that parties,  lawyers,
    and judges below, should end the practice  of  referring  endlessly  to
    decided authorities and should instead focus  upon  the  facts  of  the
    case, look at the  Razgar  guidance,  and  incorporate  the  Rules  and
    principles  arising  from  the  Article  8  case  law  as  part  of   a
    proportionality assessment.

13.  Notwithstanding, I refer to two cases.  The first is  the  decision  of
    EV (Philippines) & Ors [2014] EWCA Civ 874, a decision of the Court  of
    Appeal which both parties have referred to and  the  lead  judgment  of
    Lord Justice Christopher Clarke in that case.  At paragraphs 50  to  60
    the Lord Justice stated as follows:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world.  If one parent has no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?

         59.  On the facts of ZH [that being a reference to  ZH  (Tanzania)]
             it was not reasonable to expect the children to  follow  their
             mother to Tanzania, not least  because  the  family  would  be
             separated and the children would be deprived of the  right  to
             grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our case.   In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen.  None has  the  right
             to remain in this country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
             father has no independent right to remain.  If the parents are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go with  them.   As  the  Immigration  Judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents.  Although it is, of course a question of fact for the
             Tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents.  Just as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

14.  The judge in this  case  clearly  took  into  account  the  immigration
    history of the adult appellants.  This is referred to at  paragraphs  3
    to 5 of the decision  under  challenge.   These  show  that  the  first
    appellant and the second appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully,
    the first appellant in 2006 and the  second  appellant  in  2007  as  a
    student and student dependant respectively.  The judge noted that  that
    lawful leave continued until 30 November 2015 after which it expired by
    virtue of effluxion of time without any in time application having been
    made for further leave to remain.  The judge noted that the application
    that led to the decision that was challenged by way of appeal was  made
    on 24 December 2015, after the previous grant  of  leave  had  expired.
    Two issues arise in relation to that chronology.

15.  The first is the point raised by Mr Qadir by  reference  to  the  grace
    and favour period granted by the Secretary of State of 28 days from the
    period when a previous grant of leave expired to enable  an  individual
    to make an application for further leave.  Mr Qadir is not a lawyer and
    this is an area of some complexity but what he needs to  understand  is
    that the effect of the law is not that a further  period  of  leave  to
    remain of 28 days is granted.  It is just that the Secretary  of  State
    will not refuse the second application because it has been  made  after
    the period of existing leave had expired.  In this case  the  Secretary
    of State does not dismiss the application on the basis that it has been
    made at a time when no period of leave existed and outside the  28  day
    period provided by the Rules, so that does not assist the applicants in
    this case.

16.  The  second  point  that  arises  is  that  the  status  of  the  adult
    appellants and the children in this case has never been 'settled'.   It
    has always been that their status has been temporary as a  student  and
    student dependant and in relation to the children no evidence that they
    had leave to remain in their own right and therefore their  status  has
    always been precarious.

17.  In this case the judge went further  than  just  considering  that  the
    evidence was precarious in  paragraph  36  where  the  judge  made  the
    following finding:

         "I have come to the conclusion that the appellants probably entered
         the UK from 2006 - then with leave - with the intention of settling
         in the UK and remaining here for economic and social benefit.  They
         have subsequently started their family  here.   However,  residence
         and entry to the UK is not a matter of preference to  be  exercised
         by individuals according to choice.   They  must  comply  with  the
         requisite Immigration Rules.  They have not in  this  case,  and  I
         conclude that the entry for study has  historically  been  used  by
         them as a  device  to  secure  long-term  residence.   Their  leave
         finally expired on 30 November 2015."

18.  The conduct of the adults is relevant in  two  respects.   Firstly,  if
    one returns to the judgment of Lord Justice Christopher Clarke  it  can
    clearly be seen at the date where the judge  was  making  the  decision
    under appeal that no member of this family  had  any  lawful  right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The effect of the  unchallenged  finding
    in paragraph 36 is illustrated by the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in another case to which both parties have made reference, that  of  MA
    (Pakistan) v Upper Tribunal & Ors [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  in  which  a
    differently constituted Court of Appeal  found  that  when  considering
    whether it was reasonable to remove a  child  from  the  UK  under  the
    Immigration Rules 276ADE(1)(iv) and the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, Section 117B(6), a court or Tribunal should not simply
    focus on the child but should have regard to the wider public  interest
    considerations including the conduct and  immigration  history  of  the
    parents.  Judge Lloyd has found, and it  is  an  unchallenged  finding,
    that the likely intention of  the  parents  has  been  disingenuous  in
    relation to the status they sought within the United Kingdom.

19.  The other issue that needs to  be  borne  in  mind  is  that  the  best
    interests of the children are not the determinative factor.  One has to
    go back only a relatively short distance in terms of  case  law,  to  a
    judgment of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas, in  which  it  was  confirmed
    that the best interests are one part of the proportionality assessment,
    albeit an extremely important one,  that  a  judge  has  to  take  into
    account.

20.  It cannot be successfully argued that the judge has  erred  in  failing
    to consider all the written evidence.  The fact the judge may not  have
    set out 'chapter and verse' and made findings on each and every element
    of the evidence relied upon does not admit, or justify,  a  finding  of
    arguable legal error as there is no legal obligation upon  a  judge  to
    make findings on each and every issue that is relied upon by a party to
    an appeal.

21.  The guidance that has been provided by the Senior  Courts  in  relation
    to reasoning has set out a sensible test, which is whether a reader  of
    the determination can understand why the judge came to  the  conclusion
    that he or she did in the particular circumstances of a case.  In  this
    matter it is clear by reading Judge Lloyd's decision  that  it  can  be
    understood why he arrived at the conclusion he did.  It is  a  case  in
    which the judge submitted the evidence to  the  appropriate  degree  of
    anxious scrutiny, including that relating to  the  composition  of  the
    family unit.

22.  The judge notes the following at paragraphs 33 to 35:

         "33. This is an appeal couched in a preference to remain in the  UK
             and for children to be educated  through  the  UK's  education
             system."

    Again,  the  comment  of  Lord  Justice  Christopher   Clarke   in   EV
    (Philippines) is very pertinent to that application and finding.

23.  At [34] it was found that the appellants  comprise  a  cohesive  family
    unit.  "There is no clear evidence of a developed  private  life  other
    than the routine connections that  they  have  acquired  through  their
    residence here over the last seven years.  They are first and  foremost
    a family and dependent upon each other, showing that the nature of this
    family was one that very much existed as a cohesive family unit,  which
    is a factor and an entity that was not  shown  to  be  disrupted  as  a
    result of the Secretary of State's decision".

24.  The judge found that the  first  appellant  came  here  as  a  student,
    shortly thereafter joined by his wife.   "The  second  appellant  never
    worked, successive extensions were sought and that the family made  the
    application on the grounds of private and  family  life,  although  the
    family life element did not need to be considered to any  great  extent
    by the judge as the proposal is that in fact the family will be removed
    as a unit and such family life could continue".

25.  A key finding by the judge is that set out in  paragraph  37  in  which
    the judge makes the following comment:

         "The  appellants   have   argued   that   there   are   exceptional
         circumstances in their case.  These circumstances would  appear  to
         be based primarily on the interests of the children but  also  upon
         the notion that it would be unduly harsh  for  them  to  return  to
         Pakistan.  On the evidence before me I do not  accept  that.   They
         have a family network in Pakistan which can assist  them  in  their
         reintegration into their  home  country.   They  have  not  on  any
         analysis severed their ties irrevocably.  Further, in  relation  to
         the children, namely the third and fourth  appellants,  their  best
         interests are served by their remaining as  part  of  their  family
         unit of mother, father and  two  siblings.   Overwhelmingly,  their
         best interests are  served  by  their  returning  as  a  family  to
         Pakistan."

    That finding was challenged at length by  Mr  Qadir  for  a  number  of
    reasons, none of which I find when the decision is read as a  whole  in
    relation to the evidence that the judge was asked to  consider  on  the
    papers, establishes arguable legal error.

26.  First there is the reference to unduly harsh.  It is  not  the  finding
    by the judge that it would be unduly harsh but a reference to the basis
    upon which the case was submitted in the documentary evidence that  had
    been provided.  The judge did not accept that it was unduly  harsh  but
    it is clear from reading the rest of the decision as a whole  that  the
    judge was well aware that that was not the correct test, in any  event,
    and that the requirement was to consider the reasonableness of  removal
    both under the Immigration  Rules  and  also  Section  117B,  which  is
    referred to by  the  judge  in  paragraph  29  of  the  decision  under
    challenge.

27.  It was suggested that the finding that the  family  in  Pakistan  could
    not  assist  in  reintegration  was  somehow  perverse,  irrational  or
    contrary to the evidence but that has not been  made  out.   The  first
    appellant, and I accept the second appellant and all the  family,  have
    not placed any burden upon the public purse in the United Kingdom since
    they  have  been  here  as  the  first  appellant  has  been  supported
    throughout his time and his studies by his parents  in  Pakistan.   The
    fact that the evidence showed that the parents were suffering from  ill
    health does not necessarily mean that their circumstances  have  fallen
    to the extent that no further support would be available and indeed  Ms
    Isherwood refers to a piece of real  evidence,  namely  an  application
    made for fees exemption by the first appellant on the basis that he  is
    wholly dependent upon support received from his  parents  in  Pakistan.
    That gives support  to  the  case  that  the  first  appellant  remains
    dependent upon, and supported by, the family who are in Pakistan.

28.  The evidence that was provided in the papers the  judge  was  asked  to
    consider did not support the contention made by Mr Qadir  this  morning
    that such support was not available, even if funds had to  be  diverted
    to meet medical costs in Pakistan or that there was no family to assist
    in reintegration.  The evidence  suggested  that  in  addition  to  the
    parents their older sibling, the first appellant's older  brother,  had
    returned to  Pakistan  to  help  the  parents  and  although  Mr  Qadir
    suggested that the brother had not assisted the first appellant  during
    his  time  in  the  United  Kingdom  it  is  not  suggested  from   the
    correspondence that he  would  effectively  abandon  his  brother,  his
    brother's wife and the children if they sought some assistance from him
    in reintegrating.  In any event,  it  was  not  established  that  such
    assistance as would have been  needed  was  not  available  from  other
    family members, namely the grandparents.

29.  So far as  Mr  Qadir  referred  to  the  appellant's  occupation  as  a
    freelance journalist in the contested area of  Kashmir,  which  we  all
    know, and  have  knowledge  from  the  news  reports  on  the  BBC  and
    elsewhere, is an area of some tension between India and  Pakistan  with
    occasional acts of violence from separatist elements.  This  is  not  a
    protection appeal.  It has not been suggested that any real  risk  will
    arise to the first appellant by returning  and  continuing  his  chosen
    profession as a journalist.  There was no evidence before the judge  to
    suggest that that was the case.

30.  It is accepted that taking  a  family  who  have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom  for  a  number  of  years  and  returning  them  to  Pakistan,
    especially children who have no practical experience  of  having  lived
    there previously, may well result in hardship, disruption, and possibly
    upset and distress, but that is the normal impact of removing  families
    and expecting them to relocate.  That is not necessarily a finding or a
    consequence limited to immigration  matters  as  nationals  within  the
    United Kingdom  having  to  remove  themselves  from  Cornwall  to  the
    farthest North of Scotland, or even shorter distances  within  the  UK,
    often have to move their children around  the  country  and  experience
    such  practical  problems  and  consequences.    It   would   only   be
    unreasonable if it was shown that the impact of the move on  Fizza  was
    such that it affected her physical or emotional wellbeing to an  extent
    beyond that, that  may  lead  to  some  form  of  irreparable  harm  or
    disadvantage to  the  child  which  could  not  be  resolved  with  the
    assistance of the parents or other supportive networks that may exist.

31.  The difficulty for the appellants in this case  is  the  evidence  that
    was made available to the judge was, as the judge stated, namely a wish
    and a preference to remain in the United Kingdom so the children  could
    be educated here and their lives continue here as a  family  unit.   It
    was not made out on the evidence that the consequences of removal meant
    that the threshold of 'unreasonableness' was  even  remotely  met,  let
    alone crossed, and breached in relation to this appeal.

32.  I therefore make two findings.  The  first  finding  is  the  assertion
    that the judge applied the wrong test is not arguably  made  out.   The
    second assertion that the judge erred in law in terms of the  facts  is
    not made out.  The decision made can only be challenged on the basis of
    an irrationality or Wednesbury unreasonable argument, but this not made
    out.  The finding by the judge that the appeal should be  dismissed  on
    immigration and human rights  grounds,  for  the  reasons  stated,  was
    wholly within the range of reasonable conclusions open  to  the  judge.
    On the evidence it  is  arguable  that  it  was  the  only  sustainable
    decision that the judge could have made applying the appropriate  legal
    provisions to the facts as found.

33.  For that reason it is my finding that there is no material legal  error
    made out in relation to this decision and the decision shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 6 February 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

