
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13309/2017
                                                               HU/13314/2017
                                                               HU/13316/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2019                           |On 25 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between
                                     S L
                                     J L
                                     M C
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson, instructed by AGI solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of China. The third appellant was  born  in
    1975, is the mother of the  first  and  second  appellants.  The  first
    appellant is now aged 16 years and the  second  appellant  is  aged  18
    years. The appellant's appealed against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State dated 15 October 2017 to refuse them entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on
    24 September 2018, dismissed the appeals. The  appellants  now  appeal,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. This is an appeal which turns on the operation of paragraph 320 9110 of
    HC 395 (as amended);

         Grounds on which entry clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused

         (11) where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
         way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

         (i) overstaying; or

         (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

         (iii) being an illegal entrant; or

         (iv) using deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave
         to enter or remain  or  in  order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
         Secretary of State or a third party  required  in  support  of  the
         application (whether successful or not);

         and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as  absconding,
         not meeting  temporary  admission/reporting  restrictions  or  bail
         conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the re-documentation process.

 3. The appellant argues that the judge failed to  apply  the  case  of  PS
    (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC)
    despite referring to that decision at [9]. The  appellant  argues  that
    the judge failed to give a clear indication as to why the circumstances
    in this case were sufficiently aggravating to attract  the  application
    of paragraph 320(11).

 4. The Upper Tribunal in PS held that:

         "In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11)  of  HC  395,  as
         amended, to refuse an application for entry  clearance  in  a  case
         where the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry clearance  in
         paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C), the  decision
         maker  must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing  the  aggravating
         circumstances said to justify refusal and must have regard  to  the
         public interest in  encouraging  those  unlawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom to  leave  and  seek  to  regularise  their  status  by  an
         application for entry clearance."

 5. Mr Timpson, who appeared for the appellants, submitted that  the  entry
    clearance officer had not invoked paragraph 320 in earlier applications
    made by the third appellant. Moreover, the judge had done no more  than
    to give details of the poor behaviour of the third  appellant  but  had
    failed to link this conduct directly  to  the  exercise  of  discretion
    against the appellants under paragraph 320.

 6. I do not agree with Mr Timpson's submission. I consider that the  judge
    was fully aware of the issues posed by PS and dealt with these in  some
    detail at [17-19]. Whilst  the  judge  may  perhaps  have  been  better
    advised to extract principles of law from the case of PS rather than to
    distinguish the instant case from PS on the facts, he has identified an
    essential difference between the two cases,  namely  that,  unlike  the
    appellant in PS who departed voluntarily, the third  appellant  in  the
    instant appeal had to be forcibly removed from  United  Kingdom  having
    absconded. I agree with the  judge  that  this  factor  diminishes  the
    relevance of the policy considerations addressed in PS, namely that  an
    improper use of paragraph 320 that would lead to individuals who  might
    otherwise leave and apply for entry clearance remaining  illegally  and
    clandestinely in the United Kingdom. Further, the judge draws attention
    to the fact [18]  that  the  entry  clearance  officer  has  'expressly
    referred to considering the exercise of  discretion  and  is  expressly
    decided not to exercise discretion  having  considered  the  particular
    circumstances in the case.' The wording of the refusal notice  has  led
    the judge  to  conclude  that  the  entry  clearance  officer  properly
    considered the exercise of his/her discretion. I find that it was  open
    to the judge to reach that conclusion.  I disagree with Mr Timpson that
    the judge has done no more than detail the poor conduct  of  the  third
    appellant; he has, in his analysis, linked that conduct to the exercise
    of discretion under paragraph 320. Further, there  was  no  requirement
    for the entry clearance officer or the judge to use a  particular  form
    of words when applying paragraph 320.

 7. I am satisfied that the exercise of discretion  has  been  carried  out
    properly and with a proper concern for the facts. Even if that  is  not
    the case, it is not arguable, in my opinion, that the past  conduct  of
    the third appellant would ever escape  consideration  by  reference  to
    paragraph 320(11), the application of which would  be  very  likely  to
    lead to refusal of entry clearance on any application; the link between
    the third appellant's conduct and 'aggravating circumstances' is, in my
    opinion, axiomatic.

 8. I am satisfied that the first Tier Tribunal has not erred  in  law  for
    the  reasons  advanced  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  or  at  all.   In
    consequence, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Given that the appeal has been dismissed, there  can  be  no  fee  order  in
favour of the appellants


Signed                              Date 20 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
