
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13582/2016
     hu/13585/2016
     hu/13588/2016
     hu/13593/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                            |On 31 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                Opeoluwa [A]
                                   [F A1]
                                 Olabisi [A]
                                   [F A2]
                       (anonymity direction nOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms K Smith, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                    ORDER

UPON hearing from Ms Smith of Counsel for the Appellants and  from  Mr  Tan,
Senior Home Office Presenting Officer for the Respondent;

AND UPON considering the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Fletcher-Hill dated 27 November  2017  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeals
against the decision of the Respondent dated  18  May  2016  refusing  their
human rights claims; the Appellants' grounds of  appeal  dated  11  December
2017; and the grant of permission to appeal dated 1 May 2018;

AND UPON it being agreed between  the  parties  that  the  judge  materially
erred in law in failing to adjourn the hearing,  it  being  unfair,  as  per
Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC) for  the  hearing  not
to be adjourned, in particular on the basis that Notre Dame  Refugee  Centre
had withdrawn representation only on 4  October  2017,  9  days  before  the
hearing of 13 October 2017, stating that they were 'no  longer  representing
the Appellant',  and  thereby  using  language  consistent  with  the  first
Appellant  having  formed  the  long  standing  impression  that  they   had
previously been representing him;

AND UPON the Tribunal being satisfied that it is appropriate  to  make  such
an order;

IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, by consent, under Rule 39 Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 THAT:

 1. The decision of the judge is set aside.


 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

    No anonymity direction is made.


POST SCRIPT

1    After the making of the above order in open  court  at  the  Manchester
      Civil Justice Centre on 5 October 2018, but before the promulgation of
      the order, the Respondent has, on 16 October 2018,  written  a  letter
      addressed to the First Appellant  in  person,  at  his  home  address,
      informing him that "I am writing to inform you  that  having  reviewed
      the decision on your (and your dependents) application(s) on behalf of
      the Secretary of State I have decided to withdraw the decision  of  18
      May 2016 (recently appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal).  You  will  be
      notified of the new decision in due course. The reason for withdrawing
      the decision is the length of residence of your eldest child."

2    That letter was copied by fax  to  the  Manchester  IAC.  A  fax  cover
      letter which stated "Please  see  attached  letter  to  the  appellant
      indicating that the decision of 18 May 2016  (recently  remitted  back
      from the Upper Tribunal) has been withdrawn." That fax  in  turn  then
      appears to have been forwarded to Field House, scanned and emailed  to
      me.

3    The question arises than as  to  what  to  do  about  the  Respondent's
      notification that the decision of 18 May 2016 has been withdrawn.

4    Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  provides
      that:

           "17.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may  give  notice  of
           the withdrawal of its case, or any part of it-
                 (a)  by sending or  delivering  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  a
                 written notice of withdrawal; or
                 (b) orally at a hearing.


           (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless  the  Upper
           Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except  in  relation  to  an
           application for permission to appeal.

5    Alternatively, Rule 17 of The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 provides:

           "Withdrawal 17.-
           (1) A party may give notice of the withdrawal of their appeal-
                 (a) by providing  to  the  Tribunal  a  written  notice  of
                 withdrawal of the appeal; or
                 (b) orally at a hearing,
           and in either case must specify the reasons for that withdrawal.




           (2) The Tribunal must (save for good reason) treat an appeal  as
           withdrawn if the respondent notifies the Tribunal and each other
           party that the decision (or, where the appeal  relates  to  more
           than one decision, all of the decisions)  to  which  the  appeal
           relates has been withdrawn and specifies  the  reasons  for  the
           withdrawal of the decision.

           (3) The Tribunal must  notify  each  party  in  writing  that  a
                            withdrawal has taken effect under this rule and
                            that the proceedings are no longer regarded  by
                            the Tribunal as pending."

6    Although arguably until my order, above, remitting the  appeal  to  the
      First tier Tribunal has been promulgated to the  parties,  the  appeal
      remains extant before the Upper Tribunal.

7    However, I do not treat the Respondent's letter of 16 October  2018  as
      a notice of withdrawal of its case before the Upper Tribunal, for  the
      following reasons:

      (i) no notice of withdrawal of its case has been sent or delivered  by
      the Respondent  to  the  Upper  Tribunal;  rather,  a  letter  to  the
      appellant has been copied  to  the  First  tier,  and  the  Respondent
      clearly believed from the terms  of  the  fax  cover  letter  sent  to
      Manchester IAC that it was corresponding with the First tier;

      (ii) no notice of withdrawal of the Respondent's case was given orally
      at the hearing before me on 5 October 2018;  rather,  the  Respondent,
      indicating its acceptance that the Judge's decision was  unsustainable
      by reason of an error of law, agreed to my proposal that the matter be
      dealt with by an Order under Rule 39 of the 2008 Rules;

      (iii) this Upper Tribunal treating the Respondent's case as withdrawn,
      would risk it being unclear what  the  respective  parties'  positions
      were in the present appeal before the Upper Tribunal;

      (iv) the First tier is able to make  an  appropriate  case  management
      decision of its own in the  light  of  the  Respondent's  decision  to
      withdraw the decision of 18 May 2016.


Signed                     Date 25.10.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

