
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/13787/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 April 2019                         |  On 8 May 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                            leonard y n kniazeff
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Katani and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines.  His appeal to  the  FtT
    was against the Secretary of State's decision refusing his human rights
    application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  based  on  his
    family life with Ian Maxtone, for reasons given in  a  letter  dated  3
    December 2015.  The appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Handley
    in a decision promulgated 2 February 2017.  The judge observed that the
    Secretary of  State  had  accepted  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship and found the appellant and his partner  credible  however
    he concluded that the appellant would not face insurmountable obstacles
    on return.  In brief the judge's reasons were that  the  appellant  had
    entered into a relationship  when  his  immigration  status  was  of  a
    temporary nature and he was still in contact with  his  family  in  the
    Philippines.  He had no doubt that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    return to the Philippines and quickly integrate to society  there  with
    reference to his sexuality and would not face insurmountable obstacles.
     The judge concluded at [30] and [31]:

         "30. As indicated, it  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  and  the
             sponsor are in a  genuine  relationship.   I  find  it  is  of
             significance that when the appellant moved to  Birmingham  and
             lived there for nearly a year the  sponsor  did  not  go  with
             them. I had no reason to  doubt  that  they  were  in  regular
             contact with each other but it is also  of  some  significance
             that the sponsor did not visit the  appellant  in  Birmingham.
             The sponsor provided the appellant with some financial support
             when he was in Birmingham  but  the  appellant  also  obtained
             employment in Birmingham and as far as I  understand  he  also
             received some support from friends.  This is not a case  where
             the appellant was dependent on the sponsor.

         31.  In conclusion I accept that the sponsor and the appellant  are
             in a relationship.  I  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
             sponsor is a British Citizen.  However I also take account  of
             the appellant's immigration history and find it is significant
             that he  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  when  he  had  no
             entitlement to be here.  The appellant and  the  sponsor  were
             separated and did not meet  each  other  for  almost  a  year.
             There are no health issues and no children  are  involved.   I
             conclude that it is reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
             return to the Philippines.  It may well be the case  that  the
             separation will be temporary to enable the appellant  to  make
             an application to allow him to return to the  United  Kingdom.
             The  appellant  has  not  persuaded  me  that  such  temporary
             separation  will   interfere   disproportionately   with   any
             protected rights."

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by the Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in view of the observations in the joint  minute  endorsed  by
    the Interlocutor of the Lord Ordinary following refusal  of  permission
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt.

 3. The joint minute is in the following terms:

              "WINTER for the Petitioner and TARIQ for the Respondent concur
         in stating to the Court that the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) dated 5th October 2017  to  refuse
         permission to appeal to it ought to be reduced and the Petitioner's
         appeal remitted back to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
         Chamber) for consideration on all grounds  which  were  before  the
         Upper Tribunal and for the following reasons:

          i) An issue that the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FTT")  required  to
             consider was whether the Petitioner met  the  requirements  of
             paragraph Ex.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.   This
             applies if:

                  "The applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
                  with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,
                  settled in the UK or in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
                  humanitarian  protection,  and  there  are  insurmountable
                  obstacles to family  life  with  that  partner  continuing
                  outside the UK."

         ii) The  FTT  Judge  in  the  decision  dated  26th  January  2017
             considered whether there were insurmountable obstacles to  the
             Petitioner returning to the Philippines.  The FTT Judge failed
             to consider whether there were insurmountable obstacles to the
             Petitioner continuing his family life with his  civil  partner
             in the Philippines.  The  Immigration  Rules  Judge  therefore
             failed to address the  central  issue  required  by  paragraph
             Ex.1.

        iii) In its decision dated 5th October 2017 refusing permission  to
             appeal, the UT incorrectly noted that the FTT Judge had made a
             finding on the issue  of  whether  there  were  insurmountable
             obstacles to the Petitioner's relationship  with  his  partner
             continuing in the Philippines.  The UT erred in law in stating
             that "It was manifestly open to the  FTTJ  to  find  that  the
             partner could be expected to relocate to the Philippines  with
             the appellant so the Immigration  Rules  were  not  met  ...".
             There was no such finding in the FTT Judge's decision.

         iv) There are compelling reasons to interfere with the decision of
             the  UT.   The  UT  has  erred  in  law  by  operating  on   a
             misunderstanding  or  misapprehension  of  the   FTT   Judge's
             findings.  The FTT Judge has failed to  consider  whether  the
             Petitioner's partner could be  expected  to  relocate  to  the
             Philippines.  The Petitioner's  case  has  not  properly  been
             considered  under  paragraph  Ex.1  of  Appendix  FM  of   the
             Immigration Rules.  The error of law is one that cries out for
             consideration (SA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department 2014 SC 1: paragraph 44).

         The Petitioner and Respondent therefore crave the Court  to  uphold
         the Petitioner's third plea-in-law and to reduce the decision dated
         5th October 2017 and find the Respondent liable to  the  Petitioner
         for the expenses of the process as taxed by the Auditor of Court."

 4. At the outset of the hearing Mr Winter explained that  the  only  issue
    under Appendix FM with reference to the partner requirements related to
    finance.  Mr Maxtone had two jobs with  the  Local  Authority  but  his
    hours had been recently cut  and  was  unable  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules.  He and Mr Govan agreed that  Judge  Handley
    had erred in his decision.

 5. Before proceeding further, I consider the parties were correct to  come
    to that conclusion.  Although Judge Handley directed himself as to  the
    nature of the insurmountable obstacles test he  proceeded  to  consider
    the case under Article 8 only and failed to reach  a  conclusion  under
    Appendix EX.1 whether there were  insurmountable  difficulties  to  the
    family life with Mr Maxtone  continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom.
    Instead, he was  focused  on  the  circumstances  (and  obstacles)  the
    appellant might face  before  reaching  his  conclusion  in  the  final
    sentences to [31]  above.   Before  consideration  of  the  case  under
    Article 8, it was incumbent upon Judge Handley to  decide  whether  the
    appellant came within the exceptions  in  EX.1  in  the  light  of  his
    inability to meet all the requirements  of  the  Rules  for  a  partner
    seeking leave to remain.

 6. I set aside the decision of Judge Handley at the  hearing.   Mr  Winter
    relied on two new statements from the appellant and Mr Maxtone as  well
    as a psychiatric report on the appellant by Dr Stewart Roberts to which
    there was no objection by Mr Govan.  Mr Govan initially indicated  that
    he had questions for the appellant and Mr Maxtone.  The latter was  not
    at court explained  by  commitments  in  respect  of  his  father.   On
    reflecting however he decided he  had  no  questions  for  either.  The
    appellant adopted his statement and submissions followed.   By  way  of
    summary of those submissions  Mr  Govan  referred  to  the  apprehended
    difficulties by Mr Maxtone relocating to  the  Philippines  but  argued
    that none could constitute as obstacles and in particular there was  no
    reason why he would be unable to  learn  Tagalog  or  why  a  residence
    permit could not be obtained.  He noted the absence of evidence of  his
    father's dependency and there was no evidence of Mr Maxtone's  fear  of
    flying that could prevent travelling.  The test was a stringent one and
    the case arose out of a consequence of the  appellant  and  Mr  Maxtone
    choosing to marry whilst the latter had "precarious" leave.  There  was
    no medical evidence as to the care provided by  the  appellant  to  his
    father-in-law.   The  psychiatric  evidence  indicated  no  history  of
    anxiety and did not add a great deal why the appellant should remain in
    the United Kingdom.  The expert evidence indicated a divided society in
    the Philippines (as to gay men) and although he did not say the parties
    would not experience difficulties, it did not establish that they would
    not be able to live together.  His final point related to the grant  of
    entry clearance if the Rules could not be met and it was  not  for  the
    judge to speculate the outcome.  With reference to Section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  the  appellant  was  not
    financially self-sufficient, however Mr Govan accepted  that  he  spoke
    good English.

 7. By way of response Mr Winter relied on the  expert  evidence  and  urge
    that matters were tipped in the appellant's favour by reference to  the
    difficulties homosexuals might face in the  Philippines.   Outside  the
    Rules, and with reference to Section 117B, the appellant had leave when
    the relationship was formed.  Mr Winter contended delay was a  relevant
    factor and he noted there had been no  attempts  by  the  Secretary  of
    State to remove the appellant.

 8. My findings and conclusions are as follows.  It is first  necessary  to
    consider the case under the Rules and  then  under  Article  8  if  the
    former are not met.  As enjoined by the Senior President of Tribunal in
    TZ (Pakistan):


         30.  A determination by a tribunal about a decision that is  within
             the Rules may or  may  not  involve  the  consideration  of  a
             requirement that possesses an  article  8  element.   That  is
             because other aspects of the Rules may  not  be  satisfied  so
             that the appellant concerned cannot come within the Rules  and
             the  enquiry  into   the   application   of   the   Rules   is
             foreshortened.  That  was  the  position  so  far  as  PG  was
             concerned. Although in general terms it is not incumbent on  a
             tribunal to express a concluded view about something  that  is
             either not in issue or  not  determinative  within  the  Rules
             (unless the hearing is a one stop appeal within the meaning of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended,
             when as a matter of law all material issues will be before the
             tribunal and will necessitate a decision), as explained  below
             where article 8(1) is engaged and the consideration of Article
             8 outside of  the  Rules  must  follow,  the  tribunal  should
             consider the insurmountable obstacles test  within  the  Rules
             before considering the exceptional circumstances test  outside
             the Rules.

         31. Where Article 8 is in issue within the  Rules  there  will  of
             necessity have to be a conclusion on the question  of  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles to the  relocation  of  the
             appellant and his or her family.  That involves an  evaluation
             or value  judgment  based  upon  findings  of  fact.   When  a
             tribunal goes on to consider an Article 8 claim outside of the
             Rules (as it will do where article 8 is  engaged,  see  Hesham
             Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
             UKSC 60, [2016] 1 WLR 4799 at [80]), it will factor  into  its
             evaluation of whether there are exceptional circumstances both
             the findings of fact that have been made and the evaluation of
             whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles - that being
             a relevant factor both as a matter of policy and on the  facts
             of the case to the question of exceptional circumstances.


         32. In the circumstance that an FtT  does  not  need  to  make  an
             evaluation  about  insurmountable  obstacles,   the   question
             arises: how  does  that  tribunal  or  a  subsequent  tribunal
             relying on the same facts approach the question of exceptional
             circumstances outside the Rules?  Again, the answer is  to  be
             found in Agyarko at [47] and [48].  By reference to Hesham Ali
             at [44 to 46], [50] and [53], Lord Reed made it clear that  in
             striking a proportionality balance (i.e. when  undertaking  an
             article 8 evaluation outside the Rules) a tribunal  must  take
             the Secretary  of  State's  policy  into  account  and  attach
             considerable weight to it 'at a general level'.


         33. This means  that  a  tribunal  undertaking  an  evaluation  of
             exceptional circumstances outside the  Rules  must  take  into
             account as a factor the  strength  of  the  public  policy  in
             immigration control as reflected by the Secretary  of  State's
             test within the Rules. The critical issue  will  generally  be
             whether the strength  of  the  public  policy  in  immigration
             control in the case before it is outweighed by the strength of
             the article 8 claim so that there is a positive obligation  on
             the state to permit the applicant to remain in  the  UK.   The
             framework or approach in R (Razgar) v Secretary of  State  for
             the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 2 AC 368 at [17] is
             not to be taken to avoid the need to undertake  this  critical
             balance.


         34. That leaves the question of whether the tribunal  is  required
             to make a decision on Article 8 requirements within the  Rules
             i.e. whether there are insurmountable obstacles, before or  in
             order to make a decision about article 8  outside  the  Rules.
             The policy of the Secretary of State as expressed in the Rules
             is not to be ignored when a decision about article 8 is to  be
             made outside the Rules.  An evaluation of the question whether
             there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  is  a  relevant  factor
             because considerable weight is to be placed on  the  Secretary
             of  State's  policy  as  reflected  in  the   Rules   of   the
             circumstances in which a foreign national  partner  should  be
             granted leave to remain.   Accordingly,  the  tribunal  should
             undertake an evaluation of the insurmountable  obstacles  test
             within the Rules in order to inform an evaluation outside  the
             Rules because that  formulates  the  strength  of  the  public
             policy in immigration control 'in the case before  it',  which
             is what the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (at [50]) held was  to
             be taken into account. That  has  the  benefit  that  where  a
             person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference to  an
             article 8 informed requirement, then this will  be  positively
             determinative of that  person's  article  8  appeal,  provided
             their case engages article 8(1), for the very reason  that  it
             would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed.

         35. I  suggested  at  [19]  that  there  exists  a  structure  for
             judgments in the FtT where Article 8  is  engaged.   That  was
             referred to by Lord Thomas in Hesham Ali at  [82  to  84]  and
             recommended by him.  I strongly  endorse  his  recommendation.
             Although there is no obligation  in  law  for  a  tribunal  to
             structure its decision-making in any particular way and it  is
             not an error of law to fail to do so, the use of  a  structure
             in the judgments in these appeals would almost certainly  have
             avoided the appeals, given that the ultimate conclusion of the
             tribunals was correct.  To paraphrase Lord Thomas:  after  the
             tribunal has found the facts,  the  tribunal  sets  out  those
             factors that weigh in favour of  immigration  control  -  'the
             cons' - against those factors that weigh in favour  of  family
             and private life - 'the pros' in the form of a  balance  sheet
             which it then uses to set out a reasoned conclusion within the
             framework of the test(s) being applied within or  outside  the
             Rules.  It goes  without  saying  that  the  factors  are  not
             equally weighted and that the tribunal must in  its  reasoning
             articulate the weight being attached to each factor."

 9. The financial requirements that Mr Winter accepted the  appellant  fell
    foul of required at E-LTRP.3.1. a  gross  annual  income  of  at  least
    �18,600 unless EX.1. applies.


10. EX.1 (relevant to this case) is as follows:


         "EX.1    This paragraph applies if -


         ...


                (b)     the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
                    British citizen, settled in the UK or  in  the  UK  with
                    refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
                    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that
                    partner continuing outside the UK.


         EX.2.    For the purposes of  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
                means the very significant difficulties which would be faced
                by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
                life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome
                or would entail very serious hardship for the  applicant  or
                their partner."


11. EX.2. reflects the judgment of Lord Reed in R (Agyarko) v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11 in which at [43] ff:

         "43.  It  appears  that  the  European  court  intends  the   words
             "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a practical and
             realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to  obstacles
             which make it literally impossible  for  the  family  to  live
             together  in  the  country  of  origin  of  the   non-national
             concerned. In some cases, the court has used other expressions
             which  make  that  clearer:  for  example,  referring  to  "un
             obstacle majeur" ( Sen v The Netherlands  (2003)  36  EHRR  7,
             para 40), or to "major  impediments"  (  Tuquabo-Tekle  v  The
             Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798, para 48), or  to  "the  test  of
             'insurmountable obstacles' or 'major  impediments'"  (  IAA  v
             United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19,  paras  40  and  44),  or
             asking itself whether  the  family  could  "realistically"  be
             expected to move ( Sezen v The Netherlands (2006) 43 EHRR  30,
             para  47).   "Insurmountable  obstacles"  is,   however,   the
             expression employed by the  Grand  Chamber;  and  the  court's
             application of it indicates that it is a stringent  test.   In
             Jeunesse, for example, there were said to be no insurmountable
             obstacles  to  the  relocation  of  the  family  to  Suriname,
             although the children, the eldest of  whom  was  at  secondary
             school, were Dutch nationals who had  lived  there  all  their
             lives, had never visited  Suriname,  and  would  experience  a
             degree of hardship if forced  to  move,  and  the  applicant's
             partner was in full-time employment in  the  Netherlands:  see
             paras 117 and 119.
         44.   Domestically,  the  expression   "insurmountable   obstacles"
             appears in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the Rules.   As
             explained in para 15 above, that paragraph  applies  in  cases
             where an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route
             is in the UK in breach of immigration laws, and requires  that
             there should be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
             that  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.   The  expression
             "insurmountable obstacles" is now defined by paragraph EX.2 as
             meaning "very significant difficulties which would be faced by
             the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life
             together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
             would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  their
             partner."  That definition appears to me to be consistent with
             the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg case law.
              As explained  in  para  16  above,  paragraph  EX.2  was  not
             introduced until after the  dates  of  the  decisions  in  the
             present cases.  Prior to the insertion of that definition,  it
             would nevertheless be reasonable to infer,  consistently  with
             the Secretary of State's statutory duty to act compatibly with
             Convention rights, that the expression was  intended  to  bear
             the same meaning in the Rules as in the  Strasbourg  case  law
             from which it was derived.  I would therefore interpret it  as
             bearing the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX.2.
         45.  By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles" are
             treated as a requirement for the  grant  of  leave  under  the
             Rules in cases to which that paragraph applies.   Accordingly,
             interpreting the expression  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the
             Strasbourg case law, leave to remain  would  not  normally  be
             granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain  under
             the partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws,
             unless the applicant or their partner would face very  serious
             difficulties in continuing their family life together  outside
             the UK, which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
             serious hardship.  Even in a case where such  difficulties  do
             not exist,  however,  leave  to  remain  can  nevertheless  be
             granted outside the Rules in "exceptional  circumstances",  in
             accordance  with  the  Instructions:  that  is  to   say,   in
             "circumstances in which refusal would result in  unjustifiably
             harsh consequences for the individual such that refusal of the
             application would not be proportionate".   Is  that  situation
             compatible with article 8?"

12. The history of the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  is  more
    relevant to an Article 8 consideration outside the Rules since EX.1. is
    solely concerned with the  enquiry  whether  there  are  insurmountable
    difficulties to his family life continuing outside the  United  Kingdom
    but nevertheless this is a useful  point  on  which  to  set  out  that
    history.


13. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 July 2006  with  entry
    clearance as a  student  until  31  October  the  following  year.   An
    application for further leave to remain, after an initial rejection was
    granted  on  1  December  2007  until  31  November  2009.   A  further
    application for leave to remain as Tier 4 Student was  rejected  on  17
    February 2010.  The appellant  however  successfully  appealed  against
    that decision which resulted in a  further  grant  of  leave  until  12
    October 2012.  On 12 October 2011 however that leave was  curtailed,  a
    further appeal was lodged but was ultimately unsuccessful.  This led to
    an application on 6 July 2012 for leave to remain as a  civil  partner.
    It was refused without  a  right  of  appeal,  however,  the  appellant
    succeeded on judicial review leading to the decision dated  3  December
    2015 which is under appeal.


14. Turning to the facts of the relationship, the uncontested  evidence  by
    the appellant explains that he  first  met  Mr  Maxtone  in  July  2008
    leading to a decision to live together in March the following year when
    they entered into a civil partnership on 24 April 2009.


15. At the time the appellant's leave was curtailed the appellant had  been
    subject to homophobic abuse from a neighbour where  he  lived  with  Mr
    Maxtone in Falkirk and decided it would be a good idea to be  with  his
    Philippine friends in Birmingham.  According to Mr  Maxtone's  evidence
    that led to a difficult period but  they  did  not  split  up  and  the
    appellant  moved  back  to  Falkirk  to  live  with  him   again.    He
    acknowledges that both had faced racial and homophobic abuse and  their
    neighbours had even  made  false  allegations  against  the  appellant.
    Those neighbours finally moved.


16. Mr Maxtone works as a literacy tutor for Sterling Council and is also a
    community learning and development support worker for Falkirk  Council.
    He has set up a project called "The Write  Angle"  to  help  people  in
    society who has literacy issues, mental  health  issues  or  any  other
    people who felt they were not accepted.   Both  he  and  the  appellant
    volunteer in this project  through  which  Mr  Maxtone  has  made  many
    friends and for which the appellant volunteers as a photographer.


17. Mr Maxtone's father is 84 years old and suffers  from  angina.   He  is
    also prone to migraines which impairs his functions and suffers from  a
    medical condition which causes an overproduction of  red  blood  cells.
    This causes him to be  extremely  tired  and  also  at  risk  of  blood
    clotting.  The appellant sees him once a week where he helps around the
    house.  He also takes him out swimming to keep him active.


18. The appellant refers in his statement to his  partner's  severe  phobia
    over flying.  He has only travelled abroad once which was in the  early
    1990s and has been unable to do so again due to stress and anxiety.  Mr
    Maxtone explains in his statement that his last trip abroad had been in
    1994 and he had no intention of doing so again.  He  has  suffered  for
    long periods of anxiety and depression in the past and the years it has
    taken for him to rebuild his life.  He does not want to find himself in
    a "dark place" again.


19. The psychiatrist report reveals an opinion that there was  no  evidence
    of the appellant having or ever having  any  psychiatric  illness.   Dr
    Roberts considered it highly likely that he would suffer an "unpleasant
    adjustment reaction" if he had to move to the Philippines  but  he  did
    not predict the development of a psychiatric illness.  He refers to the
    appellant's strong relationship with Mr Maxtone and the high  level  of
    separation anxiety if he had to move to  the  Philippines  which  would
    make any adjustment reaction more distressing.


20. As to life in the Philippines, Mr Maxtone  explains  in  his  statement
    that it would be unreasonable for them to do so as they had spent their
    life together in the UK.  Both  were  close  to  his  family  where  Mr
    Maxtone has a lot of family ties such as his mother's  grave  which  he
    visits for comfort.  He considers that he would struggle  to  adapt  to
    life in the Philippines as he does not speak the language nor  does  he
    know its culture, in addition to the concerns previously expressed over
    his flying phobia.


21. An expert report by Dr Vina Lanzona previously provided to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is relied on.  She explains  that  she  is  an  Associate
    Professor in the Department  of  History  with  specialisation  on  the
    Philippines and South-East Asia at the University of Hawaii  at  Manoa.
    She is also a native of the Philippines where she was  awarded  her  BA
    Degree.  Her report has three headings:


      i) A general and brief treatment of the rights of LGBTQs.


     ii) The general status of LGBTQs.


    iii) Cases of actual treatment of homosexuals in the country.


22. In respect of (i) she states that Philippine laws and  policies  uphold
    LGBTQ  rights  in  theory  with  reference  to   the   country's   1987
    Constitution.  While same sex relationships are not legally  recognised
    a number of laws mentioned  sexual  orientation  or  address  same  sex
    relations.  Despite these developments, LGBTQs  and  their  communities
    are not always fully supported by the  state.   Civil  laws  have  been
    reportedly used by unscrupulous law enforcers to extort from and harass
    LGBTQ people in particular a provision in the penal code  which  allows
    police to raid venues frequented by homosexuals who are  then  arrested
    for offending "against decency or  good  customs"  or  by  engaging  in
    "highly scandalous conduct".  She reports that the police are  given  a
    broad discretion for its implementation.  There is no intention to pass
    national anti-discrimination laws  that  exclusively  seek  to  protect
    LGBTQ people.  Instead protection is included in proposed laws  against
    discrimination based on race, ethnicity and religion.  In  the  absence
    of national legislation,  sub-ordinances  and  local  government  units
    "mandate protection" from discrimination on the  basis  of  SOGI.   She
    refers to the most important legislation being  an  anti-discrimination
    bill that prohibits discrimination  based  on  sexual  orientation  and
    gender identity that  was  introduced  in  Congress  in  2000  but  has
    languished in the Chamber for many years.  This  Act  will  criminalise
    anti-LGBTQ, discriminatory hiring and employment practices.   There  is
    no guarantee when the Bill will be passed into law.


23. In respect of [ii] Dr Lanzona reports that the Philippines "has somehow
    gained a reputation of being Asia's most  gay  friendly  country"  with
    reference to a Pew Research  Center  Report  published  in  2013.   She
    refers however to the findings in another  Pew  Survey  which  revealed
    that Filipinos seem intolerant and even homophobic  when  it  comes  to
    questions of morality with nearly two thirds surveyed saying homosexual
    reality was immoral and only a quarter found that morally acceptable.


24. As to employment Dr Lanzona refers to a USA/UNDP Report from which  she
    quotes:


         "LGBT(Q) individuals face  challenges  in  employment  both  on  an
         individual level and as members of the community that is subject to
         discrimination and abuse."


25. This is illustrated by reference to further studies and the  indication
    that many incidents go unreported.  Under a  heading,  Social  Standing
    and Reputation reference is made to the  Philippine  Catholic  Church's
    blatant campaign against LGBTQ persons and to the USA/UNDP Report  that
    mainstream media is also responsible  for  the  discrimination  of  the
    LGBTQ people by way of sterotyping.


26. As to (iii), Dr Lanzona accepts that it is undeniable there are  indeed
    positive  developments  in  terms  of  the  acceptance,  tolerance  and
    recognition  of  the  rights  of  LGBTQ  persons  but  in  general  the
    Philippines is very much behind other countries in terms  of  treatment
    of homosexuals.   A  number  of  examples  are  given  of  difficulties
    encountered.  She expresses in her conclusions that the Philippines  is
    a country of "intense  contradictions"  describing  the  country  as  a
    tolerant and accepting society with a deep  sense  of  religiosity  and
    adherence to Catholicism as  well  as  being  deeply  conservative  and
    resistant to change apparent in the treatment  of  LGBTQ.   She  quotes
    from a Human Rights Committee Report which the footnote  indicates  was
    in 2012:


         "Widespread and systematic human rights violations on the basis  of
         sexual orientation, gender identity and homosexuality  persists  in
         the Philippines."


    Dr Lanzona concludes with the observation that although  changes  could
    be seen, "... there is still a long way to go for  the  LGBTQs  in  the
    Philippines to feel safe, accepted and therefore recognise their  worth
    and contribute as valuable members of society".


27. Mr Govan is correct that there was no medical evidence in  relation  to
    Mr Maxtone Senior's needs.  A social worker's report or something  akin
    would have  been  reasonably  obtainable.   Nevertheless  there  is  no
    challenge to the credibility of the evidence on this aspect  and  there
    is no evidence that there is anyone else who could step in  to  provide
    care.  This is the most compelling aspect of the domestic obstacles why
    Mr Maxtone would be unable to accompany the appellant.  I  accept  that
    were he to leave the United Kingdom he would lose his close connections
    and contact with family  but  I  am  not  persuaded  these  aspects  of
    themselves, whilst unreasonable, would constitute serious difficulties.
     People are able to  adapt  and  form  new  friendships  at  most  ages
    elsewhere.  Mr Maxtone's phobia of flying  is  something  that  can  be
    addressed through psychological counselling.  Although an obstacle,  it
    is one which can be reasonably addressed.


28. I have greater concern about the difficulties  that  Mr  Maxtone  would
    face in endeavoring to continue his family life with the  appellant  in
    the Philippines.  I do not see any support for  Mr  Govan's  submission
    that he would be able to  obtain  a  residence  permit.   There  is  no
    evidence of  Philippine  migration  law  before  me  but  if  same  sex
    partnerships are not recognised, Mr Maxtone would be unable to rely  on
    his civil partnership to achieve immigration status.  This case must be
    considered in the real world and an important question is whether there
    is any real prospect of Mr Maxtone obtaining suitable employment in the
    Philippines using his skills set.  There is  an  evidential  vacuum  in
    this regard but nevertheless I have real doubts that he will be able to
    do so.  Whilst  I  accept  it  may  be  possible  for  him  to  acquire
    sufficient Tagalog to form and develop  friendships,  realistically  he
    will only be able to function socially outside  his  relationship  with
    members of an Anglophonic expatriate community.


29. Taking all  these  matters  into  account  coupled  with  Mr  Maxtone's
    reference to a previous depressive illness, I think on balance that  he
    will be unable to adjust satisfactorily  to  life  in  the  Philippines
    which would impact negatively on his relationship and functioning as  a
    social human being.  The factors considered cumulatively point  towards
    very serious  difficulties  for  him  and  in  my  judgment  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles to the strong family life which he has enjoyed
    since 2008 with the appellant continuing in the Philippines.  It  is  a
    society which has some way to go in accepting same  sex  relationships.
    The report of discrimination and difficulties faced by gay people is an
    aspect that has a role of some force in the equation.  Whether  or  not
    the appellant would succeed in obtaining entry clearance to  return  to
    the United Kingdom is not for me to decide but in truth it is one  that
    will face a real hurdle in the light of the financial threshold on  the
    current evidence.


30. The  ability  of  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the Rules as a  consequence  of  EX.1  being  made  out
    nevertheless requires consideration of this case under Article 8  since
    that is the ground available to the appellant is under the Human Rights
    Convention.


31. Part 5A of the 2002 Act sets out  public  interests  considerations  in
    relation to Article 8.  The provisions of  s.117B  applicable  to  this
    case are in the following terms:

         "117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases

         (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
    public interest.

         (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)Little weight should be given to-

         (a)a private life, or

         (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         ..."


32.  The  appellant  is  competent  in  English.   He  is  not  financially
    independent but has a skills set which should  enable  employment.  His
    relationship with a qualifying partner  (Mr  Maxtone  being  a  British
    citizen) was established at a time when he was in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully and that relationship continued for  some  four  years  during
    lawful presence.


33. The public interest is  indicated  in  the  Rules  by  reference  to  a
    threshold of insurmountable obstacles in a case of  this  kind.   This,
    taken with the provisions of s.  117B  that  the  appellant  positively
    meets indicates that the public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control is to be given reduced weight by virtue of the appellant  being
    able to meet the requirements of the EX.1 and the positive  aspects  of
    s.117B that are in play.  Accordingly, in my judgment  it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's right to his  family
    life should he be required to leave the United Kingdom.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 2 May 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
