
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13610/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 05th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   mr b M
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Denholm instructed by Bail for Immigration
Detainees
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant seeks permission in time to appeal against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rodger  promulgated  on  1st  June  2016
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent to  deport
    him pursuant to the provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  The grant of permission was unclear stating that there was  some
    arguable merit in grounds (ii), (vi) and (vii) and also stating  "There
    is less arguable merit in the other grounds" and addressed grounds (i),
    (iv) and (v) but omitted any reference  to  ground  (iii).   The  grant
    indicates there was some merit, albeit little in  the  latter  grounds,
    save for (iii).  Nonetheless, I conclude that permission was granted in
    all grounds save (iii) and for this ground, for completeness,  I  grant
    permission.

 2. The appellant is a national of Lesotho aged 44 and has been resident in
    the United Kingdom since the age of 9 and has five  children  with  his
    long-term British partner C F.  The children are all British and  range
    in age from 3 to 19.  His eldest daughter So is 7  months  pregnant  at
    the time of writing.

Grounds of Permission

 3. The appellant  faced  deportation  following  his  conviction  on  17th
    October 2010 for conspiracy to defraud and seven counts  of  fraud  for
    which he was sentenced to seven-and-a-half  years'  imprisonment.   His
    family remained in close contact with him during his  imprisonment  and
    he was released on 22nd July 2014 and had been living with  his  family
    since that date.

 4. Given the length of sentence imposed the appellant must establish  that
    he satisfy the test of "very  compelling  circumstances"  derived  from
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and set  out
    in Section 117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    in order to succeed in his appeal.

 5. It was contended that the facts of the case met the threshold owing to:-



      a) the impact of his deportation on his children;

      b) the impact of his deportation on Ms F;

      c) his broader family ties in the in the United Kingdom including  his
         mother and his brother;

      d) his length of residence in the United Kingdom;

      e) his strong cultural ties to the United Kingdom; and

      f) the low risk of his reoffending and the assessed low risk of harm.

 6. Ground (i)  argued that the determination was marred  by  errors  about
    the family support available to Ms F and which could  be  derived  from
    the appellant's family  who  were  in  the  UK  in  the  event  of  the
    appellant's deportation, (referred to at paragraph 60).

 7. There was reference in paragraph 60 of the decision to:-

         "Ms F also has the support of the appellant's family who are in the
         UK.  His sister, Claire, was at one stage helping to look after  Sa
         and all of the  children  are  close  to  their  cousins,  Claire's
         children.  Ms F and the children see  the  appellant's  mother  and
         brother on a regular  basis  and  did  so  during  the  appellant's
         absence".

 8. At the hearing it was contended that the reference to Ms F  having  the
    support of the appellant's sister Claire was incorrect.  That  was  the
    case  when  her  first  statement  was  prepared  in  April  2015   but
    subsequently, as the judge indicated, she was  now  resident  in  South
    Africa and the assumed support did not exist.  Similarly, at  paragraph
    106 the judge reasoned:-

         "whilst I have considered the circumstances of the family unit  and
         whilst it is without a doubt  A  will  be  greatly  missed  by  his
         partner and children and that they will be likely to  be  very  sad
         and unhappy about his deportation, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
         effect on them is not something that they cannot be helped  through
         with secondary therapy or with the support of their mother,  aunty,
         uncle or grandparents in the UK or that the effect on them would be
         unduly harsh in all of the circumstances".

 9. Again, Aunt Claire was not in the United Kingdom and this was  contrary
    to the judge's assumption.

10. The judge clearly attached significant weight to  the  availability  of
    supporters' protective factor in relation to Ms  F's  ability  to  cope
    with  caring  for  her  children  in  the  appellant's  absence.    Her
    conclusions on that issue were clearly premised on a number of  factual
    errors and inaccurate assumptions which rendered her analysis unsafe.

11. I am not persuaded that the  judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
    support available to Ms F.  In paragraph 60(a) the judge is clear  that
    Ms F has family in the UK who provided her and continued to provide her
    with support and assistance "through visits and regular telephone calls
    and contact through social media".  The judge also identified at  60(b)
    that Ms F had a supportive relationship with  her  mother  who  visited
    from Spain and assists her with the children when she is  visiting  and
    further had regular contact with her mother through telephone calls and
    social media.  At 60(c) the judge recognises that the support from  the
    sister had been limited because it refers to assistance being  "at  one
    stage helping to look after Sa".

12. As the grounds of appeal identify, there are three other aunts  in  the
    United Kingdom on Ms F's side, one of whom she is close to and sees six
    to eight times a year.  That Ms F is not close to her  father  or  that
    the aunt, sister of the appellant, has departed for South  Africa  does
    not undermine the overall assessment of the judge's view of the support
    that Ms F could derive from the  family  and  various  members  of  the
    family  are  cited  as  being  able  to  offer  support.   It  was  not
    necessarily physical presence which was important  and  the  judge  was
    clear that some of the support derived from  the  telephone  calls  and
    contact through social media which would not be interrupted by Claire's
    removal to South Africa.

13. As the judge stated at 60(e):-

         "Whilst Ms F had found it difficult coping with the children in the
         appellant's absence, there were no safeguarding or  welfare  issues
         regarding her care of the children or her ability to cope with  the
         children or to provide care and support for them."

    The judge clearly assumed that there was a  range  of  support  from  a
    variety of sources and the physical absence of one member of the family
    would not undermine the overall findings.  Specifically the judge noted
    at 60(h) that:-

         "Ms F was commended by the Head Teacher of Q School for her  effort
         and determination to maintain the family unit and  whilst  she  did
         encounter problems with the children, I am satisfied that  she  was
         not unable to cope".

    The judge was clear  in  taking  into  account  Ms  F's  mental  health
    difficulties and a possible significant deterioration, but as the judge
    pointed out at 60(j) she was not satisfied that:-

         "Mr Horrocks has considered the availability of support to each  of
         the children, as  evidenced  by  previous  involvement  of  outside
         agencies, which would be likely to have a positive  impact  on  the
         mental health and behaviour of the children and on the family  unit
         itself".

14. As noted these findings do not depend on the sister being available  to
    assist Ms F on a day-to-day basis and she  was  aware  of  the  contact
    between Ms F and other family members when she  made  her  findings  at
    60(k).  She specifically found:-

         "I am satisfied that if Ms F felt a deterioration in her ability to
         cope and her mental health, that she is aware of  the  availability
         of help via her GP or other agencies and that she would be able  to
         seek support or treatment if she were to suffer a deterioration  or
         an inability to cope."

15. Ground (ii) asserted that the judge failed to give  any  or  sufficient
    consideration to the impact of the appellant's  removal  upon  his  two
    youngest children Se and  Sa.   In  the  oral  submissions  Mr  Denholm
    submitted that this was at the heart of the assessment  and  only  very
    limited consideration had been given.  He asserted the judge had failed
    to give any or adequate reasons for concluding that the impact  on  the
    deportation on Se  and  Sa  did  not  give  rise  to  "very  compelling
    circumstances" and there was extensive evidence before the Tribunal  as
    to the adverse affect.  The exercise in which the judge was engaged was
    necessarily forward looking.  He argued  that  there  was  considerable
    evidence before the judge dealing with the position of Se and  Sa,  not
    least  from  Professor  Yule,  Emeritus  Professor  of  Applied   Child
    Psychology at the Institute of Psychiatry, King's College  London,  and
    from  Judith  Jones  BA  CQSW,  Independent  Social  Worker  and  Peter
    Horrocks, Independent Social Worker, who  identified  that  Se  and  Sa
    would both suffer emotional harm at the separation from  their  father.
    The judge failed to take this material properly into account.

16. There is no merit in this ground and I find no  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision regarding to the two younger children.   At  paragraph
    48 the judge identified there was a wealth of  evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's children and the effect of the appellant's absence on  them
    during his imprisonment and immigration detention  and  the  judge  had
    carefully considered all of  the  evidence  set  out  in  the  bundles.
    Indeed, the judge proceeds at paragraph 48 to set out all  the  various
    aspects of evidence and the reports individually,  including  those  of
    Professor Yule, Judith Jones and Peter Horrocks.  It is  not  incumbent
    on the judge further to Budhathoki (reasons for decision)  [2014]  UKUT
    00341 to address every single piece of evidence but  in  this  instance
    the judge has carefully weighed all the key reports.

17. It is quite clear that the judge addressed the difficulties of  all  of
    the children, including the youngest, noting specifically at  paragraph
    48 citing from Professor Yule's report that

          "The  children's  psychological  problems  are  very  likely   to
          increase should their father again be separated from  them,  this
          time by deportation and  so  at  a  distance  where  they  cannot
          visit".

18. There was specific reference to Se in relation to the report  from  the
    Head of Q Infant & Nursery School and how each child had reacted to the
    absence of the appellant and noted that Se had been more settled, happy
    and very proud of his new baby brother [Sa] since his father's  return.
    The judge specifically identified that there was no reference as to why
    the school thought that Ms F would not be able to cope and maintain the
    family unit as she had  done  previously  when  the  appellant  was  in
    prison.  Similarly, the report of Peter Horrocks such that  the  family
    unit were treated as suffering emotional harm as  a  whole  was  quoted
    from by the judge and taken into account.

19. Not least there was a separate assessment of Se and Sa at paragraph  74
    but no diagnosis of mental health conditions or diagnosed condition for
    either boy related to their father's absence.  The  judge  returned  at
    paragraph 96 identifying no safeguarding issues around the care of  the
    children and that Ms F was able to obtain the support of CAMHS  as  and
    when required.

20. Finally, at  paragraph  98  the  judge  recognises  that  it  would  be
    "devastating for the children and Ms F" - and that  would  include  the
    youngest children - and there would be a lot of emotional upset.  I  am
    not persuaded that on reading the decision as a whole  that  the  judge
    did not address the interests of the younger children.  That is  simply
    not clear from the decision.  The judge addressed the reports fully and
    carefully and the weight to be placed on various aspects of evidence is
    a matter for the judge SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] Civ 155.

21. Ground (iii).  It was asserted that the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    impact of the appellant's deportation of all five of his  children  was
    mitigated by the fact that all of the children are  now  "more  mature"
    than they were when in prison was irrational.  I find  that  was  taken
    out of context as  the  judge  states  the  report  of  Professor  Yule
    diagnosing Sie with anxiety was dated 25 February  2015.   The  hearing
    was in fact held in May 2017 and the judge noted that there was more up-
    to-date evidence on the point citing that Sie was "doing well at school
    and is more mature than during her father's previous absence".

22. Although the judge has stated in respect of all of  the  children  that
    they are more mature, are doing well at school, the judge  was  overall
    clear it was not just that the children had matured and shown awareness
    and remorse for past behaviour, but that there were avenues of  support
    for the children that Ms F could seek out agencies such as CAMHS,  that
    Ms F had coped during the appellant's previous absence, and was  likely
    to be able to cope again with being a single parent to the children.

23. Not least So had now a partner and was  pregnant,  although  living  at
    home but would have care available to her.

24. The judge repeats that there were no  safeguarding  issues  surrounding
    the  care  of  the  children  and  Ms  F,  such  that  it  necessitated
    intervention on her part or social services (paragraph 96).  Indeed, Ms
    F is drawn as an effective and capable person  who  was  aware  of  the
    support systems and modes of support available to her  (paragraph  97).
    Between paragraphs 75 and 80 the judge made an  overall  assessment  of
    the best interests of the children and indeed all four of the  children
    and accepted that it would be in the best interests  of  any  child  to
    remain in a two parent family.  There are safeguarding issues of  where
    there are none "in this appeal".

25. Nevertheless, and this is the key issue,  at  paragraph  80  the  judge
    found that whilst it was in the best interests of the children  and  no
    doubt the partner to have their father and no doubt the partner to have
    their father remain in the UK, they did not constitute very  compelling
    circumstances against deportation.  There is therefore no merit in this
    ground.

26. Ground (iv).  The grounds asserted there was an erroneous  approach  to
    'social  and  cultural  integration'.   In  considering   whether   the
    deportation was "unduly harsh" as a step on the  route  to  considering
    whether it gave rise  to  "very  compelling  circumstances"  the  judge
    erroneously  concluded  that  it  was  borderline  as  to  whether  the
    appellant was socially or culturally integrated in the  UK  because  he
    had been convicted of a serious offence.  This was a misdirection.  The
    appellant was obviously socially and culturally integrated,  not  least
    by virtue of the fact that he has a British  partner  of  twenty  years
    standing and five British children.  The respondent's own  guidance  on
    the approach to exceptional circumstances makes  clear  "how  long  the
    foreign criminal has  lived  in  the  UK".   The  judge  had  erred  in
    referring to his integration as being borderline because  he  had  been
    convicted of a serious offence (paragraph 84).

27. I do not accept this ground as disclosing an error in the decision.  As
    set out in the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 the concept of integration is a broad one and it is
    open to  the  judge  to  find  that  his  integration  was  borderline.
    Further, and as set out in  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship  with
    Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC) with respect to 399A(b) the rule is cast
    in the present tense: "he is socially and culturally integrated in  the
    UK".  The case also set out the various factors to take into account on
    either side of the equation and the exercise should  include  offending
    namely 'whether he meets the requirements of paragraph 399A(b) requires
    us to weigh up all  considerations  relevant  to  social  and  cultural
    integration into the UK'.

28. The judge was satisfied that the appellant had been  lawfully  resident
    in the UK for most of his life but noted the serious crime that he  had
    committed and the lengthy sentenced imposed  which  strongly  suggested
    that the appellant was not socially or culturally integrated within the
    UK, that he chose to break the law.  The very serious  offence  related
    to two different businesses, the second of which he set  up  after  the
    first business was stopped in its tracks by the police.

29. However, even if that were an error, which I do not accept,  the  judge
    was quite clear that she went on in the alternative by stating:-

         "However, 399A is a three pronged test so even if 399A(b) were made
         out, I am not able to accept for the reasons set  out  above,  that
         there would be any significant obstacles to  his  integration  into
         Lesotho.  He is a national of Lesotho, he speaks the  language,  he
         has some family connections in Lesotho (through his brother Magnus)
         and he is likely to have retained social, cultural  ties  with  his
         home country due to being educated there until age 9 years and  his
         subsequent stays and visits to his home country."

30. I note that LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369 at paragraph  35  confirms
    that:-

         "I would not gainsay that  the  fact  of  LW's  residence  in  this
         country for approximately 40 years, is a point of  importance.  But
         to found 'compelling reason' for not  deporting  him,  considerably
         more is required than that provided by the FTT  (or  the  UT).  The
         'passage of time' point was  indeed  well  addressed  by  UT  Judge
         Jordan when granting permission to appeal to the UT; he said this:

             'This raises a question as to  whether  the  passage  of  time
             alone is exceptional and if so, at what point does  it  become
             exceptional - 20 years, 25 years, 30 years, 40 years?  If  so,
             does  that  render  removal  disproportionate   whatever   the
             offending or is it only exceptional if you are sentenced to  6
             years but not if it is 10 years or 15 years?'"

31. The court proceeded to confirm, and I note LW (Jamaica) was  a  private
    life case but its rationale can be extended to family life cases,  that
    what matters to public confidence is that:-

         "any such decision is reached appropriately, after  due  regard  is
         had to the great weight to be attached to the  public  interest  in
         the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  and   with   'exceptional
         circumstances'   properly   understood   as   meaning   'compelling
         reasons'."

    There is no doubt that the judge found that the appellant, even  if  he
    were integrated, had not shown  compelling  circumstances  overall.   I
    find no error of law in the determination disclosed by this ground

32. Ground (v).  The  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  very  compelling
    circumstances by first considering whether the provisions applicable to
    those sentenced to less than four years' imprisonment would but for the
    length of sentence apply to A.  The judge devoted a significant part of
    her determination to the question of whether  but  for  his  length  of
    sentence he would have satisfied the requirements of Rule 399  or  399A
    or exception (1) or (2) in Section 117C did so on the basis  that  this
    was a "staging  post"  to  the  question  of  whether  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above  those  in  Rule  399/339A/exception  (1),
    exception (2) arose.

33. It was argued that this was incorrect and represented  a  more  onerous
    construction of the relevant  provisions  that  had  been  endorsed  by
    senior courts as per Akinyemi v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 236.  In that case
    it was found that going through those provisions  first  was  an  over-
    literal approach and that the thrust of the provisions as a  whole  was
    that the very compelling circumstances which  the  criminal  must  show
    must be more compelling that those covered by the specific exceptions:-

         "It is convenient to record at  this  point  that  there  was  some
         discussion before us as to the correct construction of section 117C
         (6). At first sight a possible reading  of  the  phrase  'over  and
         above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2' is  that  the  foreign
         criminal is obliged to show, first, that he fell within  the  terms
         of one or other (or possibly even both) of the exceptions, and then
         to demonstrate, additionally, 'very compelling circumstances'.  But
         Mr Drabble submitted that this was  an  over-literal  approach  and
         that the thrust of the provisions as a  whole  was  that  the  very
         compelling circumstances which the criminal must show must be  more
         compelling than those covered by the specified exceptions. No doubt
         in the paradigm case falling within sub-section (6) one or other of
         the exceptions would be satisfied, but that might not always be so,
         and a more flexible approach  was  preferable  so  as  to  avoid  a
         mismatch between the approach adopted  under  the  legislation  and
         that required by article 8. He also pointed out that the issue  was
         not in any event of substantial importance since section 117A  only
         requires the decision-taker to 'have regard to' the  considerations
         in  sections  117B  and  117C,  so  that  even  if   the   stricter
         construction of sub-section (6) were adopted the  Respondent  would
         not be compelled to act in breach of article 8 (contrary to section
         33 of the 2007 Act) if that is what deportation would entail in any
         given case. Mr Dunlop did not advance any argument in  rebuttal  on
         either point. In my view the better approach is to adopt  the  more
         flexible construction advanced by Mr Drabble."

34. It was argued that the judge engaged in a  very  detailed  analysis  of
    whether the impact of his arrival on the children or his partner  would
    be unduly harsh before considering the  very  compelling  circumstances
    and the  staged  approach  was  wrong  in  principle  as  it  was  more
    inflexible.

35. I am not persuaded that the judge took the incorrect approach  in  this
    instance.  Having set out Chege (Section 117D - Article 8  -  approach)
    [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC) and  having  explored  the  various  exceptions
    which she was obliged to do the judge  nevertheless  did  consider  the
    wider compelling circumstances and indeed cited at paragraph 17  of  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) where Lord Justice Elias said:-

         "In order to establish a very compelling  justification  overriding
         the high  public  interest  in  deportation,  there  must  be  some
         additional feature or features affecting the nature or  quality  of
         the relationship which take the case out of the ordinary."

36. The judge was clear that the exercise of striking a balance between the
    competing interest at play needed to be done through the  lens  of  the
    Immigration Rules and was clearly  aware  at  paragraph  104  that  the
    broader issues needed to be taken into consideration.  What is clear at
    paragraph 105  is  that  the  judge  considered  all  of  the  evidence
    including the matters raised by the appellant including the  effect  on
    his partner and children his length of stay in the UK  and  his  likely
    circumstances on return to Lesotho in arriving at  her  conclusion  and
    states:-

         "on assessing all the circumstances individually and also assessing
         them  cumulatively  I  find  that  there  are  no  very  compelling
         circumstances in terms of the case  law  I  have  considered  which
         would outweigh the significant public interest in  the  appellant's
         deportation".

    Therefore, the judge did not err in approaching  the  matter  via  'the
    staging post' but correctly  looked  at  the  compelling  circumstances
    through the lens of the Immigration Rules which she was obliged to do.

37. Ground (vi).  It was argued that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    financial obstacles to visits  taking  place,  that  contact  could  be
    maintained by way of visits  by  the  children  to  Lesotho  and  other
    countries and in doing so the judge failed to consider whether  regular
    visits, or indeed any visits at  all  to  foreign  countries  would  be
    affordable.

38. I do not accept this contention.  In a narrow reading of  the  decision
    of the judge the judge was clear at paragraph 98 that the family  could
    maintain  contact  with  the  appellant  also  via  modern   forms   of
    communication not just visits.  That conclusion, if it were in doubt at
    paragraph 98 is further underlined at  paragraph  99  where  the  judge
    separately considers the possibility of the children travelling to meet
    their father, but also in a separate sentence stating:-

         "They can  also  maintain  regular  contact  via  modern  forms  of
         communication.  Accordingly, whilst it will be  upsetting  for  the
         children and Ms F, it would not be unduly harsh on any of them  and
         Exception 1 and paragraph 399 has not been made out."

39. The judge therefore considered the possibility of the appellant and the
    children maintaining contact through more than one medium when arriving
    at her final conclusion.  That was open to her.

40. Ground (vii).  It was asserted that the conclusion on  very  compelling
    circumstances was not open to  the  judge  on  her  own  findings,  for
    example the judge quoted at paragraph 65 that So would be "likely to be
    devastated and very upset if her father were to  be  deported"  and  at
    paragraph 98 the appellant's removal "would undoubtedly be  devastating
    for the children and Ms F and there will be  likely  to  be  a  lot  of
    emotional upset suffered by them all".

41. The course of action which  on  the  judge's  views  is  likely  to  be
    devastating for this family regardless of factors  which  may  mitigate
    the harm led inevitably to the conclusion on the  facts  of  this  case
    that very compelling circumstances existed and therefore it was  argued
    that the judge's conclusion was irrational.

42. That assertion is not made out.  The judge, at paragraph  112,  clearly
    took into account the very long residence of the appellant in  the  UK,
    the facts of the appellant's family, that  he  had  been  educated  and
    worked in the UK, the adverse reactions of his children and that of his
    partner including the diagnoses made by Professor Yule, that it was not
    in the interests of his children for him to leave the UK  and  that  he
    has not committed further offences since  his  serious  conviction  and
    that he was a good prisoner.

43. By way of  contrast  the  judge  also  found  that  the  appellant  was
    convicted of a very serious crime and  had  a  prominent  role  in  the
    business which conducted transactions over a period of time, such  that
    it could not be said that he only participated in  offending  behaviour
    on one occasion.  The appellant had  received  a  lengthy  sentence  of
    imprisonment for fraud  for  seven-and-a-half  years.   The  crime  was
    committed when he was an adult and despite the  presence  of  a  family
    unit and Ms F and that the children  had  been  born.   The  sentencing
    judge clearly took the view that the appellant  had  a  vital  role  in
    illicit business and  his  offending  behaviour  was  not  due  to  his
    ignorance.

44. Overall the judge did not accept that there was a very low risk that he
    would reoffend.  That was  an  important  factor.   Further,  that  the
    appellant had continued ties to the Lesotho culture and  balancing  all
    of the factors in  the  appeal  and  taking  into  account  the  public
    interest the judge found the deportation decision was proportionate.

45. As set out in Kamara paragraph 18:-

         "There is no special rule regarding the reasons to be  given  by  a
         tribunal deciding an immigration appeal. The conventional  approach
         applies. The Upper Tribunal's decision is to be read looking at the
         substance of its reasoning and not with a fine-tooth comb or like a
         statute in an effort to identify errors. In giving its  reasons,  a
         tribunal is entitled to focus on the principal  issues  in  dispute
         between the parties, whilst  also  making  it  clear  that  it  has
         considered other matters set out in the  legislative  regime  being
         applied."

Notice of Decision

46. I find no error of law and the decision shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction because minors are involved.






Signed Helen Rimington                       Date 31st August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


