
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13295/2017
                                                               hu/03485/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2019                            |On 5 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                      Mr VISHALKUMAR HARSHADBHAI PATEL
                       Mrs minalben vishalkumar patel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Abbas
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India.  They were born respectively on 3
    February  1982  and  21  January  1984.   They  appealed  against   the
    respondent's decisions to refuse them leave to remain dated 13  October
    2017.

 2. The appeals were dismissed by Judge Seelhoff (the judge) in a  decision
    promulgated on 2 August 2018.  For the reasons he set out at  [41]-[63]
    he found there would not be significant  obstacles  to  the  appellants
    returning to India and that notwithstanding  taking  into  account  the
    children's best interests, the respondent's decision was proportionate.

 3. The grounds claim the  judge  failed  to  give  regard  to  the  police
    certificate dated 20 July 2016 at page 58 of the appellant's bundle and
    NPCC letter dated 22 July 2016 at page 57 of  the  appellant's  bundle.
    (Ground 1). The appellant  said  he  had  no  reason  to  withhold  the
    information in respect of his convictions because he had  obtained  the
    documentation to be  provided  in  support  of  his  application.   The
    omission on the application form was innocent.  By not considering  the
    police certificate which was dated before the submission  date  of  the
    application, the judge had not given adequate weight to the appellant's
    account of him having an innocent mind.  The submission of  the  police
    certificate  was  significant  and  the  failure  to  consider  it  was
    material.

 4. The grounds also claim that in considering the eldest child's status as
    being precarious because there was no live application  before  him  in
    respect of that child (see [58] of the decision), the judge  failed  to
    consider that a child should not be blamed for matters for which it was
    not responsible such as the conduct of a parent. (Ground  2).   Because
    the view the judge formed regarding the conduct of the father, and  the
    fact that there was no live appeal for the  children  before  him,  his
    consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the  children  and   their
    circumstances was flawed.

 5. Judge Page refused permission on 3 September 2018.  He said inter alia:

         "2.  ... I am  not  satisfied  that  this  application  amounts  to
             anything more than disagreement with conclusions the judge has
             reached on the evidence, dressed up as  legal  argument.   The
             judge has  reached  findings  at  paragraphs  41-63  that  are
             carefully reasoned and those conclusions were properly open to
             the judge to reach on the evidence.   Although  complaint  has
             been made that the judge has failed to give proper regard to a
             police certificate and an NPCC letter it does not follow  that
             no regard was given to these documents.  It was not  incumbent
             upon the judge to list every single document before  him  when
             reaching his decision, because  there  has  been  no  specific
             reference to a document it does not follow  that  it  was  not
             considered.  Read as a whole the decision of the Tribunal does
             not appear to contain any arguable errors of law".

 6. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Doyle granted permission on 16  November  2018.   He  said  inter
    alia:

         "2.  The judge  finds  that  the  appellants'  oldest  child  is  a
             qualifying child.  It is arguable  that  there  is  inadequate
             consideration of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  and  s.117B(6)
             of the 2002 Act.  It  is  arguable  that  at  [62]  the  judge
             applies the wrong test in law".

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Abbas relied upon the grounds.  Mr Clarke relied upon  the  Rule  24
    response.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. The judge heard this case before KO [2018] UKSC 53.  Nevertheless,  the
    grounds anticipated KO in relying upon Zoumbas that: "a child must  not
    be blamed for which he or she is not responsible, such as  the  conduct
    of a parent".

 9. There is no doubt that Mr Patel had a  poor  immigration  history.   As
    regards Ground 1, the judge was entitled to reach his findings in  that
    regard.

10. As regards Ground 2, the judge was entitled to make the finding he  did
    on the evidence before him.   The  judge  carried  out  an  appropriate
    proportionality exercise at [60]-[63]. Mr Patel's  conviction  and  his
    failure to mention it would have led to  a  mandatory  refusal  of  the
    original application in any event.  The  judge  considered  the  family
    background and the return to India scenario at  [56]-[59].   The  judge
    had no information regarding the children except an  attendance  letter
    from the school and a series of one-page character  references.   There
    was no suggestion that any of the witnesses were aware  of  Mr  Patel's
    history of deception and criminal convictions.  None of  the  witnesses
    attended court.  The judge was faced with a paucity of evidence.

11. In my view, if the principles in KO  had  been  addressed  the  outcome
    would have been the same.   It  was  reasonable  and  proportionate  to
    expect Mr Patel's wife and children to return with him to India.

12. The judge's decision contains no error of law and shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         28 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
