





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13744/2017


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2018                         |On 10th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                     Ms Widad Husain Hamoody Al Ghazali
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McKenzie, Counsel instructed by Chris Raja
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mackintosh promulgated on the 5th September whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The  appeal  was  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse the appellant's human rights claim
    under article 8 of the ECHR. The appellant was seeking entry  clearance
    to the UK to join her son and his family in the UK.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan on 1st  October  2018.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The grant of leave raises the issue that the judge in dealing with  the
    appeal only considered whether the appellant met  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules and therefore only considered Article 8 under the
    rules. Having found that the appellant did not met the requirements  of
    the rules, the judge allegedly did not consider  Article  8  otherwise,
    including Article 8 outside the rules. The grounds of appeal claim that
    the judge has failed to consider article 8 properly.

 5. Whilst the case under the immigration rules was not conceded before me,
    the focus of the appeal was on Article 8  outside  the  rules  and  the
    alleged family life established between the appellant and her son, Mr S
    G S Mahdi, and his family, who live in the UK.

    Factual background

 6. The appellant, a national of Iraq, had left Iraq  during  the  time  of
    Saddam Hussein. The appellant initially settled in the  United  Kingdom
    with her family in 1983. At that  time  the  family  consisted  of  the
    appellant, her husband and materially her son [the present sponsor] and
    his older brother.

 7. In 1992 the appellant left the United Kingdom to take up a position  in
    Dubai. Her husband remained in the United Kingdom with the sponsor  and
    his brother. By reason of their residence in the  United  Kingdom  they
    ultimately qualified  on  the  basis  of  long  residence  for  British
    citizenship.

 8. Having obtained British citizenship the father of the family  travelled
    to Dubai to be with the appellant. The sponsor and  his  elder  brother
    remained in the United Kingdom to  complete  vocational  training.  The
    elder brother ultimately  qualified  as  a  dentist  and  emigrated  to
    America.

 9. In 1997 the appellant divorced her husband. There is no further contact
    between the appellant and former husband. In the meantime the appellant
    had been working in Dubai working initially at the state hospital. From
    January 2008 onwards she commenced work in  the  Medicare  Hospital  in
    Dubai.

10. In 2006 the sponsor and his  family  joined  the  appellant  in  Dubai.
    Whilst the sponsor and his family were in Dubai  the  appellant  rented
    out her apartment and moved in to live with the sponsor  and  his  wife
    and their eldest daughter. It appears that the sponsor and his wife had
    two further children. It is the relationship between the appellant  and
    her son and family that developed at that time that was central to  the
    assertion that there was a family life between the appellant on the one
    side and her son, her daughter-in-law and grandchildren on the other.

11. In 2015 the sponsor and his  wife  decided  to  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom. By September 2016 the sponsor's wife and children were  in  in
    London, the children being enrolled settled in schools  in  the  London
    area. Once the  sponsor  and  his  family  left  Dubai,  the  appellant
    returned to live in her own flat and continued working as before.

12. The appellant by reason of her age reduced the number of hours that she
    was working.

13. It is put in terms that now reaching the age of 81 the appellant  faces
    the prospect of ceasing working in Dubai and having to return to  Iraq,
    a country with which she has had no contact for over 35  years.  It  is
    the country of her nationality. Her residence in Dubai is dependent  on
    her working. If she ceases to work, her resident permit in  Dubai  will
    not be renewed.

14. Whilst much is made in the grounds of  appeal  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's status in Dubai is dependent upon her employment, the judge
    has taken that into account in paragraph 27 of the decision. Indeed  as
    part of the documentation submitted there is reference to the fact that
    her current residence permit in Dubai was renewed on 5 April  2017  and
    is valid until 4 April 2019. There is reference in the submissions made
    by the appellant's representative to the fact  that  she  has  been  in
    employment as a senior radiologist but of late has had to cut down  her
    workload to 3 days per week.

15. On 3 July 2017 the appellant  applied  for  settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom to join her son and his family. The problem with regard to  the
    position of the appellant is that  she  has  been  separated  from  the
    sponsor and the grandchildren for a significant period of time of  over
    9 months at the time of the application and over a year at the time  of
    the hearing. of nine months or more

16. I would note in the submissions made that there  is  reference  to  the
    fact that  the  Current  Immigration  Rules  in  the  USA  prevent  the
    appellant from going to live with her elder son due to the fact of  her
    Iraqi passport. It is to be noted also in the statement of the  sponsor
    there is reference to the fact that the  appellant  sought  to  go  and
    settle in the USA with her eldest son but by reasons of the matters set
    out that was refused.

    Submissions

17. Firstly it was submitted that the judge  has  failed  to  consider  the
    guidance in the case of Charles (human  rights  appeal:  Scope)  [2018]
    UKUT 000809. Further the judge has failed to take account of  the  case
    law submitted by  the  appellant's  representatives.  Specifically  the
    judge has failed to consider the guidance in the cases  of  BRITCITS  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368 and Dasgupta [2016] UKUT 00028 (IAC).

18. It  was  asserted  that  the  cases  identify  circumstances  in  which
    grandparent and grandchild can be considered  to  have  a  family  life
    together.

19. It is  asserted  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  consider  that  the
    relationship with grandparent  and  grandchild  can  constitute  family
    life. In the present case it is alleged that the judge  has  failed  to
    consider the relationship of the grandchildren to the appellant. It  is
    asserted that the case law identifies that there can be a  family  life
    between grandparent and grandchild and accordingly that the decision by
    the judges flawed in failing to consider that relationship has erred in
    the assessment of Article 8.

20. In failing to consider the relationships it is claimed that  the  judge
    has failed to properly assess the family life rights and has  therefore
    erred in law.

21. On behalf of the respondent it was submitted that  the  judge  had  not
    merely considered Article 8 under the rules but had gone on to consider
    whether the facts warranted consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
    rules.  From paragraph 52 onwards  the  judge  having  found  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the rules determined whether
    there were circumstances which warranted  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the rules.  The approach of the judge was consistent  with  the
    case law dealing with Entry Clearance and Leave to Enter.

    Consideration

22. The judge has clearly made findings with regard to article 8 under  the
    Immigration Rules. There were no challenges to the findings  made.  The
    issue was whether the judge had considered Article 8 outside the rules.
    The appellant was seeking to rely upon her relationship to her son  and
    to her grandchildren in the United Kingdom.

23. Whilst it has to be acknowledged that family  life  can  exist  between
    grandparents and grandchildren I draw attention to para 61 of  Britcits
    wherein it is stated by the Master of the Rolls:-

         61 Nor do I accept the submission that there is always family  life
         which engages Article 8 of the convention  whenever  a  UK  citizen
         with an elderly parent resident outside the UK wishes to bring  the
         parent to the UK to look after the parent. Whether or not there  is
         family life at the moment of the application will depend on all the
         facts as to the relationship  between  parent  and  child  and  its
         history; Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 170 at [19]; Huang at [18;
         Jitendra v ECO New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

24. I also draw attention to SS  (Congo)  &  others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    wherein LJ Richards drew a distinction between an in-country appeal and
    out-of-country appeal. In the case a distinction was drawn  between  an
    in country case and an out of country case. In an out of country appeal
    consideration is being given to creating a closer family unit in the UK
    than exists at present. Whereas in an in-country cases the  close  unit
    basis for family life in the UK already exists. As in the present  case
    family life in the UK does not exist and an assessment has to  be  made
    whether the positive obligation under Article 8 to promote family  life
    and whether the pre-existing "family life" in Dubai given the facts was
    sufficient to justify consideration of article  8  outside  the  rules.
    With the circumstances such that family life should be allowed to be re-
    established in the United Kingdom.

25. In paragraph 40 of SS (Congo) LJ Richards states:-)

         40 In the light of these authorities, we consider  that  the  state
         has a wider margin of appreciation in determining the conditions to
         be satisfied before LTE is granted, by contrast with  the  position
         in relation to decisions regarding LTR for  persons  with  a  (non-
         precarious) family life already established in the United  Kingdom.
         The Secretary of State has already, in effect,  made  some  use  of
         this wider margin of appreciation by excluding section  EX.1  as  a
         basis for grant of LTE, although it is available  as  a  basis  for
         grant of LTR. The LTE Rules therefore maintain, in general terms, a
         reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8  in  the
         ordinary run of cases. However,  it  remains  possible  to  imagine
         cases where the individual interests at stake are of a particularly
         pressing nature so that a good claim for  LTE  can  be  established
         outside the Rules. In our view, the appropriate general formulation
         for this category is that such cases will arise where an  applicant
         for LTE can show that compelling circumstances exist (which are not
         sufficiently recognised under the new Rules) to require  the  grant
         of such leave.

26. The case indicates that  compelling  circumstances  have  to  exist  to
    justify promoting  a  family  life  that  requires  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance or leave to enter.

27. I take account of paragraphs 18 and 60 of Huang 2007 UKHL11.

         18 ... Human beings are social  animals.  They  depend  on  others.
         Their family, or extended family, is the group on which many people
         most heavily depend, socially, emotionally and  often  financially.
         There comes a point at which, for some, prolonged  and  unavoidable
         separation from this group seriously inhibits their ability to live
         full and fulfilling lives. Matters such  as  the  age,  health  and
         vulnerability of the applicant, the closeness and previous  history
         of the family, the applicant's  dependence  on  the  financial  and
         emotional support of the family, the prevailing cultural  tradition
         and conditions in the country of origin and many other factors  may
         all be relevant. The Strasbourg court has repeatedly recognised the
         general right of states to control the entry and residence of  non-
         nationals, and repeatedly acknowledged that the Convention  confers
         no right on individuals or families to choose where they prefer  to
         live. In most cases where the applicants complain of a violation of
         their article 8 rights, in a case where the  impugned  decision  is
         authorised by law for a legitimate object and the interference  (or
         lack of  respect)  is  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  engage  the
         operation of article 8,  the  crucial  question  is  likely  to  be
         whether the interference (or lack  of  respect)  complained  of  is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  end  sought  to  be   achieved.
         Proportionality is a subject  of  such  importance  as  to  require
         separate treatment.

         60 It remains the position that the ultimate question is how a fair
         balance  should  be  struck  between  the  competing   public   and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in  mind:
         that is to say, a requirement that the  case  should  exhibit  some
         highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the  test
         of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word
         "exceptional", as already explained, as meaning  "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that the refusal of the application  would  not
         be proportionate". So understood, the provision in the Instructions
         that leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply  involves  the  application  of  the  test  of
         proportionality to the circumstances of the  individual  case,  and
         cannot be regarded as incompatible with article 8. That  conclusion
         is fortified by the express  statement  in  the  Instructions  that
         "exceptional" does not mean "unusual"  or  "unique":  see  para  19
         above.

28. In that respect guidance was given in the case of  Kugathas  2003  INLR
    170 to help in determine whether there is family  life.  An  assessment
    has to be made of  dependency  to  establish  whether  there  is  real,
    committed and/or effective support or relationship between  the  family
    members. In the case the normal relationship between a  mother  and  an
    adult son without more was not sufficient to establish family  life  in
    the context of Article  8  even  where  the  parties  might  be  living
    together. [see paragraph 25 judgment of LJ Arden].

29. The case law speaks  in  terms  of  real,  committed  and/or  effective
    support  or  relationship  between  the  family  members  in  order  to
    establish the family life exists and where one is  dealing  with  entry
    clearance or leave to enter there have to be compelling circumstances.

30. In part the judge has looked at the  issues  and  determined  certainly
    that there is no financial dependency between  the  appellant  and  her
    sponsor and the grandchildren in the United Kingdom [see paragraphs  of
    the decision 48 and 49].

31. The parties have been living separately and apart. The sponsor and  his
    family made a decision that they wished to return to the United Kingdom
    for the benefit of their children. That was a matter of choice made  by
    them. Once that choice had been made the appellant continued to live in
    Dubai; continued to  work;  continued  to  occupy  her  own  apartment.
    Clearly the age of the appellant is a material  consideration  but  the
    judge took that into account. However the sponsor and his  family  have
    made a choice that they wished to come to the  United  Kingdom  without
    any certainty that the appellant could join in the United  Kingdom.  It
    appears  to  be  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the rules. It is material  that  the  reasons  for  the
    family being in the United Kingdom was a matter of choice made  by  the
    sponsor and his family.

32. There was no guarantee at that stage that there would  be  a  right  to
    bring the appellant into the  United  Kingdom.  The  immigration  rules
    provided criteria by which an elderly relative  can  enter  the  United
    Kingdom but the appellant does not meet that criteria.

33. The judge considered the Immigration Rules and has given valid  reasons
    for finding that the appellant did not met the rules.

34. In looking otherwise whether  or  not  there  were  compelling  factors
    justifying considering article 8  outside  the  rules,  the  judge  has
    considered whether there are compelling circumstances in paragraph  52.
    The judge took account of the grandchildren. The judge concluded taking
    account of all the facts that there were no circumstances or no factors
    warranting consideration of Article 8 outside the  rules.  That  was  a
    conclusion on the facts, which the judge was entitled to  make  on  the
    facts as presented and is consistent with the case  law  set  out.  The
    judge has considered whether consideration of  Article  8  outside  the
    rules was warranted and concluded that it was not.

35.  In  the  circumstances  there  had  to  be  factors  which   justified
    considering article 8 outside  the  rules  and  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence the judge was entitled to conclude that  there  were  no  such
    circumstances.

36. Accordingly there is no material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

37. I dismiss the appeal.

38. I do not make an anonymity direction








Signed

Date 5th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



