
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/13199/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2016                       |      On 19 February 2018           |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MISS NUSRAT JAHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Aghayere


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet to allow  the  respondent's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 11 May  2016  to
    refuse her leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE and under  Article  8
    to help care for her niece and nephew who have complex medical needs.

2.   Permission was granted on the basis that it is arguable that the  judge
    erred in concluding that the respondent  should  be  granted  leave  to
    remain for  twelve  months  on  the  understanding  that  ongoing  care
    arrangements would need to be investigated by  the  children's  parents
    when they had already been offered a care package but chose to use  the
    services of the respondent.

3.   For  ease  of  reference  I  shall  refer  to  the  respondent  as  the
    applicant.

4.   The applicant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 30 October 1986.   She
    obtained a student visa in November 2015.  She  completed  a  nine-week
    English language course and then planned to study  for  public  health.
    She did  not  start  those  studies  because  of  her  sister's  family
    situation.  She has not visited Bangladesh since that time.  Her mother
    and two brothers live in Bangladesh.

5.   On 9 February 2016 the applicant applied for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Her representative's covering letter made reference to
    her family and private life (Article 8/human rights).  In addition, she
    also raised that she was currently assisting with the care of her niece
    and nephew, S and SA.  The application was refused on 11 May 2016.  The
    Secretary of State accepted that the applicant's niece and  nephew  had
    complex medical needs, but it was not accepted that the applicant would
    face very significant obstacles to  her  integration  into  Bangladesh.
    Nor  could  she  succeed  under  Article  8  ECHR  because  while   the
    applicant's nephew and niece had complex medical needs, such care would
    be provided by the local authority and medical professionals and  there
    was no requirement for the applicant to provide such care.

6.   In the submissions recorded by the judge,  Counsel  for  the  applicant
    referred to a number of documents in the respondent's bundle which  set
    out the high level of care  which  was  required  for  the  applicant's
    niece, S born on 29 July 2001.   There  was  no  question  that  S  was
    increasingly dependent on the applicant.  The submissions  also  stated
    that Social Services cannot provide the necessary care and  supervision
    as they are only offering 30 hours' help  per  week,  when  S  requires
    observation and assistance 24/7.  Therefore, the  applicant  should  be
    granted discretionary leave to remain.

7.   The judge made the following findings:

         "12. It is accepted by the parties that the appellant's  niece  and
             nephew (who are now aged 16 and 14 respectively) have  complex
             medical needs as a result of their suffering from Bardet-Biedl
             Syndrome,  which  is  a   genetic   condition   which   causes
             significant health issues including learning difficulties.  S,
             the appellant's niece, who is now aged 16, has  also  suffered
             thyroid  cancer  and  has  undergone  a  tracheostomy,   which
             requires ongoing care.  There is significant medical  evidence
             that both the children require care and support, both  medical
             and psychological.  There is also a third child, D, who is now
             aged 6, who has not yet shown signs of any medical needs,  but
             providing attention for that young child has placed a  further
             burden on the appellant's parents.


         13.  There are letters of support on the file from the  appellant's
             MP and medical and social care  professionals,  which  support
             the appellant's case that she should be allowed to stay in the
             UK in order to provide ongoing care.  I have had regard to the
             respondent's concession for carer's policy which is set out in
             the representative's letter of 9 February 2016.  In  paragraph
             4.3 of that policy it is stated that in cases where there  are
             sufficient exceptional compassionate circumstances to continue
             the exercise of discretion, leave to remain may be granted for
             up to 12 months at a time.  I am satisfied  that  this  is  an
             exceptional case where the appellant is providing  significant
             support, both social and psychological, to her young niece and
             nephew in view of their complex medical  needs.   In  my  view
             this is a case where the respondent should  grant  12  months'
             discretionary leave  to  remain,  on  the  understanding  that
             ongoing care arrangements will need to be investigated by  the
             children's parents, with the help of Social Services  and  the
             medical  profession.   This  is  for  the  reason   that   the
             appellant, who is now aged 30 and has lived  the  majority  of
             her life in Bangladesh, may return to  Bangladesh,  where  her
             other family members live at a later date.  The responsibility
             for providing  care  is  on  the  parents  and  public  health
             authorities and not on the appellant herself".

8.   Ms Holmes submitted that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for
    her decision that the Secretary of State should  grant  twelve  months'
    discretionary leave to remain, on the understanding that  ongoing  care
    arrangements will need to be investigated by  the  children's  parents,
    with the help of Social Services and the medical profession.  Ms Holmes
    submitted that a care package had been offered to the applicant's niece
    and nephew by Social Services.  The care package was in the form of  30
    hours' help per week.  Ms Holmes  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not
    mention  this  care  package  at  all  and  had  not  taken   it   into
    consideration in her decision.  This was a material error of law.

9.   She also stated that the applicant's  statement  did  not  mention  the
    care package offered by Social Services.  The  judge  did  not  mention
    that there was already a care package available.

10.  Ms Holmes referred to Chapter 17, Section 2, the Home  Office  guidance
    on carers.  Paragraph 17.3.1 was in respect  of  "granting  an  initial
    period of leave to remain".  The guidance states:

         "Where the application is to care for a sick or  disabled  relative
         it will normally be appropriate to grant leave to remain for  three
         months on Code 3  (no  recourse  to  employment  or  public  funds)
         outside the Rules.


         The applicant must be informed that leave has been granted  on  the
         strict understanding that during this period arrangements  will  be
         made for the future care of the patient by  a  person  who  is  not
         subject to the Immigration Rules".


11.  The guidance goes on to say that the applicant  must  be  advised  that
    leave has been granted exceptionally outside the normal requirements of
    the Immigration  Rules  to  enable  the  applicant  to  make  permanent
    arrangements for the future care of their relative by a person  who  is
    not subject to immigration control; and that it is  unlikely  that  any
    further leave will be granted on this basis.

12.  Ms Holmes also referred to paragraph 17.4.1 which refers  "to  granting
    a further period of leave to remain".  This guidance states that  where
    there  are  sufficient  exceptional  compassionate   circumstances   to
    continue the exercise of discretion, leave to remain may be granted for
    up to twelve months at a time; and that in all cases it  must  be  made
    clear to the carer that  they  are  acting  exceptionally  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

13.  Mr Aghayere relied on the Rule 24 response.  He  submitted  that  there
    was a care plan for the applicant's niece and nephew and this  was  for
    30 hours.  However, because the niece and nephew  needed  24-hour  care
    per week and not 30 hours as provided by the authorities, that was  why
    the judge made the findings at  paragraph  13.   I  asked  Mr  Aghayere
    whether the care provided by the applicant replaced the 30  hours  care
    provided by Social Services or was in addition to the care provided  by
    Social Services.  He referred to a letter from Enfield Social  Services
    at page 20 of the applicant's bundle which said that additional support
    was encouraged.  He said this means that the support given  by  Enfield
    Social Services was not sufficient and they were encouraging additional
    support.

14.  If that were the case, I find that the judge did not include it in  her
    decision.  Indeed, the judge did not mention any of this evidence  that
    Mr Aghayere has referred me to.  I find that his submissions support Ms
    Holmes' submission that the judge made no reference to the care package
    that had been offered by Enfield Social Services.   This  care  package
    did not feature in her decision at all.

15.  I also find that the judge erred in law in deciding that the  applicant
    should be granted twelve months' discretionary leave to remain  on  the
    understanding  that  ongoing  care  arrangements  will   need   to   be
    investigated by  the  children's  parents,  with  the  help  of  Social
    Services and the medical profession.  I find that again this stems from
    the failure of the judge to mention  that  there  was  already  a  care
    package in place.  The judge's failure to mention this  vital  evidence
    materially undermines her decision.

16.  In any event, the respondent's guidance on carers indicates that  there
    is an initial grant of three months before a further  grant  of  twelve
    months is considered.

17.  Consequently, I find that the judge erred in law in her decision.

18.  The judge's decision cannot stand.  It has to be re-made.

19.  The applicant should provide evidence from Enfield Social  Services  to
    inform the court whether:

    (1)  the 30-hour care package that is in place has been agreed with the
         children's parents, and


    (4)  whether the care provided by the applicant is in addition  to  the
         care Social Services are currently providing.


20.  The appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross to be reheard by a  judge  other
    than FtTJ Sweet.

    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun




















