
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13352/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote hearing via Skype at Field    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 12 May 2020                       |On 05 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                              xiangqin chen (v)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, instructed by QC Immigration
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                   (Decision given orally on 12 May 2020)

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal brought against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Swinnerton promulgated on 9 December 2019, permission of  appeal
    having been granted by First-tier Tribunal  judge  Foudy  on  20  April
    2020.

 2. Underlying the appeal, and  the  focus  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration, is a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  17  July
    2019 refusing the appellant's human rights claim.   In  substance,  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain was  founded  on  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules - it being asserted  that  the  appellant
    had lived continuously and lawfully in the United Kingdom for a  period
    in excess of ten years and that she is, as a consequence,  entitled  to
    Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 3. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Ms  Cunha  accepted  that  the
    paucity of reasoning and the failure to the  First-tier  Tribunal  take
    account of, what on the face of it are, material matters leads  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's conclusion of Article 8  being  flawed  by  legal
    error. In light of such concession, and my  concurrence,  I  need  only
    deal briefly with the grounds of challenge.

Decision and Reasons

 4. The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision is threefold.

 5. The first ground raises a procedural fairness challenge - it being said
    that neither the appellant nor  the  appellant's  legal  representative
    received notice of the hearing of  6  December  2019  and  that,  as  a
    consequence, neither attended that hearing. It  is  asserted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal acted unfairly in proceeding in their absence.

 6. On a procedural fairness ground, the question for the Upper Tribunal is
    not whether the First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably in proceeding with
    the hearing on the information that it had available to it, but whether
    there has been a deprivation of a right  to  a  fair  hearing  (See  SH
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284).

 7. Good practice dictates that factual assertions made in the  grounds  of
    challenge should be supported by  a  witness  statement.   For  reasons
    which have not been explained, the Tribunal has not been provided  with
    such a statement in the instant case. There is  though  other  evidence
    before me which supports the contentions made.

 8. The Tribunal's file demonstrates to  my  satisfaction  that  a  hearing
    notice was sent to the appellant's legal representatives.  It  was  not
    sent to the appellant directly because the legal representatives failed
    to provide an address for the appellant (other than a care of address),
    even after being directed to do so. The Tribunal's file also  discloses
    that both  the  appellant's  legal  representative  and  the  appellant
    attended before the First-tier Tribunal on 11 November  2019.  On  that
    date, the appeal was on the float list but was not reached  and  so  it
    was adjourned to be heard on a later date.

 9. There is evidence before me in the form of an email written directly to
    the Tribunal on 12 December 2019 (i.e.  3  days  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was promulgated), by a person who appears to be  in
    the employ of (or at least writing on behalf of) QC Immigration  -  the
    email having emanated from an address which ends "@qc-immigration.com".
     This email asserts that the hearing notice  for  the  hearing  of  6th
    December was not received.

10. Looking at this evidence as a whole, and despite the absence of witness
    statements supporting such evidence,  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that
    neither the appellant nor her legal representatives received notice  of
    the hearing of 6  December.   This  finding  leads  inexorably  to  the
    conclusion that there has  been  procedural  unfairness,  although  not
    through any fault of the First-tier Tribunal.

11. There are two further grounds of challenge which I will also deal  with
    briefly.  The  second  ground  relates  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    application of paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules.   It  was  the
    appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  requirements
    of the Rules had been met.  This is explicitly said to be  so  in  more
    than one place in the documentation produced by  the  appellant.   This
    submission is, however, doomed to failure because the appellant accepts
    there was a gap in  her  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Following the  reasoning set out in the decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in Masum Ahmed [2019] EWCA Civ 1070 and of Mr Justice Sweeney
    in this Tribunal in R (on the application  of  Ahmed)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (para 276B - ten years lawful  residence)
    [2019] UKUT 10 (IAC), continuity of lawful residence is a self-standing
    limb of paragraph 276B and if there is a gap in such residence then the
    requirements of that Immigration Rule cannot be met.

12. The final ground of appeal revolves around the application  of  Article
    8.

13. The First-tier Tribunal concluded as follows in relation to Article  8:
    "I do not find that the  appellant has had at least 10 years continuous
    lawful residence om the UK and I do not find that the decision  of  the
    Appellant [sic] is disproportionate".  When  looked  as  a  whole,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's Article 8 consideration falls woefully  short  of
    being adequate.  It is clear that when a Tribunal  is  considering  the
    application of Article 8 it must initially consider the  extent  of  an
    appellant's private and  family  life.  In  this  case  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  proceeded  straight  to  the  assessment  of  proportionality
    without making any findings as to the extent of the appellant's private
    life in the United Kingdom - a matter upon which the appellant provided
    evidence. In addition, given that the substance of the appellant's case
    on the issue of proportionality revolved around an allegation that  the
    gap in continuous residence was contributed to or caused by Home Office
    delay, one would have expected to see clear findings on this issue. The
    decision is, however,  silent  on  this  submission  and  the  evidence
    relating thereto.

14. The consequence of all of the above is that the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision is  set  aside  in  its  entirety.   This  appeal  has  to  be
    determined afresh. As the appellant has not yet had a lawful  and  fair
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  appropriate,  and  unusual,
    course is for this  matter  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh before a judge other than Judge Swinnerton.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside,  and  the  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine afresh.


Signed   Mark O'Connor

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date 13 May 2020

