
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13532/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 February 2018                       |On 23 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                           mrs nasim akhtar jahan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who appealed against a  decision
    of the Respondent to refuse her application for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of her British partner  and  two  children.
    That appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S T  Fox  who
    in a decision promulgated on 25 April 2017 dismissed it.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Mailer on 27 November 2017. His reasons for  so
    doing are: -

         "1.  The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 19  May  1949.
             Her appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  her
             application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of  her
             British partner and two children, was refused on human  rights
             by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated  on
             25 April 2017.

         2.   It was conceded by her counsel at the hearing that  she  could
             not satisfy the requirements under  the  relevant  Rules.  The
             appeal was on the basis of Article 8 outside the Rules.

         3.   It is arguable that he did not properly consider her Article 8
             claim outside the Rules and imposed too high a  threshold.  He
             arguable failed to consider  whether,  having  regard  to  her
             mental health problems and her  husband's  frail  health,  the
             return  to  Pakistan  would  result  in  unjustifiably   harsh
             consequences - Agyarko [60]. It is  also  not  clear  why  the
             Judge found at [29] that on the basis of the  evidence  before
             him, the Appellant was not entitled to  a  Residence  card  as
             confirmation of her right to reside in the UK,  which  appears
             to  relate  to  applications  under  the   Immigration   (EEA)
             Regulations

         4.   The grounds are arguable."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset of the hearing Miss Cleghorn handed up the  authority  of
    ZB (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 834 which she relied in making her
    submissions supporting the grounds of appeal.

 5. Mr Diwnycz  firstly  accepted  that  the  reference  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 29 of his decision to the entitlement of the Appellant  to  a
    Residence Card was a cause of concern as no such issue was within  this
    appeal. He  also  accepted  that  this  was  an  inadequately  reasoned
    decision for the reasons put forward in the grounds and  one  which  on
    the face of it is absent any "Razgar" analysis.

 6. Both parties invited me, in these circumstances to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had been deprived of a fair  hearing  within  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to remit the appeal.

 7. That is an analysis that I share.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge S T Fox.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 February 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
