
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13828/2018
                                                               HU/13830/2018
                                                               HU/13831/2018
                                                               HU/13832/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th March 2019                            |On 28th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                     MRS ZARLKHTA [D] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                          [A D] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                      MISS AMINA [D] (THIRD APPELLANT)
                      MISS ROQIA [D] (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Lea, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Afghanistan,  currently  residing  in
    Pakistan.  The first Appellant is the mother of the second,  third  and
    fourth Appellants.  The second Appellant is a minor.  They appeal  with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Meah)
    dismissing their appeals against the  refusal  by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer ("ECO") to grant them entry clearance to the UK for settlement.

 2. Their applications were considered under the Family Reunion  provisions
    contained within the Rules.  They sought reunification with  the  first
    Appellant's son, Mr [OD] ("the Sponsor"), who was granted full  refugee
    status in the UK in June 2014.

 3. The ECO refused the applications on several grounds:

       . He was not satisfied that the  parties  were  related  as  claimed.
         This ground now falls away as relationships have  been  established
         but I will return to this point further in this decision

       . The applications did not meet  the  Immigration  Rules  so  far  as
         financial dependency is concerned

       . There were no exceptional/compassionate circumstances  put  forward
         such as to warrant a grant of entry clearance outside the Rules.

 4. The Appellants appealed the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  refusal  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act claiming that the decisions to refuse
    their applications were in breach of their Article  8  ECHR  rights  to
    family/private life.

Background

 5. There is a background to these appeals which it is necessary to recite.
      Although  the  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Afghanistan,  they  are
    currently living in  Pakistan  having  left  Afghanistan  in  2006,  on
    account of the Sponsor's father having been murdered by the Taliban  in
    a car bomb attack. Their claim is that they have no status in Pakistan.
     The Sponsor (and another brother who is also now  in  the  UK)  formed
    part of the Appellants' pre-flight family and were  also  part  of  the
    family unit in Pakistan.

 6. When the Appellants' applications were  first  made,  the  family  unit
    comprised not only the Appellants but included the Sponsor's  wife  and
    children.  At that point all  applications  were  refused  because  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not  accept  the  relationship  as  claimed
    between the Sponsor, his wife and children, and the  Appellants.   Once
    the family relationships  were  established,  the  Sponsor's  wife  and
    children  were  granted  entry  clearance  under  the  Family   Reunion
    provisions of the Rules.  The ECO however maintained his refusal in the
    cases of the Sponsor's mother and his siblings  because  they  did  not
    come within the Immigration  Rules.   They  exercised  their  right  to
    appeal to the FtT.  The FtT upheld the ECO's decision.  The  Appellants
    appealed the FtTJ's decision and thus the matter  comes  before  me  to
    decide if the FtTJ's decision discloses an error of law requiring it to
    be set aside and re-made.

Error of Law Hearing

 7. Before me Mr Lea appeared for the  Appellants  and  Ms  Cunha  for  the
    Respondent. I heard submissions from both representatives.

 8. Mr Lea acknowledged that the grounds seeking permission  are  extensive
    but said, in summary, that his submissions would concentrate on grounds
    (1) and (2) which asserted that the FtTJ had taken the  wrong  approach
    to the evidence, by going behind the concession made by the  Respondent
    and by taking an evidential point not raised during the hearing.

 9. In support of these assertions he referred to [30] and [31]. The  FtTJ,
    following  an  exposition  of  the  jurisprudence,  clearly  records  a
    concession made by the Respondent that Article 8 is  engaged  in  these
    appeals.  The judge follows this by confirming at [33] that he  accepts
    that there is family life between the  Appellants  and  their  Sponsor.
    Therefore what should have  followed  was  a  fact  sensitive  exercise
    analysing whether there was a compelling case under Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  The judge's approach to this was incorrect.

10. The Appellants' circumstances are that they are living in Pakistan with
    no status there. Their dependency on the Sponsor is  by  force  greater
    than that which exists  in  normal  family  circumstances.   The  judge
    focused on saying that the relationships did  not  meet  the  threshold
    test in Kugathas [2003] by looking mainly at financial dependency.   He
    thereby failed to engage with the Appellants' case  which  is  that  in
    their   particular   circumstances   "dependency"   merits   a    wider
    consideration of Article 8, because  family  life  in  their  situation
    could only be enjoyed in the UK.   This  error  rendered  the  decision
    materially flawed.  The judge had treated reliance on public  funds  as
    determinative, and failed to properly consider relevant matters such as
    background evidence (ground 4) and credibility of the witnesses (ground
    3).  Had the judge not followed the restrictive approach which he  did,
    he would have engaged in a proper proportionality  exercise  which  may
    well have resulted in a different decision.

11. The next point raised by Mr Lea specifically concerned ground (2),  the
    "fairness" point.  This arises in relation to the evidence of a  letter
    from Mr Gul, put forward in support of  the  Appellants'  claims.   The
    FtTJ at [40] made a finding that this letter was a fabrication and thus
    discredited the Sponsor's evidence.  Mr Lea pointed  out  that  nowhere
    during the course of the hearing was this evidence questioned and  this
    point put to the Sponsor.  The suggestion  of  this  evidence  being  a
    fabrication was raised only in the  Respondent's  closing  submissions.
    The Sponsor was given no opportunity to respond to it despite objection
    being raised by the Appellants' representative. There is no  evidential
    basis therefore to show what led the FtTJ to conclude that  the  letter
    is a fabrication.   The  evidence  contained  in  the  letter  forms  a
    material part of the Appellants' case and they  have  been  denied  the
    opportunity of a fair hearing.  The decision is materially  flawed  and
    should be set aside to be re-made.

12. Ms Cunha sought to defend the decision by saying, if I  understood  her
    correctly, firstly that the concession at [31]  was  no  more  than  an
    acknowledgement that the parties are related to the Sponsor as claimed.
    (The applications had been refused originally on the relationships  not
    being accepted.)  Secondly in  any  event  the  judge  had  made  clear
    findings that the connection between the Sponsor and the Appellants was
    such that it did not go beyond the normal emotional ties  envisaged  in
    Kugathas.

13. At the end of submissions I announced my decision that I was  satisfied
    that the decision of the FtT must be set aside for material  error.   I
    now give my reasons for this finding.

Consideration of Error of Law

14. I find force in Mr Lea's submissions as set out  above  (paras  10  and
    11).  The judge's findings are contradictory when [37] is looked at  in
    the light of the finding made at [33].  I find that the  judge  appears
    to accept initially that there is family life  between  the  Appellants
    and their Sponsor indicating Article 8(2)  should  be  considered.   He
    then goes on to adopt the restrictive approach set out in  Kugathas.  I
    find that this has  led  the  judge  to  take  the  wrong  approach  in
    evaluating the evidence before him  including,  for  example,  evidence
    that the Sponsor had become the head of the Appellants' family unit  at
    the time they left Afghanistan.  Criticism  is  made  of  the  lack  of
    visits made by the  Sponsor  to  the  Appellants  but  in  making  that
    criticism it appears that material evidence has been side stepped.  The
    family circumstances are not the norm.  The Sponsor does not come  from
    Pakistan so he has no given right to visit there.  Any assessment under
    Article 8(2) must keep these matters in mind and in my  judgment  on  a
    reading of the decision I find the judge has not properly assessed this
    evidence.

15. This brings me to the second ground raised by Mr Lea.  It  is  hard  to
    see what reasoning the judge has employed in order to reach his finding
    at [40] that he disbelieves the contents of the  letter  from  Mr  Gul.
    The letter from Mr Gul which forms an integral part of the  Appellants'
    claims sets out that he can no longer provide support for them. Mr  Lea
    in his submissions said that in the course of the hearing there was  no
    cross examination of the Sponsor  on  this  point.   Ms  Cunha  in  her
    submissions was unable to assist. According to Mr Lea's submissions the
    credibility or otherwise of Mr Gul's letter  was  only  raised  by  the
    Respondent in closing submissions. Objection to the point was taken  by
    the  Appellants'  representative  stating  that   procedural   fairness
    required the point  to  be  put  to  the  Sponsor  by  reopening  cross
    examination.

16. Nowhere in the FtTJ's decision do I see that  the  above  point  noted.
    What the judge says is as follows;

         "I was also told that ..... Mr Gul ..... is now saying  he  can  no
         longer accommodate or assist them. A letter from him to this effect
         was provided in the appellants 'bundle. [39]

         "Ms Godfrey argued that it was not credible that he would  suddenly
         stop his support in the manner described and she asked me therefore
         to attach limited weight to this claim. I accept her contention  on
         this point as I find the timing of the claim and  the  letter  (the
         source of which cannot be verified) is all  too  convenient  and  I
         find that this has been provided to  bolster  the  claim  that  the
         appellants are under pressure to leave Peshawar on all counts hence
         this created an  additional  feature  of  exceptionality  in  their
         cases, and I simply do not believe this aspect of the claim." [40]

17. Nowhere do I see it noted by the FtTJ, as it  should  have  been,  that
    objection was taken to this point.  Nor do I see any note by  the  FtTJ
    directing that the point be put to the Sponsor thereby giving  him  the
    opportunity to answer it.  I am bound to conclude  therefore  that  the
    FtTJ's findings at [40] are reached improperly and constitute  material
    error.

18. The errors set out above are sufficient therefore for  me  to  conclude
    that the decision is flawed and must be set aside.  I find  nothing  is
    to be preserved from the decision.  It is set aside  in  its  entirety.
    The appropriate course is for it  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing to take place.  It should  be  noted  that
    the finding at [31] recording that  "a  concession"  was  made  by  the
    Respondent is of course also set aside.  Mr Lea indicated that  he  was
    taking no point on this issue.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  for  material  error.
These appeals will be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
rehearing.  Nothing is preserved from the original  decision.   The  hearing
should take place before a Judge other than Judge Meah.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     22 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
