
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13130/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th March 2018                            |On 12th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Bishal Limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Duncan, Counsel, instructed by N. C. Brothers &
                    Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Lloyd  promulgated  on  10th  July  2017  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal on the basis of his human  rights  arising  from  an
    application for entry clearance to  join  his  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the adult dependent child of a Gurkha.  Permission to appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain.  The grounds upon
    which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

    "The grounds allege that the judge erred in finding that the  Appellant
         was emotionally dependent on his parents.  The limited evidence did
         not demonstrate emotional  dependence  to  the  Kugathas  standard.
         Cumulatively,  the  judge   had   failed   to   make   a   balanced
         proportionality assessment.

    I have carefully considered the decision.   It  is  arguable  that  the
         judge has failed to give adequate the  decision.   It  is  arguable
         that the judge has failed to give adequate reasons for finding that
         the Appellant is emotionally dependent on  his  parents  given  the
         limited evidence before him.  The judge states that he accepts  the
         evidence that the Appellant is emotionally dependent on his parents
         at [16] but without giving any details.  At [15] he finds  that  he
         has not formed his own family unit, but this does not equate  to  a
         finding of emotional dependence on his parents.  He notes that  the
         Appellant continued living with his mother until July 2015 but does
         not refer to any more recent evidence.

    It is arguable that the judge has failed to give adequate  reasons  for
         the findings of emotional dependence."

 2. I was  not  provided  with  a  Rule  24  reply  but  was  addressed  in
    submissions by Mr Duncan on the Appellant's behalf.

 3. I shall refer to the parties by their constitution  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for ease of comprehension.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions I indicated that I did not find that  there
    was an error of law in the decision such that it should be  set  aside.
    My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 5. In  respect  of  the  first  Ground  of  Appeal  it  centres  upon  the
    interpretation of family life and seemingly whether it was  engaged  or
    not.  The grounds are confusing and inconsistent in that it  is  stated
    that the Entry Clearance Officer does  not  dispute  that  family  life
    exists but argues that  there  was  no  evidence  showing  evidence  of
    dependency "beyond the normal emotional ties between adults".   It  was
    said that there had to be "something more",  and  reliance  was  placed
    upon the Court of Appeal's decision of AAO v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    [2011] EWCA Civ 840 at paragraph 35.  In making her submissions Ms  Pal
    did not forward this ground with any vigour and when I posed to her the
    question whether the Kugathas standard still applied in  light  of  the
    Court of Appeal authority of R, (on the application of Gurung & Ors)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  8  -  which
    approved in turn, the Upper  Tribunal's  seminal  decision  in  Ghising
    [2012] UKUT 00161 (IAC), that the engagement of family life was a fact-
    sensitive evaluation  and  one  which  did  not  necessarily  fall  for
    consideration under the Kugathas  standard  -  Ms  Pal  was  unable  to
    explain why such a submission was made on the Entry Clearance Officer's
    behalf and accepted  that  Gurung  was  still  correct  and  superseded
    Kugathas and a fact-sensitive-evalutation was required as opposed to  a
    search for something "beyond normal emotional  ties  betweeen  adults".
    Turning to my own view, I first observe  that  in  the  course  of  his
    decision the judge carefully considered  the  submission  made  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's representative in this regard at paragraph 10
    and the reply to those submissions at paragraph 11 from the Appellant's
    representative.  The judge noted at paragraph  12  that  there  was  no
    indication that the Appellant had worked and his absence in  India  was
    for educational purposes. The judge noted  at  paragraph  13  that,  in
    their evidence, the Appellant and Sponsor  had  demonstrated  that  the
    Sponsor did visit Nepal and had visited the house where the Appellant's
    mother and the Appellant lived and it was found to be  highly  unlikely
    that the Respondent's assertion that there was  no  contact  was  true.
    Therefore I find that it was open to the judge to find at paragraph  13
    that there was a continuing relationship and it  was  likely  that  the
    Sponsor would have spent time with the Appellant on  the  occasions  he
    visited Nepal.  The judge also found at paragraph 14 that the Appellant
    had continued to receive financial support from the Sponsor, that there
    was no evidence of any other source of financial support to him, and on
    balance he was financially dependent upon the Sponsor  via  remittances
    on a monthly basis to meet his needs.  I  pause  to  observe  that  the
    evidence of financial support will of course have  a  basis  to  it  as
    there is no other indication on  the  face  of  the  evidence  why  the
    Sponsor would remit money to the Appellant other than for his  personal
    needs, given that he did not work, and was therefore  not  independent.
    The judge also noted at paragraph 15 that the Appellant had not  formed
    his own family unit and that he did not have a partner or  spouse  and,
    perhaps most persuasive of all, that the Appellant remained living with
    his mother (the Sponsor's wife) until only three months before his  own
    application was made for entry clearance.  Therefore,  given  that  the
    judge heard oral evidence from the Sponsor and  given  that  there  was
    evidence before him, not least in the form of witness statements,  from
    both the Sponsor and Appellant, I am not persuaded that it was not open
    to the judge to find as he did that the Appellant was  financially  and
    emotionally dependent upon the Sponsor and I do not find that there  is
    a material error  revealed  by  Ground  1,  alongside  my  observations
    regarding  the  binding  authority  of  Gurung,  approving  the   Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Ghising in relation  to  the  engagement  and/or
    enjoyment of family life.

 6. Turning to Ground 2, Ms Pal put this ground as submitting that  it  was
    not open to the judge to make  findings  upon  the  historic  injustice
    rendered to Gurkhas and  that  this  was  not  a  point  taken  by  the
    Appellant's representative and it was in essence a frolic.  I indicated
    that I was unimpressed with that submission, not  least  because  there
    was no witness statement from the Presenting Officer or any opportunity
    for the judge to reply to such a submission (notwithstanding  the  fact
    that the term frolic had only been pronounced today for the first  time
    in clarifying the ambit of the ground).  In  the  parties'  presence  I
    paused to examine the Record of Proceedings on file from the First-tier
    Judge and I confirmed to the parties that on page 4 of that  Record  of
    Proceedings  the  First-tier  Judge   had   bullet-pointed   that   the
    Appellant's representative sought to rely upon  historic  injustice  in
    respect of Article 8(2) and also that the  authority  of  Rai  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320, which  the  Appellant
    sought to rely upon, was handed  up  and  paragraphs  38  and  42  were
    specifically relied upon whilst the Presenting  Officer  also  had  the
    opportunity to know of and address the authority as he  had  sought  to
    rely on paragraph 58 of Rai.  Therefore, on that basis, the  point  was
    clearly taken by the Appellant's representative before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the proportionality assessment was properly considered  in
    the context of the authority of Rai.  In any event,  I  note  that  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Rai is, of course,  a  binding  authority
    which the First-tier Tribunal  would  have  had  to  apply,  given  its
    binding  nature.  Finally,  for  my  part,  I  would  hope   that   the
    Respondent's impromptu criticism  of  a  First-tier  Judge  for  merely
    applying a binding decision of the Court of Appeal is a challenge  that
    would not be repeated, at least not without  a  sound  evidentiary  and
    legal basis basis for doing so.

 7. As such I do not  find  that  the  decision  should  be  set  aside  in
    accordance with the requisite standard identified in R, (Iran) & Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

Notice of Decision

 8. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 12 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini



