
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13339/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2018                  |On 20 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Dulal Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision sent on 15 August  2018,  Judge  Plumptre  dismissed  the
    appeal of the appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh,  against  a  decision
    made by the respondent dated 20 October 2017 to refuse his  application
    for ILR.  The judge considered that the appellant  was  caught  by  the
    provisions of paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules because he  had
    fraudulently used a proxy to sit a TOEIC English Language Test  on  his
    behalf on 29 August 2012 at Colwell College.

2.   I heard detailed submissions from Mr Biggs  at  the  end  of  which  Mr
    Tarlow said he was persuaded by them not to seek to defend the  judge's
    decision.  I too am persuaded by at least three  of  these  submissions
    that the judge materially erred in law in more  than  one  respect:  in
    considering at paragraphs 13 and 59 that the legal  burden  of  proving
    the appellant had an "innocent explanation" rested on him;  in  judging
    that the appellant had not provided  an  innocent  explanation  on  the
    basis of an unreliable and  factually  mistaken  consideration  of  the
    evidence relating to  his  academic  certificates  and  references  and
    letters of support (which had been provided to the respondent and which
    the respondent had not challenged);  and  in  failing  to  conduct  the
    hearing in a procedurally fair way that identified to the appellant the
    judge's own issues about this documentation (or perceived lack  of  it)
    and afforded him proper opportunity to address them.

3.   For the above reasons I set aside the  judge's  decision  for  material
    error of law.  Both parties were of the view that if I  set  aside  the
    judges' decision the case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    because the decision on the issue of whether  the  appellant  had  used
    deception would require a de novo hearing at which the appellant  could
    give oral testimony and be cross-examined.

4.   To conclude: the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  set
    aside for material error of law and the case is remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 January 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




