
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13257/2019
                                                               HU/13259/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Teams)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2021                       |On 15 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                             CHANDRA BAHADUR RAI
                                  NABIN RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms D  Revill,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Everest  Law
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Microsoft Teams. A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. These are appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Minhas ("the judge") promulgated on  15  October  2020  in
         which she dismissed the human rights appeals of Chandra Bahadur Rai
         ("the 1st appellant") and Nabin Rai ("the 2nd  appellant")  against
         decisions of the respondent dated 5 July 2019 refusing their  human
         rights claims (in the form of applications for entry clearances  to
         join their father in the UK).

      2. Both appellants are male nationals of Nepal. The 1st appellant  was
         born on 24 January 1976 and the 2nd appellant was  born  on  4  May
         1982. On 3 April 2019 they applied  for  entry  clearance  to  join
         their father, Parsuram Rai ("the sponsor"), a former Gurkha soldier
         who was discharged from the army prior  to  1  July  1997  (he  was
         discharged on 18 February 1971 after 8 years service). The  sponsor
         and his spouse (who is the mother of the 2nd appellant and the step-
         mother of the 1st appellant) were granted Indefinite Leave to Enter
         (ILE) the UK in September 2016 and entered the UK in  October  2016
         pursuant to the grant of ILE.  The  appellants'  applications  were
         made outside of the immigration rules and outside the terms of  the
         respondent's policy on Gurkhas, the latest  version  of  which  was
         published on 22 October 2018.

      3. Although the respondent accepted in the appealed decisions that the
         appellants  may  have  received  financial  assistance  from  their
         sponsor and that they were in contact with him, the respondent  was
         not  satisfied  that  either  of  the  appellants  were   genuinely
         dependent either financially or emotionally on their  sponsor.  The
         respondent was not satisfied that family life existed  between  the
         appellants and their sponsor for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR.

      4. The appellants appealed the respondent's decisions  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. In addition to the respondent's bundle of documents the  judge  had
         before her a bundle of documents prepared by the appellants'  legal
         representatives that included brief statements from the appellants,
         statements from the sponsor and his spouse, money transfer receipts
         showing funds remitted by the sponsor to  the  appellants,  several
         Nepal Telecom call history documents relating to the 1st appellant,
         screenshots of Viber calls relating to the sponsor, and photographs
         of several calling cards. The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the
         sponsor and his spouse.

      6. Having summarised the evidence before her and  having  set  out  in
         some detail the submissions from both  legal  representatives,  the
         judge accurately directed herself as to the appropriate burden  and
         standard of proof and identified the relevant legal authorities and
         decisions relating to Article 8 family life  relationships  between
         adult children and their parents, with particular reference to  the
         cases involving Gurkhas. These included Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA
         Civ 31 ("Kugathas"), Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA  Civ
         320 ("Rai"), Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  [2012]
         UKUT 00160 (IAC) ("Ghising"), Rai v Entry  Clearance  Officer,  New
         Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320 ("Rai") and Pun v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
         2106 ("Pun").

      7. In the section of her decision headed "Findings  and  Reasons"  the
         judge set out her reasons for finding that there was no family life
         for Article 8 purposes between the  appellants  and  their  sponsor
         either at the time the sponsor and his spouse left Nepal in 2016 or
         at the date of the hearing.

      8. At [18] the judge noted that the 1st appellant was 43 years old and
         that the 2nd appellant was 36  years  old  at  the  time  of  their
         applications. The judge noted the evidence from  the  sponsor  that
         the property in which the family had resided when the sponsor  left
         Nepal, and in which the appellants  continued  to  occupy  together
         with their two other siblings, was owned by a landlord who provided
         the accommodation  in  exchange  for  food  and  farming  work  and
         occasionally money. The judge found that  the  appellants  did  not
         rely on their sponsor for their accommodation.

      9. At [19] the judge referred to the evidence from the appellants  and
         their sponsor and his spouse to  the  effect  that  the  appellants
         undertake farming work and other casual labouring work.  The  judge
         acknowledged remittances of funds by the sponsor to  the  appellant
         in March, April, May, July and December 2019 and in  January,  July
         and September 2020. The judge noted the  sponsor's  claim  that  he
         started sending money to the  appellants  in  2017  but  that  this
         assertion was not corroborated by  any  documentary  evidence.  The
         judge stated:

             "I find the appellants  can  obtain  employment  and  are  not
             reliant on the sponsor for their daily needs as  the  evidence
             is, they work in exchange for food, accommodation and money. I
             find the sponsor is assisting the appellants financially.  The
             evidence does not lead me to conclude that assistance has been
             ongoing since 2016/2017. There is no evidence before me as  to
             the living costs of the appellant or to what extent the  money
             sent by  the  sponsor  is  relied  upon.  The  sums  are  sent
             sporadically and in my view is [sic] they are used as 'top up'
             to the monies or payment in kind  the  appellants  receive  in
             Nepal rather than real, effective or  committed  support  from
             the sponsor. I find  if  the  monies  were  not  sent  by  the
             sponsor, the appellants  would  continue  to  work  for  their
             accommodation and food."

     10. At [20] the judge noted the  absence  of  documentary  evidence  in
         support of the sponsor's claim that  a  loan  of  1  lakh  "from  a
         relative in Nepal"  was  obtained  in  order  to  provide  for  the
         appellants until the sponsor was able to send money  from  the  UK,
         and that the sponsor and his spouse had given  evidence  that  they
         had no other family in Nepal other than their  children,  and  that
         neither appellant referred to  financial  support  from  any  other
         family members in  their  statements.  The  judge  found  that  the
         sponsor did not make any arrangements  to  financially  assist  the
         appellants upon his departure from Nepal. The judge concluded  that
         this undermined the claim to family life  "...  as  the  appellants
         were not in receipt of real, committed or  effective  support  from
         the sponsor upon his departure from Nepal."


     11. At [21] the judge noted that the evidence of  contact  between  the
         sponsor and the appellants was limited to 2019/20.  The  judge  was
         not assisted by the copies of  telephone  cards  as  they  did  not
         indicate who was called, and there was no evidence before the judge
         of a telephone number that belonged to either appellant.  the  list
         of telephone records did not disclose who the calls were  made  to.
         The judge stated that, if he accepted the calls were  made  to  the
         appellants, the evidence was restricted to 2019/20, a period  after
         the applications  were  made,  and  undermined  the  claim  of  the
         existence of an Article  8  family  life  relationship.  The  judge
         indicated that she had no doubt that, as the family claimed to have
         lived together before the sponsor and his spouse arrived in the UK,
         they did share emotional ties, but the  telephone  calls  evidenced
         the usual emotional ties between adult children and their parents.

     12. At [23] the judge stated:

             "there is little in the way of corroborating evidence in  this
             appeal. The independent evidence confirms money  transfers  in
             2019/20 and regular contact with unknown persons in  Nepal  in
             2019/20. I have found the appellants are not  reliant  on  the
             sponsor, either at  the  point  of  departure  from  Nepal  or
             presently, for accommodation, food or money. In the absence of
             any evidence as to the income and outgoings of the  appellants
             and the sporadic nature of the payments,  I  find  the  monies
             provided by the sponsor are 'top  up'  to  their  earnings  in
             Nepal not real, committed or effective support."

     13. At [24] the judge found that the appellants and the sponsor did not
         enjoy family life in October 2016. The judge acknowledged that  the
         appellants were unmarried and remained in the  'family  home',  but
         this did not lead her  to  conclude  that  there  was  family  life
         between the appellants and the sponsor in October 2016.


     14. At [25] the judge stated:

             "I then consider whether there  is  any  family  life  in  the
             present. The appellants are aged 43 and 36 years at  the  date
             of application. They continue  to  be  reliant  on  their  own
             endeavours for accommodation and food. There is no  suggestion
             they are in ill-health or otherwise unable to work and support
             themselves. I  have  found  the  sponsor  provides  them  with
             sporadic  'top  up  'monies  and  there  is  no  evidence  the
             appellants are reliant on this 'top up',  I  find  the  monies
             provided by the sponsor do not amount to  real,  committed  or
             effective support nor are  the  appellants  reliant  upon  the
             sponsor. I find  the  appellants  are  living  separately  and
             independently of their parents. There is evidence  of  regular
             contact with Nepal. However, in the context of the sponsor and
             his wife arriving in the United  Kingdom  in  their  advancing
             years, with little English and a  limited  social  network,  I
             find this contact amounts to  no  more  than  the  usual  ties
             between adult children and their parents.  I  acknowledge  the
             sponsor and his wife likely miss their children as stated, but
             in my view, this is the usual  emotional  ties  between  adult
             children and their parents rather than family life. I find, if
             there is reliance, it is the sponsor  and  his  wife  who  are
             reliant on their connection  with  the  appellants  and  Nepal
             rather than the appellants in any way being reliant on sponsor
             and his wife."

     15. The judge concluded that there was no family life, as understood by
         Article 8(1), between  the  appellants  and  the  sponsor  and  his
         spouse. In these circumstances the judge did not consider there was
         any need to assess the issue of proportionality, which was relevant
         to the Article 8(2) proportionality assessment.  The  appeals  were
         dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     16. The appellants challenge the decision on four grounds, all of which
         were amplified by Ms Revill in her written  and  oral  submissions.
         The first ground challenges the judge's finding that there  was  no
         family life between the appellants and the sponsor at the time  the
         sponsor and his spouse left Nepal  in  October  2016.  The  judge's
         finding that the accommodation was provided by the landlord and not
         the sponsor,  and  his  finding  that  there  was  no  "provision",
         financial or otherwise, made by  the  sponsor  in  respect  of  the
         appellants, were not requirements for the existence  of  Article  8
         family life. All that was  required  was  support  that  was  real,
         effective, or committed. Although such support may be in  the  form
         of money or accommodation, it could  equally  be  emotional  and/or
         practical support. Given that the judge did not  dispute  that  the
         appellants and their sponsor were all living together as  a  family
         unit until the sponsor and his spouse left Nepal, and in  light  of
         the relevant authorities, including Uddin v SSHD  [2020]  EWCA  Civ
         338 ("Uddin") the judge's finding was unsustainable and she  failed
         to give adequate reasons for concluding that family  life  did  not
         exist  at  the  point  when  the  sponsor  left  for  the  UK.  The
         respondent's concession (set out in her written  submissions  dated
         16 December 2020) that, whilst the first ground was  made  out,  it
         was not  material,  should  be  rejected  on  the  basis  that  the
         existence of family life at the point of departure from  Nepal  was
         the starting point for the assessment as  to  whether  family  life
         existed at the date of the hearing. The judge therefore  approached
         the assessment from the wrong starting point  and  this  undermined
         the reliability of her findings.


     17. The second ground contends that the judge, despite  making  various
         references to "real, effective or committed support",  in  practice
         equated this with a need for the appellants to show that they  were
         'reliant' on the sponsor as a matter of necessity,  that  is,  that
         they  could  not  survive  without  his  assistance.  This  was   a
         misdirection as there was no legal requirement for  the  appellants
         to have to rely on the sponsor out of necessity. A requirement  for
         reliance of necessity erroneously  elevated  the  threshold  family
         life under Article 8(1). There was no need for  the  appellants  to
         show that they were incapable of working themselves, or  that  they
         would be unable to survive without the money sent by  the  sponsor.
         Reference was made to paragraph 14 of Patel, which  was  reiterated
         at paragraph 17 of Rai. The judge was wrong to hold the absence  of
         reliance against the appellants when determining the  existence  of
         Article 8 family life.

     18. The 3rd ground contends that the judge erred in law by disregarding
         the possibility that the appellants' parents may  be  'reliant'  on
         them. At [25] the judge found that if there was  reliance,  on  was
         the sponsor and his spouse who were reliant on  the  appellant  and
         not the other way round. The judge's  failure  to  appreciate  that
         support can flow in both  directions  (i.e.  the  appellants  being
         dependent (in the Kugathas sense) on their parents or  the  parents
         being dependent on the appellants)  constituted  a  material  legal
         error. The judge's use of the term "if there us reliance"  in  [25]
         was part of the reasoning  in  respect  of  the  reference  in  the
         previous sentence to "usual emotional ties."

     19. The 4th ground challenges the  judge's  failure  to  undertake  the
         Article 8(2) proportionality assessment in light of her other legal
         errors in the assessment of the  existence  of  family  life  under
         Article 8(1). It was accepted by both parties that the  failure  of
         the judge to undertake  a  proportionality  assessment  would  only
         become  relevant  if  one  or  more  of  the  other   grounds   was
         established, and those grounds were material.

     20. In her written submissions the respondent accepted that  the  judge
         erred in law in her assessment of the existence of family  life  at
         the point of the sponsor's departure from Nepal, but submitted that
         this error was not  material.  At  the  error  of  law  hearing  Mr
         Whitwell did not seek to go behind this concession. The  respondent
         maintained that the judge considered all the evidence  before  her,
         that she made factual findings that were rationally  open  to  her,
         that she applied the correct legal test in respect of her  findings
         and that she was entitled to conclude that there was no  Article  8
         family life between the sponsor and his spouse and  the  appellants
         at the time of the judge's decision.

Discussion

     21. At [14] of Kugathas, Sedley LJ cited with approval  the  report  of
         the Commission in S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196 at [198]:


           "Generally, the  protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
           involves  cohabiting  dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
           dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it   extends   to   other
           relationships depends on the  circumstances  of  the  particular
           case. Relationships between adults  ...  would  not  necessarily
           acquire the protection of Article 8 of  the  Convention  without
           evidence of further elements of dependency, involving more  than
           the normal emotional ties."

     22. Sedley LJ considered the issue of dependency at [17]:


           "But if dependency is read down as  meaning  "support",  in  the
           personal  sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the   Strasbourg
           jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective" to the  word
           "support", then it represents in my view the irreducible minimum
           of what family life implies."

     23.  When  considering  the  material   factors   that   comprise   the
         "irreducible minimum" of what  constitutes  family  life  Arden  LJ
         stated, at [24]:


           "There is no presumption that a person has a family  life,  even
           with the members of a person's immediate family. The  court  has
           to  scrutinise  the  relevant  factors.  Such  factors   include
           identifying who are the near relatives  of  the  appellant,  the
           nature of the links between them and the appellant, the  age  of
           the appellant, where and with whom he has resided in  the  past,
           and the forms of  contact  he  has  maintained  with  the  other
           members of the family with whom  he  claims  to  have  a  family
           life."

     24. And at [25] Arden LJ stated:


           "Because there is no presumption of family life, in my  judgment
           a family life is not established between an adult child and  his
           surviving parent or other siblings unless something more  exists
           than normal emotional ties ... Such  ties  might  exist  if  the
           appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa."

     25. In Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338,  having  considered  Kugathas,
         the Senior President of Tribunals stated, at [31]:


           "Dependency, in the Kugathas sense, is accordingly not a term of
           art. It is a question of fact, a matter of substance  not  form.
           The irreducible minimum of what family life implies remains that
           which Sedley LJ described as being whether support  is  real  or
           effective or committed."

     26. Careful consideration must therefore be  given  to  the  particular
         circumstances of each case, and the situations in which an  Article
         8 family life relationship  exists  may  be  highly  fact-sensitive
         (Uddin, at [32]).


     27. It is apparent from the judge's decision, particularly the  section
         where she sets  out  the  appropriate  legal  test  and  supporting
         authorities, that the judge was aware that, in order  to  establish
         family life as understood in Article 8(1) ECHR, there had to be, as
         an irreducible minimum, support  that  was  real  or  effective  or
         committed.

     28. In her written submissions dated 16 December  2020  the  respondent
         conceded that  the  judge  erred  at  [24]  of  her  decision  when
         concluding that family life did not  exist  at  the  point  of  the
         sponsor's departure from Nepal given that they all resided together
         as a single family unit, notwithstanding the appellants' ages. This
         concession was maintained by Mr Whitwell  at  the  'error  of  law'
         hearing. The  respondent  however  maintains  this  error  was  not
         material as the judge nevertheless considered whether  family  life
         existed at the date of the hearing and found that it did  not.  The
         appellants accept that it was  necessary  for  them  to  show  that
         Article 8 family life continued at the date of the judge's decision
         (Rai, at [42]) but maintain that the  judge's  error  affected  her
         assessment of the existence of family  life  at  the  time  of  the
         hearing as she did not begin at the correct starting place.

     29. I am not persuaded that any error of law in the judge's  assessment
         of the existence of family  life  at  the  date  of  the  sponsor's
         departure from Nepal materially affected her subsequent  assessment
         of the existence of family life at the time of the hearing and  her
         decision. The judge was required to considered whether family  life
         existed at the time of the hearing.  Over 2 � years passed  between
         the time the sponsor and his spouse left Nepal and the  appellants'
         applications for entry clearance, and nearly  4  years  had  passed
         until the date of the hearing. The  judge  rejected  the  sponsor's
         evidence that he took a loan from a relative in Nepal in  order  to
         financially support the appellants until he could send  them  money
         directly from the UK. This finding of fact was not challenged.  The
         judge noted the absence of any evidence of money  remitted  by  the
         sponsor to the  appellants  prior  to  2019,  and  the  absence  of
         documentary evidence of communication between  the  appellants  and
         the sponsor prior to 2019. Even if the judge should have  taken  as
         her 'starting point' the fact that there was  family  life  at  the
         point of the sponsor's departure, this does not  materially  colour
         her assessment of the existence of family life at the time  of  the
         hearing or establish any legal presumption that family  life  would
         have continued. The judge was required  to  consider  all  material
         facts at the date of the hearing, an undertaking that she  complied
         with (see, e.g. [25]). A great  deal  can  change  in  terms  of  a
         relationship over a period of almost 4 years (from the departure of
         the sponsor and his spouse  from  Nepal  in  October  2016  to  the
         hearing of the appeals in September 2020) and the assessment of the
         existence of family life at the date of the hearing is  essentially
         a separate exercise from the assessment of such family life at  the
         point of departure. In these circumstances I am not persuaded  that
         any failure by the judge in respect of her starting  point  to  the
         assessment of the existence of family  life  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing materially undermined or rendered unsafe that assessment.

     30. In respect of the 2nd ground of appeal, the appellants rely  on  an
         observation by Sedley LJ at [14] of Patel that "what may constitute
         an  extant  family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
         dependency, and a good many adult children ...  may  still  have  a
         family life with parents who are now settled here not by  leave  or
         by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right". For  his  part
         Mr  Whitwell  accepted  that  dependency  of  necessity  is  not  a
         requirement for the establishment of a family life relationship.  I
         agree.  There  is  nothing  in  the  authorities  considered  above
         equating dependency of necessity (in the sense that the support  is
         required in order for the person  being  supported  to  meet  their
         essential  needs)  with  support  that  is  real  or  effective  or
         committed, which is  required  to  establish,  as  a  minimum,  the
         existence of Article 8 family life. I am not however persuaded that
         the judge fell into the error of conflating the two concepts.

     31. The judge demonstrably had in  mind  the  correct  legal  test  for
         establishing a family relationship as understood  in  Article  8(1)
         ECHR. The judge does find that the appellants are  not  reliant  on
         the sponsor for their accommodation or their daily needs  (e.g.  at
         [18] and [19]) but these are factual findings made in  the  context
         of the judge's assessment of all the evidence before her. The  fact
         that such findings are made  does  not  mean  that  the  judge  has
         misapplied the  Kugathas  test.  At  [19]  the  judge  specifically
         considered the financial assistance provided  by  the  sponsor  but
         noted that there was no evidence  that  that  assistance  had  been
         ongoing since 2016/2017 and that, in the absence of any evidence as
         to the appellants' living costs and given the  sporadic  nature  of
         the funds that were remitted, the monies were used as  a  'top  up'
         rather than being real, effective or committed support.  The  judge
         specifically considered the  money  remitted  by  the  sponsor  and
         concluded that, in the absence of any evidence as to the income and
         outgoings of the appellants, the funds provided by the sponsor  did
         not amount to real, effective or committed support (at [23]).  This
         was a conclusion rationally open to the judge on the basis  of  the
         evidence before her. At [25] the judge again found that the  monies
         provided by the sponsor  did  not  amount  to  real,  committed  or
         effective support, "... nor  are  the  appellants  reliant  on  the
         sponsor" (my emphasis). The judge has distinguished  reliance  from
         the provision of support that is real, committed or effective. This
         undermines the contention that the judge equated the Kugathas  test
         with a requirement that dependency of necessity be established. The
         judge also considered the evidence of the regular  contact  between
         the appellants and the sponsor and his spouse but that,  given  the
         ages of the appellants and the fact that the appellants were living
         separately and independently  of  their  parents  (at  [25]),  this
         contact only disclosed the existence of "the usual  emotional  ties
         between adult children and their parents" (at [21]  and[25]).  This
         again was a conclusion rationally open to the judge  based  on  the
         evidence before her  and  for  the  reasons  she  gave.  I  am  not
         persuaded this ground is made out.


     32. In respect of the 3rd ground of appeal, I  accept  that  the  judge
         appeared to fail to appreciate that reliance, for the  purposes  of
         Article 8, can go both ways  and  that,  to  the  extent  that  she
         considered that an Article 8 relationship could only be established
         if it was shown that the appellants were reliant on the sponsor and
         not the other way  round,  she  erred  in  law.  But  this  was  an
         alternative finding,  the  judge  having  already  found  that  the
         relationships between the appellants and the sponsor and his spouse
         did not disclose anything more  than  the  "usual  emotional  ties"
         between adult children and their parents. This much is  clear  from
         the final sentence of [25]. The judge states, "I find, if there  is
         reliance..." (my emphasis). It is satisfactorily clear from the use
         of the conditional clause and the content of the previous  sentence
         that  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the  contact  between   the
         appellants and the sponsor and his spouse simply did not amount  to
         anything more than the  normal  emotional  ties  one  would  expect
         between  adult  children  and  their  parents.  I  am  consequently
         satisfied that any error was not material.

     33. Given that I have found no material legal error in respect  of  the
         judge's assessment of the existence of family life, her failure  to
         then undertake a proportionality assessment can  have  no  material
         bearing on her final decision.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The appeal is dismissed.




D.Blum                              7 July 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



