
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
HU/13721/2016

                                                 HU/22020/2016

                                                 HU/13730/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th February 2019                   |  On 8th March 2019                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

              mollik mohammad marufur rahman (FIRST appellant)
                       AFRAT JAHAN (SECOND appellant)
                            A I (THIRD appellant)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms F Shaw of Counsel, instructed by Haque & Hausman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first and second appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  third
    appellant is their son, born on 8th May 2011.   All  are  nationals  of
    Bangladesh.  An application was made in February 2016 by the first  and
    second appellants for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  private  and
    family life.  The application by the first appellant was refused  in  a
    decision of 10th May 2016 on the basis that he was out of time  in  the
    lodging of an appeal and therefore was without leave.  The  application
    by the second appellant was refused on 5th September  2016  essentially
    on the basis that her spouse had no leave  to  remain  and  no  settled
    status.

2.   An appeal was made against the decisions  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    essentially relying upon Article 8 of the ECHR.  The appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly at a hearing  on  10th  August  2017
    and, in a determination promulgated on 31st August  2017,  the  appeals
    were dismissed.

3.   Challenge was made to that decision and permission to challenge it  was
    granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  24th  September   2018,
    particularly on the basis that the Judge had erred in the consideration
    as to whether the second appellant met the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B and was thereby entitled to indefinite leave to remain based  upon
    ten years' lawful residence.

4.   Thus the matter came for appeal before the Upper Tribunal at a  hearing
    scheduled for 8th November 2018.

5.   It was argued at that hearing before me that, in relation to the  first
    appellant he should be considered to have met  the  ten  year  Rule  as
    reflected in paragraph 276B to D of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Insofar
    that he failed to meet strictly the continuous period of ten years, the
    break in that lawful leave was extremely small and indeed rose  through
    the dishonesty and/or negligence of his then representatives.  Reliance
    was placed upon the recent decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Mansur
    (Immigration adviser's failings:  Article  8)  Bangladesh  [2018]  UKUT
    00274 (IAC), which held that if the matter were  regarded  as  a  "near
    miss" under the immigration  rules,  such  remained  relevant   to  the
    question of proportionality under Article 8 of the ECHR.   In  relation
    to the second appellant it was contended that she in fact did meet  the
    ten year lawful  residence  and  therefore  that  it  would  be  wholly
    disproportionate to remove her.  In terms of the third appellant he  is
    now a qualified child and issue of whether his  removal  is  reasonable
    falls for consideration.

6.   Ms Shaw most helpfully set out her submissions in a  skeleton  argument
    filed.  Mr Duffy, who represented  the  respondent  on  that  occasion,
    sought time to respond to the submissions which were set  out  in  some
    detail in the skeleton argument.  Thus the  matter  was  adjourned  for
    that to be done.

7.   The resumed hearing was on 20th February 2019.  Mr  Jarvis  represented
    the respondent.  Although no written response  has  been  made  to  the
    submissions of Ms Shaw, Mr Jarvis most helpfully set out what  was  the
    position so far as the respondent was concerned.  In effect, he invited
    me to allow the appeal in respect of all appellants  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Given that invitation it is perhaps unnecessary
    to dwell over much upon the detail.

8.   In summary, the first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  10th
    October 2006 and had valid leave until 7th January  2016.   Thereafter,
    he was deemed to have been in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

9.   The situation was that an application made in  time  to  be  a  Tier  4
    dependant was refused on 18th December  2015.   The  decision  was  the
    subject of  a  right  of  administrative  review  and  solicitors  were
    instructed to make that request.  Unfortunately through the  negligence
    of the solicitors that application when made was four days out of  time
    and fell therefore to be  rejected  as  invalid.   When  the  appellant
    applied for indefinite leave based on ten years'  continuous  leave  on
    15th February  2016  he  was  met  with  the  contention  that  he  had
    overstayed in excess of the permitted 28 days.  Thus  his  appeal  fell
    for refusal.  The negligence of the solicitors and the attempts by  the
    appellant to pursue the matter against them is well documented  in  the
    papers and no issue of  credibility  arises.   Thus  it  is  said,  and
    seemingly accepted  by  Mr  Jarvis,  that  but  for  the  out  of  time
    application caused by the negligence of the solicitors,  the  appellant
    would have had continuing leave such as to satisfy the ten  year  Rule.
    No adverse criticism is made of  the  first  appellant  and  it  is  in
    reality either a near miss or a circumstance in which the Secretary  of
    State would be able to overlook the short time break of  leave  in  the
    grant of indefinite leave to remain.

10.  In terms of the second appellant she arrived in the United  Kingdom  on
    6th October 2005.  It had been accepted that by  the  time  her  lawful
    leave expired on 7th January 2016 she had acquired  ten  years'  lawful
    residence.  Mr Jarvis concedes that on  the  material  before  him  the
    second appellant would seem to meet Rule 276B. There  were  no  adverse
    matters noted against her such as to cause that particular Rule to have
    no applicability to her.

11.  Although the child had no separate appeal rights it was  accepted  that
    he was a qualified child and that the general best interests lay in his
    remaining in the United Kingdom.

12.  Mr Jarvis concedes most helpfully that the second appellant  does  meet
    the  requisite  Immigration  Rules,  as  does  the   first   appellant.
    Alternatively, a near  miss  in  respect  of  the  First  appellant  is
    considered relevant to proportionality.

13.  Without going into great detail he  simply  invites  me  to  allow  the
    appeal in respect of all three appellants.  Ms Shaw has little  to  say
    in relation to that matter other than inviting me to highlight that the
    delay in the application by the first appellant was not his fault.  The
    respondent was invited to take that into account in deciding whether to
    grant indefinite leave as opposed to a period of leave.

14.  Regard was had to  Section  117B  and  to  Article  8  public  interest
    considerations applicable in all case. There is no suggestion that  the
    appellants will be a burden upon taxpayers.  It was accepted that  they
    have integrated into society and have demonstrated sufficient knowledge
    of  the  English  language  and  have  passed  the  requisite  language
    requirements.

15.  In all the circumstances the appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

In respect of each of the appellants the appeal is allowed on the  basis  of
human rights Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.
.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date 6 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
