
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13852/2016
                                                               HU/13857/2016
                                                               HU/13867/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2019                            |On 7 November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CM1
                                     CM2
                                     CM3
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Coleman


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and the  respondents
    as the 'appellants', as they appeared respectively  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of India born respectively  in  1976,  1970
    and 2012. They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against decisions of
    the respondent dated 20 May 2016 to refuse applications  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgation on 26 April 2019, allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. The parties agree that the appeal turns on  the  circumstances  of  the
    third appellant, the daughter of the first and second  appellants.  The
    third  appellant  is  autistic  and   suffers   also   from   breathing
    difficulties, global development delay and  sensory  difficulties.  But
    the past two years, she has been a student at  a  special  school.  The
    judge found [29], that  the  appeal  should  succeed  'because  of  the
    specific needs of the third  appellant  and  the  difficulty,  even  if
    available, of accessing  the  appropriate  services  for  her  care  in
    India.' The third appellant was born in the  United  Kingdom  and  will
    have completed seven years' continuous residence here in December 2019.
    At that point, she will become a 'qualifying child' for the purposes of
    section 117 of the 2002 Act. The judge took that fact into  account  in
    reaching his decision.

 4. The problem with the judge's reasoning is, in  part,  its  brevity  but
    more fundamentally the fact that he has made  findings  and  reached  a
    conclusion on very limited evidence indeed. Although he noted that  the
    burden of proof rested  on  the  appellants,  there  was  virtually  no
    evidence which was  up-to-date  and  concerned  the  third  appellant's
    medical condition or which dealt  with  the  availability  of  relevant
    services to help and treat the third appellant in India. At  [28],  the
    judge recorded that first appellant stated in  her  evidence  that  the
    links set out in the respondent's COI request were not available whilst
    the first appellant had also been unable to complete her own  enquiries
    into the availability of services in India. Notwithstanding the paucity
    of evidence, the judge considered that he  was  able  to  make  a  firm
    finding  [27]  that  the  third  appellant  has  'special  medical  and
    educational needs.' I fully appreciate that the judge had  to  reach  a
    decision on the basis of the evidence before him but I consider that he
    has paid too little intention to the requirement on the  appellants  to
    discharge the burden of proving their  case.  I  acknowledge  that  the
    judge found the first appellant's evidence to be  truthful  as  he  was
    entitled to do but the fact remains that the first appellant  had,  for
    whatever reason, produced little, if  any,  relevant  evidence;  simply
    asserting that the respondent's evidence was inadequate did  little  to
    help the appellants to prove their case.

 5. In addition, the judge has not sought to apply the  relevant  statutory
    provisions.  Instead,  no  doubt  motivated  by  sympathy   for   these
    appellants, he  has  based  his  conclusion  upon  a  very  generalised
    reference to 'all the evidence.' Clearly, given the absence of evidence
    to support the appellant's case, it would have been open to  the  judge
    to have dismissed the appeals; in order to allow the appeals, the judge
    should have explained properly and  in  detail  why  he  considered  it
    appropriate to do so.

 6. I set aside the decision. There needs to be further  significant  fact-
    finding. Mr Coleman, who appeared for the appellants, submitted that up-
    to-date medical and education  evidence  relating  to  third  appellant
    needs to be obtained. I agree. It is also inevitable that, by the  time
    the appeal returns for a hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the  third
    appellant will have become a 'qualifying child.' Mr Avery, who appeared
    for the Secretary of  State,  helpfully  submitted  that  it  would  be
    appropriate for the appellants, having obtained up-to-date evidence, to
    submit this directly to  the  Secretary  of  State  and  to  request  a
    reconsideration of the applications for leave to remain. That seems  to
    be an eminently sensible course of action. In any  event,  this  appeal
    will be returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake
    the decision at or following a hearing. Both parties may  adduce  fresh
    evidence provided copies of any documentary evidence  is  sent  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and to the other party no later than 10 days before
    the next hearing.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Sweet) for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at
    or following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 5 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




