
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13091/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2020                  |On 16 March 2020                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah, W.H. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  13  June  2018
      to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of  deportation
      proceedings. First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman determined the appeal  in
      a decision promulgated on 24 April 2019. On 25 June 2019  a  panel  of
      the Upper Tribunal (Lord Boyd and Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan)  found
      that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an  error
      of law and set aside the decision  relating  to  human  rights  issues
      (Annex 1).

2.    The appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal for remaking. The scope  of
      the appeal is a preliminary issue, which is determined below. The long
      procedural history of  the  case  is  integral  to  understanding  the
      conclusions of the Upper Tribunal. As such, it is necessary to set out
      the background in detail. The evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      incomplete and  some  aspects  of  the  chronology  are  unclear.  The
      chronology of events discloses shortcomings and errors  made  by  both
      parties over the course of many years.

BACKGROUND

Criminal offence

3.    On 05 February 2002 the appellant was convicted of attempted  rape  of
      a female under the age of 16 years. He  was  later  sentenced  to  six
      years' imprisonment with a four-year  extended  licence. The  judge's
      sentencing remarks outlined the serious nature of the offence:

           "[RM] late at night on 27th August you selected a victim  wholly
           unknown to you, you pursued her and you dragged her into a  park
           from the public place in which she had been walking home.  There
           you subjected her to a  terrifying  and  humiliating  ordeal  in
           which  you  used  violence   to   inflict   extensive   although
           superficial injuries in an endeavour to force her to  submit  to
           your attack.
           The fact that you only succeeded  in  an  attempt  to  rape  was
           largely brought about by her far sightedness in using her mobile
           phone to dial 999, although she had to  do  so  without  talking
           into the telephone.
           I am quite satisfied that you had selected her for the  purposes
           of such an attack and I wholly reject the protestations that you
           make in your interviews with  those  who  have  interviewed  you
           since your conviction that either  the  way  in  which  she  was
           dressed or the fact of where she was or how she behaved  in  any
           way mitigates this offence.
           She was a 14 years old child and you are now 22 years of age and
           were an adult of 21 at the time of this offence. There are  only
           effectively  three  matters  of  mitigation  which  [have  been]
           brought to my attention. The first is that you are a man of good
           character. You have never committed any criminal offence of this
           sort before. Second, is that you are in fact only just 22  years
           of  age  and  have  experienced  considerable  difficulties  and
           hardship in your upbringing and I take into  account  that  your
           clearly respectable family are going to suffer  greatly  in  the
           eyes of your  community  because  of  your  conviction  of  this
           offence.
           The third matter is really hardly to your  credit,  but  I  take
           into account that you did fail in your attempt to have  forcible
           sexual intercourse against your victim's will but the experience
           is one which self-evidently has had a considerable  impact  upon
           that young woman and common sense dictates that it would."

4.    The PNC record indicates that the appellant was given a caution on  11
      October 2008 for failure to  comply  with  notification  requirements.
      There does not appear to be any evidence relating  to  the  detail  of
      this incident, but it took place during the licence period. It was not
      considered sufficiently serious to recall him to  prison.  Since  2008
      there is no record of any other offences.

5.    A letter from the appellant's Probation Officer  dated  24  June  2011
      said that she had known the appellant for a period of five  years.  He
      complied with his licence conditions. He was assessed as  medium  risk
      of harm because of the nature of the offence,  but  the  risk  of  re-
      offending was low. The appellant took  positive  steps  to  find  work
      after his release from prison and had a long-term partner.

6.    Despite the serious nature of  the  offence  the  appellant's  witness
      statement sidelines the conviction and is  silent  as  to  whether  he
      acknowledges responsibility for his actions or feels remorse  for  the
      crime. The fact that he still appeared to deny responsibility for  the
      offence in his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  2014  is  a
      serious concern. I note that he acknowledged some regret during cross-
      examination at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in 2019, but
      it is difficult  to  assess  his  sincerity  if  it  was  not  thought
      important enough to mention in his statement. However, by his  actions
      over many years it seems that his lack  of  insight  has  not  led  to
      further offending. He has not been convicted of any  further  offences
      for a significant period. At the date  of  the  hearing  there  is  no
      evidence to suggest that he presents anything other than a low risk of
      reoffending. One can only hope that he has reflected  on  the  serious
      nature of the crime and the effect that it is likely to  have  had  on
      the victim, a child. Now that he is a father, I trust that he may have
      a better understanding of the gravity of the offence.

Residence under EU law

7.    The appellant is a citizen of India who entered the UK on  20  January
      1998 with a permit as the family member (son) of an EEA  national  who
      was exercising rights of free movement in the UK. The appellant was 17
      years old when he arrived in the UK. On 02 July  1999  he  was  issued
      with another residence permit recognising a right of  residence  under
      EU law, which was valid until 02 July 2004.

8.    The appellant was granted Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  (ILR)  on  20
      January 2005 at a time when it is likely that he was still serving the
      custodial part of his sentence. The decision letter is in  a  standard
      format and does not indicate the basis upon  which  ILR  was  granted.
      Neither party has produced enough evidence to explain  on  what  basis
      the appellant was granted ILR. A document, which  appears  to  be  his
      father's original sponsorship application from 1997, suggests that the
      appellant entered the UK as part of a family unit with his mother  and
      siblings. His mother's grant of ILR letter of the same  date  suggests
      that he might have been granted ILR as part of a  family  application,
      but there is  no  evidence  to  show  the  nature  of  the  underlying
      application for ILR.

9.    Since the appellant initially entered and remained in the UK under  EU
      law, it is possible that ILR might have  been  granted  to  reflect  a
      right of permanent residence at a time preceding the transposition  of
      the Citizens' Directive (2004/38/EC). However, I find  that  there  is
      insufficient evidence to show on the balance of probabilities that ILR
      was  granted  on  that  basis.  There  is  no  copy  of  the  original
      application, the appellant's  witness  statement  and  the  supporting
      letter from his mother are both silent on the  issue.  The  respondent
      asserts that it was granted in error, which is  also  possible,  given
      that a lengthy prison sentence would usually preclude a grant of  ILR.
      Nevertheless, there is evidence to show that the appellant was granted
      ILR. The only evidence of revocation was the deportation order  signed
      on 15 September 2009, which has since been withdrawn.

Deportation decision (2005)

10.   The respondent made a decision to  make  a  deportation  order  on  20
      December 2005. The decision involved an EEA  decision  to  remove  the
      appellant on public policy grounds with reference to Council Directive
      64/221. The appellant had a right of appeal under regulation 29 of The
      Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2000  ("the  EEA
      Regulations 2000").

11.   The decision also involved the refusal of a human  rights  claim.  The
      appellant also  had  a  right  of  appeal  under  section  82  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002")  on  human
      rights grounds (see notice of Decision to Make a Deportation Order).

First-tier Tribunal decision (2006)

12.    Immigration  Judge  Pullan  dismissed  the  appeal  in   a   decision
      promulgated on 27 March 2006. The judge noted the deportation decision
      was made with reference to Council Directive (64/221 EEC) as  well  as
      domestic human rights law. He outlined further detail about the crime,
      the  appellant's  history  of  denial,  and  subsequent  appeals.   He
      acknowledged that there was an outstanding application to the European
      Court of Justice (the evidence suggests it was in fact an  application
      to the European Court of Human Rights). His appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal and an application to the Criminal Cases Review Commission were
      unsuccessful. At the date of the hearing,  the  appellant's  continued
      denial of responsibility for the offence  raised  concerns  about  his
      future behaviour. The judge concluded that the appellant continued  to
      pose a "real and serious risk" of re-offending. The decision  did  not
      breach the appellant's rights under the Community Treaties.

13.   The judge went on to consider the appellant's private and family  life
      in the UK with reference to Article 8 of the European  Convention.  At
      the time, his situation was markedly different. He was a 25  year  old
      man, without children, and in good health. His family  ties  with  his
      parents and siblings were not considered to be sufficiently compelling
      to show that his removal would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998 ("HRA 1998").

14.   On reconsideration, a panel of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
      found that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
      decision. A further application to  appeal  was  refused.  His  appeal
      rights became exhausted on 19 October 2006.

Deportation decision (2012)

15.   The records indicate that the respondent took no further action  until
      a deportation order was signed on 15 September 2009, over three  years
      later. The evidence indicates that some action might have  been  taken
      to attempt to document the appellant in preparation for removal around
      that time, but then no further action was taken until  2011,  when  he
      was detained pending removal. The deportation order was not served  on
      the appellant until 10 June 2011, nearly five years after  his  appeal
      rights became exhausted.

16.   After the belated service  of  the  deportation  order,  there  was  a
      series of applications, decisions and  legal  proceedings  seeking  to
      resist removal. Moses LJ granted a stay on removal by order sealed  on
      13 April 2012 in the following terms:

           "The applicant has been on immigration bail for six  years  with
           no evidence  of  any  further  crime.  If  the  purpose  of  the
           deportation order was primarily protective, then  the  delay  in
           providing protection against the applicant's continued  presence
           in the UK and the absence of any apparent  need  for  protection
           does  suggest  that  this  applicant's  case  is   not   clearly
           unfounded. .."

17.   The respondent eventually agreed to consider an application to  revoke
      the deportation order.  The  representations  made  on  28  June  2011
      focussed solely on his family life with his wife and did not make  any
      submissions relating to EU law. It is unclear  whether  other  written
      submissions were made. If they were, no copies  are  included  in  the
      bundles.  If  EU  law  arguments  were  made,  one  might  expect  the
      respondent to have addressed them in her subsequent decision.

18.   On 05 November 2012 the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  refuse  to
      revoke the deportation order. No copy of the decision  appears  to  be
      included in the respondent's bundle. However,  the  summaries  in  the
      subsequent decisions of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal
      indicate  that  it  focussed  solely  on  human  rights  grounds.   No
      consideration  seems  to  have  been  given  as  to  whether  it   was
      appropriate to revoke the deportation with reference to  European  law
      in light of the Probation Officer's assessment that  he  posed  a  low
      risk of reoffending.

19.   At this point it may be useful to  note  that  there  is  a  different
      procedure for  an  application  to  revoke  an  'expulsion  order'  (a
      deportation order) made pursuant to European law. Regulation 24A(3) of
      The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
      Regulations  2006"),  which  was  applicable  at  the  relevant  time,
      required an application to revoke a deportation order to be made  from
      outside the UK.  This  was  broadly  consistent  with  the  procedural
      safeguards outlined in Article 31(4) of the Citizens' Directive  in  a
      case where  the  deportation  order  was  made  following  a  judicial
      decision. Aside from the fact that there is no evidence to  show  that
      the appellant's representatives raised EU law issues,  this  provision
      may explain why the respondent dealt with the  application  under  the
      domestic provisions for revocation of a deportation order contained in
      the immigration rules. However, it was still open to the respondent to
      exercise discretion to consider  the  application  in  country  or  to
      consider EU law issues as part of the overall balancing exercise under
      Article 8. Article 31(4) does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  an
      application to revoke the order being made from inside the UK.

20.   The appellant appealed the decision under section 82  NIAA  2002.  The
      appeal was initially dismissed by a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Judge Morris and Ms Singer) in a decision promulgated on 07 May 2013.
      The decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and remitted  to  the
      First-tier for a fresh hearing.

First-tier Tribunal decision (2014)

21.   The documentation relating to the subsequent appeal before the  First-
      tier Tribunal is incomplete.  The First-tier Tribunal (FTTJ Pullig and
      Mrs Jordan) allowed the appeal on human rights grounds in  a  decision
      promulgated on 12 June 2014. The decision noted that  the  appeal  was
      brought on human rights grounds. Nothing in the decision suggests that
      any rights of residence under EU law were  argued  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant. The First-tier Tribunal determined  the  appeal  solely  by
      reference to Article 8 of the European  Convention  and  the  relevant
      provisions by then contained in the immigration rules.

22.   By 2014 the appellant was married and had a British child.  The  panel
      heard evidence from a range of witnesses and considered other evidence
      from  the  Probation  Officer  and  social  services.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal considered the prolonged delay from the date the  appellant's
      appeal rights became exhausted to the date when the deportation  order
      was served. During the period of delay  the  appellant  established  a
      family life. It was in the best interests of  his  child  for  him  to
      remain the UK. The evidence showed a  low  risk  of  reoffending.  The
      First-tier Tribunal found that  there  was  a  significant  change  in
      circumstances  since  the  deportation  order  was  made.  The   panel
      concluded that there were exceptional circumstances  to  outweigh  the
      public interest in deportation,  which  justified  revocation  of  the
      order.

23.   In a decision promulgated on 03 October  2014,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Chalkley found that there was  no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision.

Court of Appeal proceedings (2015-2018)

24.   The respondent was granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal at a renewed oral hearing on 02 July 2015 (SSHD  v  RM  (India)
      [2015] EWCA Civ 855). Permission was granted only in relation to human
      rights grounds. Lord Justice Longmore  found  that  it  was  at  least
      arguable that there was an important point of  principle  relating  to
      the  assessment  of  deportation  cases  under  Article  8   involving
      sentences  of  imprisonment  of  more  than  four  years.  He  granted
      permission on the condition that:

           "...by the time the appeal comes on for hearing, there will be a
           proper explanation from the Home Office of how it was that after
           Mr RM (India)'s appeal had been dismissed.... It was  not  until
           the 10 June 2011 that he was detained and  deportation  actually
           set for a date in July 2012. That was something  that  obviously
           weighed very considerably with the Tribunals in the  RM  (India)
           case, and if the matter is to proceed there should be  a  proper
           explanation of how that came about."

25.   The appeal was listed for hearing on 18 October 2016. The hearing  was
      adjourned with directions for the parties to consider the position  in
      relation to EU law. It  is  clear  from  the  correspondence  that  Ms
      Jegarajah was instructed during the early stages  of  the  proceedings
      before  the  Court  of  Appeal.  Correspondence  between  the  parties
      indicates that the appellant's solicitors  belatedly  highlighted  the
      potential applicability of EU law.

26.   A consent order was sealed on 16 March 2018.  It  is  unclear  why  it
      took so long for the order to be  agreed.  There  is  no  evidence  to
      suggest that a substantive hearing ever took place before the Court of
      Appeal.  The Secretary of State agreed to withdraw her appeal  before
      the Court of Appeal. She also agreed to withdraw (i) the  decision  to
      make a deportation order dated 20 December 2005; (ii) the  deportation
      order dated 15 September 2009; and (iii) the  decision  to  refuse  to
      revoke the deportation order dated 05 November  2012,  which  was  the
      subject of the appeal. The Secretary  of  State  recognised  that  the
      original decision was made "a long time  ago  and  considers  that  it
      would be appropriate for her to reconsider the matter afresh".

27.   It is not clear why the appellant's representatives agreed to such  an
      order having succeeded in the  appeals  before  the  Tribunals  below.
      Having withdrawn the appeal before the Court of Appeal  the  decisions
      of the First-tier and Upper Tribunal stood  unappealed.  However,  the
      effect of the appellant agreeing to the Secretary of State withdrawing
      the  underlying  immigration  decisions   relating   to   deportation,
      including the one that was the subject of the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal in 2014, was that any advantage gained by  the  positive
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal was lost. In any event, the First-
      tier Tribunal decision only related to the human rights claim and  did
      not make any findings relating to EU law. The effect  of  the  consent
      order was to reset the position and to pave the way for the respondent
      to make a fresh decision.

Deportation decision (2018)

28.   The respondent wrote to  the  appellant  on  08  May  2018  requesting
      further information relating to claimed rights of residence  under  EU
      law with reference to regulation 22 of the EEA Regulations  2006.  The
      appellant's then  representatives,  Malik  &  Malik  Solicitors,  made
      further representations on 29 May 2018. Apart from a general assertion
      that his removal grounds of  public  policy  was  not  justified,  and
      enclosure of various payslips and other documents relating to his life
      in the UK, the representations were poorly drafted  and  did  not  put
      forward any meaningful arguments relating to the appellant's  position
      under EU law.

29.   The respondent made a fresh decision on 13 June  2018,  which  is  the
      decision that is the subject of this statutory appeal. It  included  a
      decision to make  a  deportation  order  under  section  5(1)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 ("IA 1971"). The appellant's conviction pre-dated
      the coming into force of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("UKBA 2007").

30.   The decision went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's  position  under
      European law with reference  to  The  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations  2016").  The  respondent
      concluded that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant had resided in the UK in accordance with the regulations for
      a continuous period of five  years.  The  appellant  might  have  been
      dependent upon his father until he was 21 years old, but there was  no
      evidence of dependency after that age. The respondent  concluded:  "It
      is considered that you do not benefit from the  provisions  under  the
      EEA Regulations and that your liability  for  deportation  is  covered
      within the Immigration Act 1971."

31.   The decision went on to consider whether the appellant had  rights  of
      residence under European law with reference to the Court of Justice of
      the European Union decision in Zambrano, but concluded that the  child
      would not be compelled to leave the area of the European Union because
      he could remain with his mother in the UK.

32.   Even though  the  respondent  considered  whether  the  appellant  had
      rights of residence under EU law, no formal decision  appeared  to  be
      made to remove him on public policy grounds under regulation 27, which
      would give rise to a right of appeal under regulation 36  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2016. It seems that the respondent proceeded on the basis
      that EU residence rights were no longer engaged.

33.   However, no consideration was given to the assertion made  during  the
      Court of Appeal proceedings that the appellant might have been granted
      ILR in 2005 as a means of recognising a permanent right  of  residence
      under EU law. The decision letter acknowledged that  ILR  was  granted
      but merely stated that it was done in  error.  There  is  no  evidence
      before the Upper Tribunal to suggest that it was revoked by any  other
      order of the Secretary of State than the  making  of  the  deportation
      order in 2009. The impact of withdrawing the deportation order  should
      have been considered.  If  the  applicant  had  acquired  a  right  of
      permanent residence, a different legal  framework  would  need  to  be
      considered.

34.   The rest of the decision involved consideration of  the  human  rights
      claim with reference to the relevant  provisions  of  the  immigration
      rules relating to Article 8 of the European Convention.  The  decision
      letter stated that the appellant only had  a  right  of  appeal  under
      section 82(1) NIAA 2002, which by that time was  confined  to  grounds
      relating to the refusal of the human rights claim following amendments
      made by the Immigration Act 2014 ("IA 2014").

First-tier Tribunal decision (April 2019)

35.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman determined the appeal  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 24 April 2019. She purported to allow the appeal "under
      the Immigration Rules" and with reference to Article 8 of the European
      Convention on Human Rights. She noted that counsel for the  appellant,
      Ms Jegarajah, did not make any submissions in relation to EU law.  She
      dismissed the appeal in so far as it involved consideration of EU law.



Upper Tribunal hearing (June 2019)

36.   The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  the  First-
      tier Tribunal  decision  relating  to  the  human  rights  claim.  The
      appellant did not apply to appeal the decision in so far as the  judge
      made findings relating to EU law. The skeleton argument  served  under
      rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  replied
      to the grounds of  appeal  but  did  not  put  forward  any  arguments
      relating to EU law. At the hearing, Ms S. Iengar (counsel) represented
      the appellant. Again, no EU law issues were raised.

37.   In a decision promulgated on 09 October 2019 the Upper Tribunal  (Lord
      Boyd and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan)  found  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision relating to the  human  rights  claim  involved  the
      making of an error of law. The judge failed to explain what weight she
      placed on the public  interest  in  deportation.  The  Upper  Tribunal
      concluded that the findings relating  to  EU  law  should  stand.  The
      parties  were  directed  to  serve  any  further  evidence   and   any
      application to call oral evidence at least 14 days before the  resumed
      hearing.

Upper Tribunal hearing (December 2019)

38.   Even though the appellant did not seek  to  challenge  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's findings relating to European law at the relevant time, and
      did not raise the issue at the error of law hearing on 25  June  2019,
      and had since the promulgation of the Upper Tribunal  decision  on  09
      October 2019 to formulate further arguments, Ms  Jegarajah  sought  to
      raise arguments relating to the appellant's rights of residence  under
      European law, without notice, at the beginning of the resumed  hearing
      on 02 December 2019.

39.   Even after some discussion, the focus of the application, if  one  was
      being made, was unclear. It was not clear  whether  Ms  Jegarajah  was
      seeking to reopen an issue relating to European law, even  though  the
      appellant did not make  an  application  for  permission  appeal  that
      aspect of the First-tier Tribunal decision. It was unclear whether she
      was confining her argument to how rights of residence  under  European
      law might impact on the proportionality assessment under Article 8  of
      the European Convention in so far as it related to the only issue that
      needed to be remade  following  the  Upper  Tribunal's  error  of  law
      decision. In the circumstances, it was difficult  to  proceed  without
      more coherent and better particularised argument. The fact that  these
      points were made at such a late stage forced an adjournment.

40.   The Upper Tribunal made directions for the appellant to serve  written
      submissions, and a bundle  of  any  indexed  and  paginated  documents
      relied upon, by 09 December 2019.  Ms  Jegarajah's  written  arguments
      dated 17 December 2019 were served on  the  same  date  in  breach  of
      directions and without an explanation for the delay or an  application
      to extend time. The respondent served a written  response  within  the
      relevant directions deadline.

Preliminary decision - scope of the appeal (February 2020)

41.   It is possible that submissions could have been  made  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal that those aspects of the deportation decision  made  in
      2018 relating to EU law were capable of amounting to an 'EEA decision'
      within the meaning of regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations 2016 thereby
      giving rise to a right of  appeal  under  regulation  36  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2016. However, it is not necessary to go into any detailed
      consideration of the issue for the following reasons:

        i) No such argument was made when the appeal was lodged. The notice
           and grounds  of  appeal  lodged  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           related solely to Article 8 of the European Convention i.e.  the
           appellant lodged an appeal under section 82  NIAA  2002  on  the
           ground that the refusal of a human  rights  claim  was  unlawful
           under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 ("HRA 1998").


       ii) Nothing in the evidence prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           hearing indicated that the appellant intended to put forward any
           meaningful case relating to rights of residence or removal under
           EU law. The appellant's statement did not explain how or why  he
           might have been granted ILR in 2005. No evidence  was  submitted
           to prove that he was. It was not even mentioned. The rest of his
           statement concentrated on his family  life  with  his  wife  and
           children and did not cover any  issues  that  were  material  to
           establishing any rights of residence under EU law.

      iii) The evidence shows that Ms Jegarajah raised  EU  law  issues  in
           negotiations during the Court  of  Appeal  proceedings.  Despite
           having raised issues relating to rights of  residence  under  EU
           law in 2016, it seems that she made no submissions on the  issue
           when she appeared before the First-tier Tribunal in this  appeal
           in April 2019. Under the  heading  "The  appeal  under  the  EEA
           Regulations", First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman stated: "81.  ...I
           note that that Counsel chose not to make any submissions in this
           regard."

42.   On closer inspection, it appears that  no  appealable  'EEA  decision'
      was made, no arguments were put forward to suggest that there  was  an
      appeal against an EEA decision when the notice appeal was  lodged,  no
      grounds of appeal were put forward  in  relation  to  EU  law,  little
      evidence was adduced, and no submissions were made in relation  to  EU
      law.

43.   Having  considered  the  written  submissions  from  both  parties  in
      response  to  directions,  the  arguments  raised  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant were no better particularised. There was a lack  of  clarity
      as to what was being argued in relation to the scope of the appeal.  I
      make the following findings in relation to the three points that could
      be discerned from Ms Jegarajah's written submissions.

      (i)   The first point  outlined  somewhat  incomprehensible  arguments
           relating to the terms and effect of  the  consent  order  agreed
           during the Court of Appeal proceedings [2-7]. It matters not  if
           the conditions of the previous grant of permission to the  Court
           of Appeal were not met when the Secretary of State withdrew  the
           appeal before  the  substantive  hearing  with  the  appellant's
           consent. The condition of the grant of permission was to produce
           evidence in time for the substantive hearing but the appeal  did
           not get to that stage. It matters  not  whether  permission  was
           technically granted or not because the  effect  of  the  consent
           order was to agree to the withdrawal of the  outstanding  appeal
           and  all  the  underlying  immigration  decisions  relating   to
           deportation whether they were made under the EEA Regulations  or
           domestic law. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  and  the
           Upper Tribunal in 2014 stand unappealed. The  previous  findings
           can be considered but had no binding effect once the decision to
           which they related was withdrawn with a  view  to  reconsidering
           the case.

      (ii)  In so far as I understood the second point, it was asserted that
           any EU law issues should be considered within the context of the
           human rights claim. If that was the argument, I accept that they
           can form part of an  overall  proportionality  assessment  under
           Article 8, but only in the context  of  the  outstanding  appeal
           brought under section 82 NIAA 2002 on human rights  grounds  for
           the reasons outlined above.

      (iii) The third point appeared to relate to  an  entirely  new  issue,
           asserting that the appellant is an EEA national  by  descent.  I
           cannot find any evidence to show that this issue was  raised  in
           the further submissions to the Secretary  of  State  before  she
           made the decision that is the subject of this appeal. The  issue
           was not raised in the subsequent notice and grounds of appeal to
           the First-tier Tribunal. Judge Wyman noted that  no  submissions
           were made on any issue relating to EU law at the hearing. On the
           evidence currently before the Upper Tribunal this appears to  be
           the first time the argument has been raised. It is difficult  to
           see how this could be anything other than a  'new  matter'  that
           requires the consent of the Secretary  of  State  under  section
           85(5) NIAA 2002 before the Upper Tribunal could consider  it  as
           part of the appeal against the decision to refuse a human rights
           claim brought under section 82 NIAA 2002.

44.   The  Upper  Tribunal  issued  a  preliminary  decision  outlining  its
      findings relating to the scope of  the  appeal  on  04  February  2020
      (Annex 2). The Upper Tribunal concluded that the remaking is  confined
      to an appeal brought under section 82 NIAA 2002. The  only  ground  of
      appeal is whether the decision to refuse a human rights claim  in  the
      context of deportation proceedings was unlawful under  section  6  HRA
      1998. The Upper Tribunal concludes that EU law  issues  can  only  be
      argued in the context of the human rights claim. The issue relating to
      the appellant's claimed nationality by descent is a 'new matter'  that
      would need to be considered with reference to section 85(5) NIAA 2002.



Upper Tribunal hearing (February 2020)

45.   Mr Lindsay refused permission for the Upper Tribunal to  consider  the
      new matter of the appellant's claimed nationality by  descent.  Having
      refused consent, the Tribunal does not have discretion to consider the
      issue. The appellant had more than sufficient time to raise this issue
      in the 15 years since he  was  first  notified  of  the  Secretary  of
      State's intention to deport him. Counsel who appears before the  Upper
      Tribunal raised EU law issue with the respondent as long ago as  2016,
      but there is no evidence to show such arguments were put  forward  for
      the respondent when the case was reconsidered, nor  was  the  argument
      put forward at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

46.   The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only. The  details  are  a
      matter of public record.

DECISION AND REASONS

47.   It was necessary to  outline  the  procedural  history  in  detail  to
      explain why this case is not  being  decided  with  reference  to  the
      potentially relevant legal framework under EU  law,  and  instead,  is
      being decided with reference to domestic human rights law.

48.   Neither party produced adequate evidence to explain why the  appellant
      was granted ILR in 2005. Whether the appellant was granted  ILR  as  a
      means of recognising a permanent right  of  residence  as  the  family
      member of an EEA national under  EU  law,  at  a  time  preceding  the
      transposition of the Citizens' Directive, seems to have been  lost  in
      the shrouds of time. The appellant has not been able to  show  on  the
      balance of probabilities that  it  was  granted  on  that  basis.  The
      respondent has not produced evidence to show why it  might  have  been
      granted in error as claimed.

49.   The only mechanism that might have revoked  ILR  was  the  deportation
      order made in 2009, which the respondent  subsequently  withdrew.  The
      Supreme Court decision in R (George) v SSHD [2014] 1 WLR 1831 suggests
      that it is  unlikely  that  ILR  was  revived,  but  there  may  be  a
      distinction between ILR granted under domestic law and ILR granted  to
      reflect a permanent right of residence under EU law.  It  is  unlikely
      that permanent residence could be 'revoked' in the  same  way  as  ILR
      granted under domestic law although it is open to a  Member  State  to
      make an expulsion order if a person with permanent residence  poses  a
      genuine and present threat to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
      society. The effect of the withdrawal of the deportation order was not
      the subject of argument. There is  insufficient  evidence  before  the
      Upper Tribunal to determine the issue.

50.   In 2005, the initial decision  to  deport  referred  to  the  relevant
      provisions of EU law and considered human rights grounds. By 2012, the
      subsequent decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order was made
      under domestic law with reference to human  rights  issues.  By  2018,
      when both parties should have been focussing their  attention  on  the
      relevant EU law issues, again, the question of whether  the  appellant
      was granted ILR to reflect a permanent  right  of  residence  and  the
      effect of the withdrawal of the deportation order on that  status  was
      overlooked. If he was granted ILR to reflect permanent residence it is
      possible that an appealable EEA decision should have been  made  under
      the EEA Regulations 2016. Instead, no consideration was given  to  the
      issue. The appellant lodged the appeal  under  section  82  NIAA  2002
      solely on human rights grounds and failed to argue any EU  law  issues
      at the hearing.

51.   The Upper Tribunal is left in the unsatisfactory  position  of  trying
      to draw several issues that have  been  left  unnoticed,  unargued  or
      unresolved over many years based on limited and inadequate evidence.

52.   The Tribunal  only  has  power  to  determine  the  current  statutory
      appeal. I have explained why the appeal against the decision dated  13
      June 2018 is an appeal brought under section 82 NIAA 2002 on the  sole
      ground that the decision to refuse a human rights claim in the context
      of deportation proceedings is unlawful under section 6 HRA 1998. In so
      far as EU law issues might be relevant to the proportionality  of  the
      decision, I will take  them  into  account  as  part  of  the  overall
      balancing exercise under Article 8 of the European Convention.

Best interests of the children

53.   The appellant has two British children. At the  date  of  the  hearing
      they were six and four years old. The children were born in the UK and
      know no other life. There is no evidence to suggest that either  child
      suffers  from  serious   health   issues   or   has   any   particular
      vulnerabilities that need to be considered.

54.   I have considered the report prepared by an independent social  worker
      called Etmond Palamani dated 28 November 2019. He  reported  that  the
      children were in good physical and  mental  health.  He  observed  the
      appellant appeared to have a good connection  with  the  children  and
      that his removal from the UK would cause them  "significant  emotional
      damage". The stress of the appellant's wife becoming a  single  mother
      was also likely to have a negative effect. Neither child was  reported
      to have behavioural problems. The social worker expressed his  opinion
      that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  appellant's  wife  and
      children to relocate to India, but he gave no reasons for  this  aside
      from the fact that they are used to living in the UK. Nor is there any
      evidence to suggest that he understood the stringent legal  test  that
      those words  were  clearly  intended  to  convey.  Understandably,  he
      concluded that separation of the children from their father would have
      a damaging effect.

55.   There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant is  anything  other
      than a loving and supportive  parent.  It  is  normally  in  the  best
      interests of both children to be  brought  up  by  both  parents.  The
      appellant is a long-standing resident of the UK.  His  wife  was  born
      here although she has familial connections  to  India.  Both  children
      were born in the UK and are familiar with life here. Although there is
      little evidence to suggest that it would be unduly harsh to expect the
      family to relocate to India, the children are British citizens who are
      entitled to the benefits that status brings. I conclude that it is  in
      the best interests of the children to be brought up by both parents in
      the UK.

Article 8(1) - private and family life

56.   The appellant entered the UK when he was 17 years old.  He  has  lived
      in the UK for a  period  of  22  years.  It  is  likely  that  he  has
      established a significant private life in the  UK  during  that  time.
      Since his release from prison he has also established a family life in
      the UK with his wife and children. I am satisfied that his removal  in
      consequence of the decision would affect  his  right  to  private  and
      family life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation  of
      Article 8(1) of the European Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

57.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects  the  right  to  private
      and family life. However, it is not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
      interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite law
      that the state has a right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
      governing the entry and residence of people into the country  are  "in
      accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  Article   8.   Any
      interference with the right to private or family life must  be  for  a
      legitimate reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

58.   Part 5A NIAA 2002 applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts  breaches
      a person's right to respect for private and family life under  Article
      8 of the European Convention. In cases concerning the  deportation  of
      foreign  criminals  the  additional  public  interest   considerations
      contained in section 117C apply. The 'public interest question'  means
      the question of whether an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
      respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

59.   The courts have repeatedly emphasised that significant  weight  should
      be given to the public interest in deportation. However, that  is  not
      to say that the weight to be given to the public interest  is  uniform
      or monolithic: see Akinyemi v SSHD [2019]  EWCA  Civ  2098.  The  more
      serious the offending behaviour; the greater the weight is  placed  on
      the public interest in deportation. The  less  serious  the  offending
      behaviour;  the   more   readily   an   individual's   compelling   or
      compassionate circumstances might  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
      deportation.

60.   The exceptions to deportation  outlined  in  section  117C  NIAA  2002
      reflect the respondent's position as to where a fair balance is struck
      between the weight that must  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
      deporting foreign criminals and  the  person's  right  to  private  or
      family life. If the appellant meets the requirements  of  one  of  the
      exceptions  the  respondent  accepts  that  his   removal   would   be
      disproportionate.

61.   Section 117C(6) NIAA 2002 states that  the  public  interest  requires
      deportation unless there are 'very compelling circumstances' over  and
      above Exceptions 1 and 2. The test has repeatedly been described as  a
      demanding one involving  a  high  threshold:  see  NA  (Pakistan),  KO
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]  UKSC  53  and  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";
      offence; seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123.

62.   The assessment under section 117C(6) of the NIAA  2002  and  paragraph
      398 of the immigration rules reflects the overall  balancing  exercise
      undertaken  by  the  Strasbourg  court  when  assessing  whether   the
      interference with a person's private or family life is  justified  and
      proportionate under Article 8(2) of  the  European  Convention.  After
      all, that is the stated intention of the statutory scheme. The need to
      consider  the  relevant  principles   outlined   in   the   Strasbourg
      jurisprudence was emphasised by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v SSHD
      [2016] 1 WLR 4799 [25-33]. After section 117C NIAA 2002 was introduced
      the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) expressly recognised the need  to
      consider Strasbourg principles  when  applying  the  statutory  scheme
      [38].

63.   I conduct my assessment with these  principles  in  mind.  I  turn  to
      consider what weight should  be  placed  on  the  public  interest  in
      deportation and what factors might weigh in favour of the appellant in
      order to assess whether the decision strikes a fair  balance  for  the
      purpose of Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

64.   I have taken into account the  following  factors  in  assessing  what
      weight to place on the public interest in deportation:

        i) The serious nature of the crime was reflected in the  length  of
           the  sentence.  The  appellant  was  convicted  of  an   offence
           attracting a sentence of six years' imprisonment and was subject
           to extended licence requirements. The more serious  the  offence
           the great the weight that must be placed on the public  interest
           in deportation;


       ii) Particular weight must also be given to the public  interest  in
           cases  involving  drugs,  violence  or  sexual   offences.   The
           appellant was convicted of a sexual offence against a minor. The
           nature of the offence  must  also  lend  weight  to  the  public
           interest in deportation;

      iii) One aspect of the public interest includes  the  need  to  deter
           others from committing crime. In Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] 1  WLR
           4799 Lord Wilson agreed that the emotive language he used in  OH
           (Serbia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2009]
           INLR 109, that the  public  interest  in  deportation  ought  to
           reflect public revulsion at  serious  crime,  ought  not  to  be
           used. Deportation is said to reflect society's  disapproval  of
           such crimes. However, if this issue is given undue weight it  is
           difficult to see how anyone would be able to resist deportation.
           It forms part of the  picture,  but  in  my  assessment  is  not
           something that attracts significant weight  in  light  of  other
           factors that affect  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
           interest in this case.

       iv) The passage of time is a significant  factor  in  this  case.  I
           accept that some crimes are so serious that the public  interest
           in deportation is not weakened. In my assessment,  this  is  not
           one of those cases. The appellant committed a serious  crime  in
           2001 when he was 21 years old. The six-year  sentence  reflected
           the serious nature of the crime but  was  still  in  the  medium
           range of the  sentencing  spectrum.  The  appellant  served  his
           sentence and complied with the licence  conditions.  When  Judge
           Pullan first heard his appeal in 2006, the  public  interest  in
           deportation was more pressing, but after the  appeal  no  action
           was taken to sign a deportation order until 2009  and  then  the
           order was not served until  2011.  If  the  public  interest  in
           deportation  was  so  pressing,  one  might  have  expected  the
           respondent to act promptly to effect removal  after  the  appeal
           was dismissed, but no explanation  has  been  provided  for  the
           delay. Moses LJ cited the delay as a factor  that  might  weaken
           the public interest in deportation as long ago as 2012.

           By 2014, the appellant succeeded in an appeal brought  on  human
           rights grounds. First-tier Tribunal  clearly  thought  that  the
           passage  of  time  since  the  offence  and  the  low  risk   of
           reoffending reduced  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
           interest in deportation. By 2018, the inexplicable agreement  to
           the withdrawal of the underlying immigration decision meant that
           the respondent was not obliged to give effect to the  First-tier
           Tribunal decision.  The  respondent  acknowledged  the  need  to
           review the case, but then failed to take  the  passage  of  time
           into account in the subsequent decision. The weakening  strength
           of the public interest in deportation over the course of such  a
           long period of time dovetails into the next point;

      (v)   The appellant committed a serious offence  in  2001.  Around  15
           years have passed since his  release  from  prison.  He  has  no
           further convictions of a similar nature.  The  offence  did  not
           form part of a  pattern  of  criminal  behaviour.  There  is  no
           evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  holds  pro-criminal
           attitudes. The fact that  he  has  not  been  convicted  of  any
           further offences over such a long period  of  time  demonstrates
           that he poses a low risk of reoffending. If this were an  appeal
           brought under the  EEA  Regulations  2016,  the  fact  that  the
           appellant has not reoffended for many years,  and  there  is  no
           evidence to show that he poses a 'genuine and present' threat to
           one of the fundamental interests of society, would determine the
           appeal in his favour.


           The focus is slightly different when considering  the  issue  in
           the context of a human rights claim. I bear  in  mind  that  the
           Upper  Tribunal  in  RA  (s.117C:   "unduly   harsh";   offence:
           seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 observed that the fact  that
           a person has not committed further offences is unlikely to  have
           a material bearing on  the  assessment,  but  that  is  not  the
           approach taken by the Strasbourg court, which takes into account
           the time that has elapsed since the  offence  and  the  person's
           conduct during that period: see Boultif v Switzerland (2001)  33
           EHRR 50, ner v Netherlands (2007)  45  EHRR  14  and  Maslov  v
           Austria [2008] ECHR 546.


           The risk of reoffending is relevant to whether  there  continues
           to be a  pressing  social  need  to  deport  a  person.  If  the
           appellant was convicted of further criminal  offences  it  would
           reinforce and give even greater weight to the public interest in
           deportation. Conversely, the fact that the  appellant  does  not
           pose a risk  of  reoffending  must  have  some  bearing  on  the
           assessment albeit it is unlikely to reduce the  public  interest
           in deportation in a determinative way  in  a  case  involving  a
           serious offence. The Upper Tribunal in RA (Iraq)  was  right  to
           observe that it is the norm to expect a  person  not  to  commit
           criminal offences. However, I find that the combination  of  the
           lengthy passage of time,  the  fact  that  there  are  no  other
           convictions of a similar nature and  there  is  a  low  risk  of
           reoffending are matters that reduce the weight to  be  given  to
           the public interest in this case.

65.   I have considered the  cumulative  effect  of  the  following  factors
      relating to the appellant's circumstances.

      (i)   The appellant entered and remained in the UK on a  lawful  basis
           and has lived in the UK for a period of 22  years,  which  is  a
           particularly long period of residence;


      (ii)  During this long period of residence, he established significant
           private life ties to the UK. The appellant entered  as  a  child
           and has spent all his adult life in the UK.  However,  there  is
           insufficient evidence before me to conclude that  he  meets  the
           private life exception contained in section 117C(4)  NIAA  2002.
           The case was not argued or evidenced on this basis;


      (iii) During this long period of residence, he  established  a  family
           life with his wife and children. The  appellant's  wife  entered
           the relationship in the full knowledge that the appellant was in
           prison and could face deportation. They started a family in  the
           knowledge that his status was  precarious.  However,  given  the
           significant delays in the case it is hardly surprising that  the
           appellant went on with his life and started a family.

           In so far as I am required to  consider  whether  the  exception
           under section 117C(5) NIAA 2002 might apply, the  evidence  does
           not show that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's
           wife and children to go to India with him or to remain in the UK
           without him. It would be  harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife  to
           abandon the business she has  established  but  she  could  work
           elsewhere. She has familial and cultural connections  to  India.
           It is not in the best interests of the children to leave the UK,
           but  they  are  young  enough  to  adapt  to  life   in   India.
           Alternatively, it is not in the best interests of  the  children
           to be separated from their father. Nothing in  the  social  work
           report  outlines  any   compelling   factors   that   would   be
           sufficiently serious to reach the  stringent  threshold  of  the
           test of 'unduly harsh'. The report outlines the  usual  damaging
           effects of deportation on a family. Albeit the evidence does not
           show deportation would  have  an  unduly  harsh  effect  on  the
           appellant's wife and children, the best interests of the British
           children are still a primary consideration and should  be  given
           appropriate weight;

      (iv)  The appellant's private and family life ties  were  sufficiently
           strong to amount to 'exceptional circumstances' outweighing  the
           public interest in  deportation  when  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           considered  the  case  in  2014.  The  decision   was   appealed
           unsuccessfully. I give significant weight to  the  fact  that  a
           previous Tribunal found that removal would  not  strike  a  fair
           balance under Article 8. There has been no  material  change  in
           circumstances relating to  the  public  interest  considerations
           since that decision. The appellant's private and family life has
           only got stronger and deeper in the intervening six years.


           There is no material difference between the test of 'exceptional
           circumstances' and  the  amended  wording  of  'very  compelling
           circumstances' now used in the statute. The wording was  amended
           to reflect the way in which the Court of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)
           v SSHD [2014] 1 WLR  544  described  the  original  'exceptional
           circumstances' test [43];

      (v)   The long passage of  time  since  the  appellant  committed  the
           offence, and the absence of any further  convictions,  indicates
           that he poses a very low risk of reoffending;

      (vi)  The unusual history of the case, including significant delays in
           the process, reduces the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
           interest in deportation. If there was a pressing social need  to
           remove the appellant the  deportation  order  should  have  been
           signed shortly after his appeal rights became exhausted in  2006
           or action should at least have been taken to remove him after it
           was eventually signed in 2009;

      (vii) Although  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
           appellant was granted ILR to  recognise  a  right  of  permanent
           residence under EU law, it is difficult to  see  on  what  other
           basis it might have been granted given his immigration  history.
           If this were an appeal brought on EU law  grounds  the  evidence
           shows that the appellant does not present a genuine and  present
           threat to one of the fundamental interests  of  society  at  any
           level. Because of the lack  of  clarity  surrounding  the  exact
           legal status of the grant of ILR, I place little weight on  this
           issue, but it cannot be ignored and forms part of the background
           to my assessment.

66.   I remind myself that the provisions contained in the statutory  scheme
      are intended to be compliant with a proper application of Article 8 of
      the European Convention. In assessing whether a fair balance has  been
      struck between the undoubted weight that must be placed on the  public
      interest in deportation and the individual circumstances of this case,
      I conclude that, while none of the factors  are  sufficient  if  taken
      alone, the cumulative effect  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  are
      sufficiently compelling to amount to 'very  compelling  circumstances'
      that outweigh the public interest in deportation for  the  purpose  of
      section 117C(6) NIAA 2002.

67.   If I was deciding  this  appeal  closer  to  date  the  appellant  was
      released from prison my decision would be different, but the prolonged
      history of this case has over the years  weakened  the  weight  to  be
      given to the public interest in deportation, and increased the  weight
      to be given to the appellant's private and family  life,  to  such  an
      extent that removal in consequence of the decision would  be  unlawful
      under section 6 HRA 1998.


DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]                               Date 12 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

ANNEX 1

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13091/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 25 June 2019                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     R M
                                                                  Respondent
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues.  We  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Ms S. Iengar, instructed by W H Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, we shall refer  to  the  parties  as  they
      were before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the Secretary
      of State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (RM) is a citizen of India who  entered  the  UK  on  20
      January 1998 as the family member (son) of an  EEA  national  who  was
      exercising rights of free movement in  the  UK.  He  was  subsequently
      issued with a residence document  recognising  a  right  of  residence
      under EU law until 02 July 2004.

3.    On 05 February 2002 the appellant was convicted of attempted  rape  on
      a female under the age of 16 years and  was  later  sentenced  to  six
      years' imprisonment with a four-year extended licence.

4.    The  Secretary  of  State  served  the  appellant  with  a  notice  of
      intention to make  a  deportation  order  on  19  December  2005.  The
      appellant appealed the decision. Immigration  Judge  Pullan  dismissed
      the appeal in a decision promulgated on 27 March  2006.  Judge  Pullan
      noted that the deportation decision was made with reference to Council
      Directive (64/221 EEC) as well as the domestic provisions relating  to
      deportation. On reconsideration, a panel of the Asylum and Immigration
      Tribunal found that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration
      Judge's decision.  A deportation order  was  signed  on  15  September
      2009.

5.    There is no evidence to show that any  further  action  was  taken  to
      remove the appellant pursuant to the deportation order. In  June  2011
      the  appellant  was  detained.  On  28  June  2011  he  made   further
      representations to the respondent, which was treated as an application
      to revoke the deportation order. It seems that several decisions  were
      made and then withdrawn during 2011 and  judicial  review  proceedings
      brought in the first half of 2012 led to the last decision made by the
      respondent being withdrawn. A further decision to refuse to revoke the
      deportation order was made on 05 November 2012, which gave rise  to  a
      right of appeal.

6.    The appeal was initially  dismissed  by  a  panel  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Morris and Ms Singer) in a decision promulgated on  07
      May 2013. The decision  was  set  aside  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
      remitted to the First-tier for a fresh hearing.

7.    A panel of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pullig  and  Mrs  Jordan)
      allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 12 June 2014. By  this
      time the appellant had married and had  a  British  child.  The  panel
      found that it was in the interests of the child to remain in the UK in
      the care of both parents. The panel found  that  the  evidence  showed
      that there was a low risk of reoffending. They took into  account  the
      length of time that had elapsed  since  the  appellant  committed  the
      offence. They also considered the impact that deportation  would  have
      on the appellant's family as well as the delays which led that  family
      life to become more entrenched. The panel concluded  that  there  were
      'exceptional  circumstances'  to  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
      deportation for the purpose of paragraph 398 of the immigration rules.



8.    The Secretary of State sought to appeal  the  decision  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 03 October 2014 Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Chalkley found that the decision did not involve the  making  of
      errors of law.

9.    The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal  the  Upper
      Tribunal decision to the  Court  of  Appeal.  It  is  unclear  whether
      permission was granted, but as a result of a  renewed  application  to
      the Court of Appeal the parties agreed a consent order. The  statement
      of grounds which accompanied the order states that  the  Secretary  of
      State  agreed  to  withdraw  the  appeal.  The  decision  to  make   a
      deportation order dated 20 December 2005, the deportation order  dated
      15 September 2009 and the decision to refuse to revoke the deportation
      order dated 05 November 2012 were also withdrawn. It is not clear  why
      the appellant's representatives would have agreed  to  such  an  order
      having succeeded in the appeals before the Tribunals  below.  However,
      it seems that the Secretary of  State  recognised  that  the  original
      decision was made "a long time ago and  considers  that  it  would  be
      appropriate for her to reconsider the matter afresh".  The  effect  of
      the consent order was that the situation was reset, paving the way for
      a fresh decision to be made by the Secretary of State.

10.   The Secretary of State invited further submissions from the  appellant
      relating to potential rights of residence under EU law. The  Secretary
      of State made a further decision to make  a  deportation  order  under
      section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 on  13  June  2018.  We  note
      that, despite the length of the sentence, this was not a  decision  to
      make an automatic deportation order under  section  32(5)  of  the  UK
      Borders Act 2007 ("the UKBA 2007") because the offence  was  committed
      prior to the UKBA 2007 coming into force.

11.   The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  appellant  produced
      sufficient evidence to show he  had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
      residence for the purpose of EU law or that he had any other right  to
      reside on that basis. He failed to produce evidence to  show  that  he
      had been dependent upon his father for a  continuous  period  of  five
      years. There was no evidence to show that the  appellant  could  claim
      current rights of residence  under  EU  law.  For  these  reasons  the
      Secretary of State concluded that he was liable to  deportation  under
      UK law.

12.   The decision letter included a  decision  to  refuse  a  human  rights
      claim, which is the decision that is the subject of this  appeal.  The
      Secretary of State noted that he was sentenced to  a  period  of  over
      four years' imprisonment. The appellant's family life  with  his  wife
      and children did  not  disclose  'very  compelling  circumstances'  to
      outweigh the significant public interest in deportation.

13.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman ("the judge")  determined  the  appeal
      in a decision promulgated on 24 April 2019. She purported to allow the
      appeal "under the Immigration Rules" and with reference to  Article  8
      of the European Convention on Human Rights. However, she dismissed the
      appeal in so far as it was brought on EU law grounds.

14.   The judge outlined the history of the case  and  the  details  of  the
      offence [3-22]. She set out the case put forward by both parties  [23-
      36]. She went on to set out the relevant legal framework  relating  to
      Article 8 of the  European  Convention  including  the  provisions  of
      paragraphs 398-399A of the immigration rules and section 117C  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002")  [37-44]
      before summarising what happened at  the  hearing  [45-68].  She  then
      returned to summarise a list of case law including cases  such  as  MF
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and KO (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2018]
      UKSC 53 [69-79]. She noted no submissions were  made  in  relation  to
      rights under EU law and concluded that there was insufficient evidence
      to show that the appellant's circumstances engaged EU law [81-84].

15.   The judge accepted that the appellant had a family life in the UK  for
      the purpose of Article 8(1) and noted  that  the  respondent  accepted
      that it would be 'unduly harsh' to expect his  wife  and  children  to
      live in the country to which he would  be  deported  [86].  The  judge
      correctly identified the fact that the appellant was  sentenced  to  a
      period of more than four  years'  imprisonment  thereby  engaging  the
      higher threshold [88][104]. She went on to  consider  the  appellant's
      individual circumstances including the nature of his family life,  his
      record while on licence, his work history, his length of residence  in
      the UK, the passage of time and any relevant periods  of  Home  Office
      delay that might have led the appellant's family life to  become  more
      entrenched in the UK [91-100]. She stated that the best  interests  of
      the children were of "serious importance" but were not a "trump  card"
      [101] without making any clear finding as to where the best  interests
      of the children lay. The judge went on to make the following findings.

           "105. I note that  Judge  Pullig,  back  in  2014,  allowed  the
                 appellant's appeal in the light of his findings namely  his
                 family, the length of time since the offence was  committed
                 and the  deportation  order  was  made,  the  low  risk  of
                 reoffending and the best interests of the children. He also
                 accepted that due to the respondent's delay that  it  would
                 not be reasonable for the appellant's wife (at  that  time)
                 and one child to relocate.


           106.  Since this decision, there has been a  further  period  of
                 almost five years that  the  appellant  has  lived  in  the
                 United Kingdom. His family life has become deeper and  more
                 entrenched over this time, with the  birth  of  his  second
                 child, and his lengthier relationship  with  his  wife  and
                 eldest child. To his credit, the  appellant  has  not  been
                 involved in any further re-offending. He continues to  live
                 with his mother, who is now a widow and  therefore  depends
                 more on her son. He also lives with his sister and her son.
                 The index offence took place back in 2002 - almost 19 years
                 ago. There has been a considerable delay by the  respondent
                 in taking enforcement action between  2006-2009.  Had  this
                 happened, the appellant would not have had any family  life
                 at that time.


           107.  Taking all these factors into consideration, I  find  that
                 there are "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above
                 those described under Section 117C and this  outweighs  the
                 respondent's position and the public interest in  deporting
                 the appellant. (sic)"

16.   The Secretary of State's  original  grounds  of  appeal  made  general
      submissions but were not clearly particularised. At  the  hearing,  Mr
      Lindsay distilled the Secretary of State's  case  into  the  following
      points.

        i) The judge erred in failing to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
           public interest considering the serious nature of the offence.

       ii) The judge erred in treating  the  previous  First-tier  Tribunal
           decision of Judge Pullig and Mrs Jordan as determinative of  the
           appeal at the date of  the  hearing  without  having  sufficient
           regard to what were said to be  "legal  changes"  following  the
           decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC
           53. In particular, the judge failed to  recognise  the  elevated
           threshold required to show that  deportation  would  be  'unduly
           harsh' on the appellant's children when considering the  overall
           test of 'very  compelling  circumstances'  outlined  in  section
           117C(6) NIAA 2002.

Decision and reasons

17.   The  judge  erred  in  purporting  to  allow  the  appeal  "under  the
    Immigration Rules". There has been no right of  appeal  on  the  ground
    that the decision is not in accordance with the immigration rules since
    the coming into force of changes made to section 84 NIAA  2002  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 ("IA 2014") in April 2015, some four years  before
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing. In so far  as  the  immigration  rules
    formed part of the assessment they related to the only available ground
    of appeal, which was whether the decision was unlawful under section  6
    of the Human Rights Act  1998  ("HRA  1998").  However,  we  find  that
    nothing turns on this loose drafting because the immigration rules  the
    judge was referring to related to the Secretary of State's position  as
    to where a fair balance should be struck for the purpose of  Article  8
    of the European Convention. For this reason, we  find  that  the  error
    does not make any material difference.

18.   The judge directed  herself  to  the  relevant  legal  framework.  She
    understood that the appellant fell within the more stringent  threshold
    requiring  'very  compelling  circumstances'  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation contained in  section  117C(6)  NIAA  2002  and
    paragraph 398 of the immigration rules. However, that was the extent of
    her findings relating to the public interest  considerations.  Although
    we consider that it was open to the judge  to  take  into  account  the
    factors relating to the appellant's individual circumstances, when  the
    findings relating to Article 8 are read as  a  whole,  we  accept  that
    there is some  force  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  submission  that
    insufficient consideration was given  to  the  weight  that  should  be
    placed on the public interest in deportation  in  a  case  involving  a
    sentence of over four years' imprisonment.  Insufficient  reasons  were
    given to explain how or why those individual factors might outweigh the
    significant weight that must  be  placed  on  the  public  interest  in
    deportation in a case involving a lengthy sentence.

19.   Mr Lindsay accepted that it was open to  the  judge  to  consider  the
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in 2014. However, there was no
    analysis as to whether there were any differences, if any, between  the
    test of 'exceptional circumstances' that was first introduced into  the
    immigration rules at the end of 2012 (HC 760) applied by the First-tier
    Tribunal at  that  time  and  the  current  test  of  'very  compelling
    circumstances', which was introduced  following  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in MF (Nigeria). The judge summarised the more recent decision
    in KO (Nigeria), but did not address the principles identified in  that
    case when she came to make her findings. She noted that the  respondent
    accepted that it would be 'unduly harsh' for the appellant's  wife  and
    children to go to the country where he would be deported, but  made  no
    clear findings as to whether it would be unduly harsh to expect them to
    remain in the UK without him in light of later authority from the Court
    of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

20.   We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making
    of errors of law. That part of the decision relating  to  human  rights
    grounds is set aside. The findings relating to the EU law aspect of the
    appeal shall stand. The usual course of action is for the  decision  to
    be remade in the Upper Tribunal. The appeal  will  be  relisted  for  a
    resumed hearing.

DIRECTIONS

21.    The  parties  are  given  permission  adduce  up  to  date  evidence,
    including any updated witness statements, which must be served at least
    14 days before the next hearing.

22.   The factual background to the case does not appear to be  in  dispute.
    It is unlikely that the appellant will need to call  further  evidence,
    but permission is granted to do so if there are new circumstances  that
    were not considered by the First-tier Tribunal that  would  necessitate
    oral evidence. The appellant shall notify the Tribunal within  14  days
    of the date this decision is sent whether he intends  to  call  further
    evidence. Otherwise, the hearing will proceed by submissions only.

23.   If the appellant intends to  call  further  oral  evidence,  he  shall
    notify the Upper Tribunal within 14 days of the date this  decision  is
    sent whether an interpreter  is  required,  and  if  so,  the  relevant
    language.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and will be remade at a resumed hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date   07 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
ANNEX 2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/13091/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                     R M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Further to the written submissions made by  both  parties  relating  to  the
scope of the appeal, the Upper Tribunal makes the following directions.

1.    The remaking is confined to an appeal brought under section 82 of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  The  only  ground  of
      appeal is whether the decision to refuse a human rights claim dated 13
      June 2018 in the context of deportation proceedings was unlawful under
      section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

2.    It is questionable whether the decision dated 13  June  2018  made  an
      'EEA  decision'  that  was  appealable  under  regulation  36  of  The
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. In  any  event,
      the appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  appeared
      to  be  confined  to  human  rights  arguments  under  Article  8,  no
      submissions were made in relation to EU law at the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing, nor did the appellant apply to appeal the First-tier Tribunal
      findings relating to EU law.

3.    Any general issues relating to rights of residence under EU  law  that
      have been considered by the Secretary of State, such as acquisition of
      a permanent right of residence, will only be considered as part of the
      overall balancing exercise under Article 8.

4.    The assertion that the appellant is likely to be a Portuguese  citizen
      by descent appears to be a significant 'new matter' that has not  been
      considered by the Secretary of State. The parties should be  ready  to
      argue whether it should be considered  at  the  resumed  hearing  with
      reference to section 85(5) NIAA 2002.

Signed:[pic]     Date:  04 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
