
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13058/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |On 07 October 2020                   |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 2 October 2020                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           LAKHVINDER SINGH BISLA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 seCRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cohen, dismissing his appeal under  section  82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against a decision  of
    the respondent made on 16 July 2019 to refuse his application for leave
    to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant did not attend the appeal on 5 December 2019 nor did  his
    representatives. They did, however,  make  a  request  by  fax  for  an
    adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from
    depression and that an appointment with a consultant  psychiatrist  had
    been made but that had not  been  possible  to  arrange  it  until  the
    following week.  The judge decided [21] that  there  was  "insufficient
    cause" for an adjournment and proceeded to determine the appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that Judge Cohen
    had erred in not adjourning the appeal where fairness required  it  and
    had failed properly to apply the test set out in  Nwaige  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418, not even addressing the issue of fairness.



 4. On 12 May 2020, First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 5. On 31 July 2020, my  directions  in  this  matter  were  issued.  Those
    directions are annexed to this decision, but it  is  relevant  to  note
    that they provided as follows:

         "Having reviewed the case, it is observed that the judge  does  not
         appear to have focussed on the correct test  under  the  procedural
         rules or to have applied  Nwaigwe;  any  submissions  focussing  on
         these issues are likely to assist the Upper Tribunal"


 6. Neither party has objected to this appeal being  determined  without  a
    hearing. The Tribunal has the power to  make  the  decision  without  a
    hearing under Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2)  requires  me
    to have regard to the views  of  the  parties.   bearing  in  mind  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2 to enable  the  Tribunal  to  deal  with
    cases fairly  and  justly,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case where no objection to a decision being  made
    in the absence of a hearing that it would be right to do so.  In  doing
    so, I have taken into account the representations of both parties.

 7.  With due respect to the submissions from the respondent, I find  that,
    as the appellant avers, there is no indication that Judge Cohen  turned
    his mind to the correct test, or considered the issue of  fairness.  At
    no stage does Judge Cohen ask himself the  question  of  whether  there
    could be a fair hearing.  Judge Cohen appears at [21] not to have taken
    into account why a psychiatric report  could  not  have  been  obtained
    earlier despite at [16] to [17] setting out  the  circumstances.  Judge
    Cohen did not engage either with the fact that the appointment  was  to
    assess the appellant; thus, the references to  existing  treatment  are
    not relevant.

 8. This error was plainly  material.  The  appeal  proceeded  without  the
    presence of the appellant and without his testimony.

 9. The appellant has now been assessed. He has been diagnosed as suffering
    from severe clinical depression, and to  be  suffering  from  cognitive
    difficulties

10. I am in the circumstances, satisfied that Judge Cohen erred in law, and
    that as a  result,  the  appellants  hearing  before  him  was  unfair.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that a procedural error occurred such  that
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen involved the making  of
    an error of law and it must be set aside.

11. As the effect of Judge Cohen's error was  effectively  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing, I consider that the only proper course  of
    action is to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    determination on  all  issues.  None  of  Judge  Cohen's  findings  are
    preserved.




Notice of Decision & Directions
    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
       a fresh decision on all issues.
       Signed                                Date 2 October 2020
       Jeremy K H Rintoul
       Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
ANNEX - DIRECTIONS ISSUED ON 31 JULY 2020

                           MEMORANDUM & DIRECTIONS

      1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the light of the present
         need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and  the
         overriding objective expressed in the Procedure  Rules[1],  I  have
         reached the  provisional  view  that  it  would  in  this  case  be
         appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

          a) whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

          b) whether that decision should be set aside.

      2. Having reviewed the case, it is observed that the  judge  does  not
         appear to have focussed on the correct test  under  the  procedural
         rules or to have applied  Nwaigwe;  any  submissions  focussing  on
         these issues are likely to assist the Upper Tribunal

      3. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:

          i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of the
             assertion of an error of law, and on the question whether  the
             First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside if error of
             law is found, to be filed and served on all other  parties  no
             later than 14 days after this notice is sent out (the date  of
             sending is on the covering letter or covering email);

         ii) Any other party may file and serve submissions in response, no
             later than 21 days after this  notice  is  sent  out;  in  the
             absence of any response from the respondent it will be assumed
             that she consents to the proposed course  of  action  set  out
             above.

        iii) If submissions are made  in  accordance  with  paragraph  (ii)
             above the party who sought permission to appeal may  file  and
             serve a reply no later than 28 days after this notice is  sent
             out.

         iv) All submissions that  rely  on  any  document  not  previously
             provided to all other  parties  in  electronic  form  must  be
             accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

      4. Any party who considers that despite  the  foregoing  directions  a
         hearing is necessary to consider the questions set out in paragraph
         1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons for  that  view  no
         later than 21 days after this notice is sent out and they  will  be
         taken into account by the Tribunal.  The directions in paragraph 3-
         above must be complied with in every case.

      5. If this Tribunal decides to set aside the decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for error of law, further directions  will  accompany
         the notice of that decision.

      6. Documents and submissions filed in response to these directions may
         be sent  by,  or  attached  to,  an  email  to  [email]  using  the
         Tribunal's reference number (found at the top of these  directions)
         as the subject line.  Attachments must  not  exceed  15  MB.   This
         address is not generally available for  the  filing  of  documents.
         Service on the Secretary of State may be  to  [email]  and  to  the
         original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction,  by
         use of any address apparent from the service of these directions.




    Signed                 Date: 27 July 2020


    Jeremy K H Rintoul
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

