
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13463/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2021                  |On 10 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HGI
                                   aka hb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Williams, David Williams Immigration and
                    Nationality Consultancy


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is a remaking of HGI's Article 8 ECHR appeal which was made in the
    context of deportation proceedings.  This remaking follows my error  of
    law decision issued on 12 November 2020 which set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge issued on 9 January  2020  which  allowed
    the appeal.

 2. HGI (who has used an alias of HB for most of his time in the UK)  is  a
    national of Tanzania.  He was born in 1981.

 3. He came to the UK on 10 November 1997 at the age  of  15  to  join  his
    mother who had claimed asylum. At  that  time  the  appellant  and  his
    family were claiming to be nationals of Rwanda. The  asylum  claim  was
    refused but the family was granted exceptional leave to remain until 28
    July 2003.  On 30 June 2003, the appellant, together  with  his  mother
    and siblings, was granted indefinite leave to remain (ILR).

 4. Between October  2000  and  December  2007  the  appellant  amassed  an
    extensive criminal history including 12 convictions  for  19  offences.
    The convictions included shoplifting, handling  stolen  goods,  driving
    whilst disqualified and whilst uninsured, affray and damaging  property
    and having a dog dangerously out of control.  None of those convictions
    led to a custodial sentence.   However,  on  6  December  2007  he  was
    convicted of possession/control of an article  for  use  in  fraud  and
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

 5. That conviction led the respondent  to  begin  deportation  proceedings
    against the appellant.  On 18 March 2008 the appellant was issued  with
    a decision to make a  deportation  order.   He  appealed  against  that
    decision but his appeal was dismissed on 25 July  2008  and  he  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 4 August 2008.

 6. Throughout all of this criminal and immigration history, the  appellant
    continued  to  maintain  that  he  was  a  Rwandan  national.  However,
    following the refusal of  his  appeal  in  2008,  when  the  respondent
    attempted to get a travel document for  him,  the  Rwandan  authorities
    maintained that he was not known to them. The Rwandan  High  Commission
    eventually confirmed  that  the  appellant's  Rwandan  ID  card  was  a
    counterfeit.  The appellant, however, continued to maintain that he was
    Rwandan, as did his mother in July 2010, when enquiries  were  made  of
    her.

 7. The respondent made further enquiries  and,  in  2012,  the  respondent
    concluded that the appellant was Tanzanian. However, an application  to
    the Tanzanian authorities for a travel document  was  refused.  Further
    correspondence with the Tanzanian authorities and litigation  with  the
    appellant followed. On 30 October 2018 the  Tanzanian  High  Commission
    agreed to issue an emergency travel document to the appellant.

 8. On 11 January 2019 the deportation order dated  1  September  2008  was
    withdrawn because it had been issued to  the  appellant  in  the  false
    identity of HB.  The appellant made further submissions on human rights
    grounds as to why he should not be deported but on  30  July  2019  was
    issued  with  a  notice  of  a  decision  to  refuse  a  human   rights
    application.

 9. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 20 November 2019. As before, the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeal in a decision dated 9 January 2020.

10. The respondent appealed against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    and, after a hearing on 19 October 2020, as before, on 12 November 2020
    I found an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    set it aside to be remade.

11. I was assisted in this matter by the  skeleton  arguments  provided  by
    both representatives and their agreement that the issue to  be  decided
    was narrow, concerning the exception set out in Section 117C(5) of  the
    Nationality and Immigration Act 2002, that is, whether the  appellant's
    deportation would result in unduly harsh circumstances for his son.

12.  There  was  agreement  about  the  basic  facts  of  the   appellant's
    relationship with his son, A.  It was not disputed  that  they  have  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  that  the  appellant  has  a
    parental role in his son's life.  The child was born in 2015  when  the
    appellant was in a relationship with his mother, H.  The mother  worked
    to support the family as the appellant was not permitted to do so.  The
    appellant was the primary carer for the child until approximately March
    2019 when the appellant and the child's mother separated.  Since  then,
    the child has lived with his mother during the week with the  appellant
    seeing him at weekends and continuing to play an important role in  his
    life.

13. Both parties referred to the recent case law from the Court  of  Appeal
    on the question of how to approach correctly an assessment of whether a
    child  will  face  unduly  harsh  circumstances.  The  parties   placed
    particular importance on  the  guidance  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    HA(Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.  In that case the Court of Appeal
    considered the correct  approach  referring  to  the  guidance  of  the
    Supreme Court in the case of KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  There
    was a  consensus  that  the  learning  of  Lord  Justice  Underhill  in
    paragraphs 51 to 57 was of particular importance:

         "51. The essential point is that the criterion of  undue  harshness
             sets a bar which is "elevated" and carries  a  "much  stronger
             emphasis" than mere  undesirability:  see  para.  27  of  Lord
             Carnwath's judgment, approving the UT's self-direction  in  MK
             (Sierra Leone), and para. 35. The UT's self-direction  uses  a
             battery of synonyms and antonyms: although these should not be
             allowed to become a substitute  for  the  statutory  language,
             tribunals may find them of some assistance as  a  reminder  of
             the elevated nature of the test. The reason why some degree of
             harshness is acceptable is  that  there  is  a  strong  public
             interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals  (including
             medium offenders): see para. 23. The underlying  question  for
             tribunals is whether the harshness which the deportation  will
             cause for the  partner  and/or  child  is  of  a  sufficiently
             elevated degree to outweigh that public interest.

         52.  However,  while  recognising  the  "elevated"  nature  of  the
             statutory test, it is important not to lose sight of the  fact
             that the hurdle which it sets is not as high as  that  set  by
             the test of "very compelling circumstances"  in  section  117C
             (6). As Lord Carnwath points out in the second part  of  para.
             23 of his judgment, disapproving IT (Jamaica), if that were so
             the position of medium offenders and their families  would  be
             no better than that of serious offenders. It follows that  the
             observations in the case-law to the effect  that  it  will  be
             rare for the test of "very  compelling  circumstances"  to  be
             satisfied have no application in this context (I have  already
             made this point - see para. 34 above). The statutory intention
             is evidently that the  hurdle  representing  the  unacceptable
             impact on a partner or child should be set  somewhere  between
             the (low) level applying in the case of persons who are liable
             to ordinary immigration removal (see Lord Carnwath's reference
             to section 117B (6) at the start of para. 23)  and  the  (very
             high) level applying to serious offenders.

         53.  Observations of that kind  are,  I  hope,  helpful,  but  they
             cannot identify an  objectively  measurable  standard.  It  is
             inherent in the nature of an exercise of the kind required  by
             section 117C  (5)  that  Parliament  intended  that  tribunals
             should in each case make an informed evaluative assessment  of
             whether the effect of the deportation of the parent or partner
             on their child or partner  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  in  the
             context of the strong public interest in  the  deportation  of
             foreign criminals; and further exposition of that phrase  will
             never be of more than limited value.

         54.  The Appellants of course accept that Lord Carnwath  said  what
             he said in the passages to which I  have  referred.  But  they
             contend that it is not a complete statement  of  the  relevant
             law and/or that it is capable of being misunderstood. In their
             joint skeleton argument they refer to the statement  in  para.
             23 of Lord Carnwath's judgment that  "one  is  looking  for  a
             degree of harshness going beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
             involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent"
             and continue:

                  "This  statement,  taken   in   isolation,   creates   the
                  opportunity for a court or tribunal to reach a  conclusion
                  on undue harshness without due regard to  the  section  55
                  duty or the  best  interests  of  the  child  and  without
                  careful analysis of all relevant factors specific  to  the
                  child in any particular case. Instead, such considerations
                  risk being 'swept up' under the  general  conclusion  that
                  the emotional and psychological impact on the child  would
                  not be  anything  other  than  that  which  is  ordinarily
                  expected by the deportation of a parent  ...  that  cannot
                  have been  the  intention  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
                  (Nigeria), which would otherwise  create  an  unreasonably
                  high threshold."

             Mr de Mello and Mr Bazini developed that submission  in  their
             oral arguments. In fact  it  comprises  two  distinct,  though
             possibly related, points. I take them in turn.

         55.  The first is that what Lord  Carnwath  says  in  the  relevant
             parts of  his  judgment  in  KO  makes  no  reference  to  the
             requirements of section 55 of the 2009 Act and  is  likely  to
             lead tribunals to fail to treat  the  best  interests  of  any
             affected child as a primary consideration. As to that,  it  is
             plainly not the case that Lord Carnwath  was  unaware  of  the
             relevance of section 55: see para. 15 of his judgment,  quoted
             at para. 41 above. The reason why it was unnecessary  for  him
             to refer explicitly to section 55 specifically in the  context
             of his discussion of Exception 2 is that the very  purpose  of
             the Exception, to the extent that it  is  concerned  with  the
             effect of deportation on a child, is to ensure that  the  best
             interests  of  that   child   are   treated   as   a   primary
             consideration. It does so by providing  that  those  interests
             should, in the case of a medium  offender,  prevail  over  the
             public interest in deportation where the effect on  the  child
             would be unduly harsh. In other words,  consideration  of  the
             best interests of the child is built into the statutory  test.
             It was not necessary for Lord Carnwath to spell  out  that  in
             the application of Exception 2 in any  particular  case  there
             will need to be "a careful analysis of  all  relevant  factors
             specific to the child"; but I am happy to confirm that that is
             so, as Lord Hodge makes clear  in  his  sixth  proposition  in
             Zoumbas.

         56.  The second point focuses on what are said to be the  risks  of
             treating KO as establishing a touchstone of whether the degree
             of harshness goes beyond "that which is ordinarily expected by
             the deportation of a parent". Lord Carnwath does not  in  fact
             use that phrase, but  a  reference  to  "nothing  out  of  the
             ordinary" appears in UTJ Southern's  decision.  I  see  rather
             more force in this submission. As explained  above,  the  test
             under section 117C (5) does indeed  require  an  appellant  to
             establish a degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  a  threshold
             "acceptable" level. It is not necessarily  wrong  to  describe
             that as an "ordinary" level of harshness, and I note that Lord
             Carnwath did not jib at  UTJ  Southern's  use  of  that  term.
             However, I think the Appellants are right to point out that it
             may be misleading if used incautiously. There seem to me to be
             two (related) risks. First, "ordinary"  is  capable  of  being
             understood as meaning anything which is not exceptional, or in
             any event rare. That is not the correct approach: see para. 52
             above. There is no reason in principle why  cases  of  "undue"
             harshness may not occur quite commonly. Secondly, if tribunals
             treat the essential  question  as  being  "is  this  level  of
             harshness out of the ordinary?" they may be  tempted  to  find
             that Exception 2 does not apply simply on the basis  that  the
             situation fits into some  commonly-encountered  pattern.  That
             would be dangerous. How a child will be affected by a parent's
             deportation will depend on an almost infinitely variable range
             of circumstances and it is not possible to identify a baseline
             of "ordinariness". Simply by way of  example,  the  degree  of
             harshness of the impact may be affected by the child's age; by
             whether the parent lives with them  (NB  that  a  divorced  or
             separated father may  still  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a child who lives with the mother);  by  the
             degree of the child's emotional dependence on the  parent;  by
             the  financial  consequences  of  his  deportation;   by   the
             availability  of  emotional  and  financial  support  from   a
             remaining  parent   and   other   family   members;   by   the
             practicability of maintaining a relationship with the deported
             parent; and of course by all the individual characteristics of
             the child.

         57.   I  make  those  points  in  response   to   the   Appellants'
             submissions. But I am anxious to avoid setting off  a  further
             chain of exposition. Tribunals  considering  the  parent  case
             under Exception 2 should not err in law if in each  case  they
             carefully  evaluate  the  likely  effect   of   the   parent's
             deportation on the particular child and  then  decide  whether
             that effect is not merely harsh but unduly harsh  applying  KO
             (Nigeria) in accordance with  the  guidance  at  paras.  50-53
             above."

14. I also took into account the guidance  from  Lord  Justice  Jackson  in
    paragraphs 151 to 163 of  HA  (Iraq)  on  the  need  to  focus  on  the
    individual  child  and  caution   in   "treating   physical   harm   as
    intrinsically more significant than emotional harm"; see paragraph 156.

15. Both parties also focussed their submissions on the social work  report
    dated 5 November 2019 of Ms Jane Bartlett.  There was no  dispute  that
    Ms Bartlett is a qualified and experienced social worker and  that  she
    had the expertise to prepare such a report.  The report sets  out  that
    Ms Bartlett was properly instructed.  I noted that in paragraph 4.1  of
    the report Ms Bartlett  set  out  the  correct  approach  to  the  best
    interests of the child in these proceedings, those best interests being
    a  primary  and  not  a  paramount  consideration.   That  belies   the
    suggestion in the respondent's  skeleton  argument  that  she  did  not
    appreciate the correct role  of  the  child's  best  interests  in  the
    assessment that has to be conducted here  as  compared  to  the  Family
    Courts.

16. The respondent's view was the social work report  was  not  capable  of
    showing unduly harsh  circumstances  for  the  appellant's  child.   Ms
    Bartlett set out in paragraph 3.5:

         "He [the appellant] said that contact with his son happens  now  by
         arrangement.  HB collects him each weekend so A can spend time with
         his family, especially J and I. A is now at pre-school on a Monday,
         Tuesday, Wednesday, in Oxford where C resides.  H said A loves  the
         train journey."

    The respondent maintained that the fact that the  appellant  no  longer
    lives full-time with the  child  and  his  mother  indicated  that  the
    appellant's deportation was less likely to have an unduly harsh  impact
    on A.  The social work report showed harshness but could not show  that
    the elevated threshold of undue harshness  was  met  here.   Where  the
    evidence did not show undue harshness for  the  child,  and  where  the
    public interest came back into  the  balance  in  the  very  compelling
    circumstances assessment, the appellant could not show  that  he  could
    defeat the public interest in deportation.

17. For the appellant, Mr Williams maintained that the social  work  report
    did provide evidence capable of  showing  that  the  appellant's  child
    would face unduly harsh circumstances in the event that  the  appellant
    was to be deported.  There was no dispute that the appellant  had  been
    the child's primary carer until the age of 4.  He had therefore  formed
    particularly close bonds with his  father,  their  strong  relationship
    continuing now even though the appellant was no longer living full-time
    with his son. The strength of their  relationship  indicated  that  the
    appellant's deportation was likely to be unduly harsh for his son.

18. Mr Williams  submitted  that  the  social  work  report  supported  the
    statements from the appellant, his ex-partner and her family as to  the
    appellant being a very  good  father  to  his  son  and  being  a  very
    important figure in his life. The partner stated, for example, recorded
    in paragraph 3.8 of the social work report, that the appellant  "has  a
    brilliant  relationship  with  A".   There  was  no  dispute  that  the
    appellant had continued to play a strong role in his child's life after
    the couple had separated.

19. Ms Bartlett's view, after interviewing the adults who knew A  best  and
    also spending time with A, was that the child would  experience  "fear,
    distress and separation from the familiarity of his  routines"  if  the
    appellant were deported; see paragraph 4.5.  Ms  Bartlett  went  on  to
    indicate in paragraph 4.6:

         "Should HB have to leave the UK and relocate  to  another  country,
         the emotional security of his son will  be  disrupted,  because  he
         would lose their relationship as he knows it, including any  direct
         contact."

    In paragraph 4.7 and 4.8 Ms Bartlett stated:

         "He is observed to be securely attached to his father who has  been
         his joint primary carer; A will know that he is safe when he senses
         his father's touch, when he looks for  him  and  hears  his  voice.
         Should his father suddenly disappear from his life he  will  suffer
         symptoms of physical and emotional loss, leading to  confusion  and
         anguish.  He will not understand these emotions but will suffer the
         loss physiologically and emotionally."

20. Ms  Bartlett  also  identified  that  the  appellant's  ex-partner  had
    "invested many years in their relationship, trusting him with the full-
    time care of her son" and that her mental state  would  deteriorate  in
    the event of the  appellant's  deportation,  she  would  "experience  a
    significant increase in levels of anxiety and stress as a  result"  and
    that this could have an additional negative impact on the child.

21. Throughout the report, Ms Bartlett stressed the importance of the  fact
    that the appellant was the primary  carer  for  the  child  during  the
    formative years between birth and 4 years old.  In paragraph 4.9 of the
    report she indicated that she considered it "crucial"  that  the  child
    retained the security of his father's presence. Ms  Bartlett  concluded
    in paragraph 5.3 of the report:

         "A needs stability in his world  and  continuity  of  care  by  his
         primary carers to whom he is securely attached, to protect him from
         the consequent psychological harm he would likely experience should
         his father be made to return".

22. The parties disagree as to whether Ms Bartlett's report shows that  the
    appellant's deportation would lead to unduly  harsh  circumstances  for
    the appellant's child.  I must make that assessment  now.  Ms  Bartlett
    considered it of particular  importance  that  the  appellant  was  A's
    primary carer for the first four years of the child's  life.  Her  view
    was that this meant  that  the  appellant  was  a  particularly  strong
    presence in A's life. This appeared to me to be significant factor. The
    evidence was  that  the  appellant  continues  to  have  a  significant
    relationship with the child even though he is not living with him full-
    time. The child is still young and highly vulnerable to the effects  of
    separation from his father.  There is no question  but  that  his  best
    interests are served by his father remaining in  the  UK  in  order  to
    continue the strong relationship that they  have  established.  I  also
    placed weight on the comments of Ms Bartlett on  the  difficulties  the
    appellant's ex-partner will experience if  the  appellant  were  to  be
    deported and how  this  would  add  to  the  child's  difficulties.  Ms
    Bartlett found the appellant's presence to  be  "crucial"  to  his  son
    because of these factors. It is therefore my conclusion that  for  this
    particular child, because of the nature of his  relationship  with  his
    father and the additional negative impact arising from the difficulties
    of his  mother  in  the  event  of  the  appellant's  deportation,  the
    threshold of undue hardship is met. Where the appellant has shown  that
    he comes within the provisions of Section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR must be allowed.



Notice of Decision

23. The appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed: S Pitt                                   Date: 3 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




