
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13971/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2020                 |On 22 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  LEON [P]
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fisher instructed by Kitty Falls Immigration Law.

For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. In his judgment of 30 June 2020 the President of the  Upper  Tribunal
       set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which dismissed the
       appellant's appeal against the refusal of his application  for  leave
       to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds, relied  upon
       as an exception to the order for his deportation pursuant to  section
       33 UK Borders Act 2007.




Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Australia born on 2 July 1957.
    3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1983 as the grandchild of
       British grandparents. The appellant asserts he was granted indefinite
       leave on arrival. He was accompanied on the flight  by  Barbara  [F],
       also an Australian citizen, and her two children Kim  (aged  12)  and
       Keith (aged 17).
    4. On 6 December 1984, the appellant married Barbara [P] (formerly [F]).
       Mrs [P] became a naturalised British citizen on 15 November 2012  and
       holds dual nationality.
    5. On 26 January  2015  at  Guildford  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
       convicted of Conspiracy to Defraud (make/supply articles for  use  in
       fraud) to which he pleaded guilty and on 19 August 2015 was  sentence
       to 42 months imprisonment. A confiscation order was made in  the  sum
       of  �850,981.87.  The  appellant  did  not  appeal   against   either
       conviction or sentence.
    6. On 25 September 2015, the appellant was served  with  a  decision  to
       make a deportation order at which point his ILR was curtailed.
    7.  The  appellant  initially  indicated  he  was  not  challenging  the
       deportation decision but later withdrew his consent to being deported
       on 6 February 2017 and indicated that he will be relying on Article 8
       ECHR in support of his challenge to the respondent's decision.
    8. The appellant was released on licence on 19 May 2017 and resides with
       Mrs [P] in a rented property in Surrey.
    9. Evidence was received from both the appellant and Mrs [P] via  Skype,
       who were cross-examined by Mrs Pettersen.

Summary of the appellants submissions

   10. On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that Mrs [P] is 83  years
       of age with deteriorating health  conditions  and  increased  medical
       needs, and that she will not get better. It was argued Mrs [P] has an
       entitlement to state assistance from Social Services or  Homecare  by
       Mrs Patterson. It was submitted on the appellant's  behalf  that  the
       real question was whether in practice she would receive the same.
   11. It was submitted Mr and Mrs [P] have been together for  a  long  time
       and that the effect of the appellant's deportation will be that  they
       will be unlikely to see each other again.
   12. It was submitted that even putting aside Covid 19 issues, the reality
       is that if Mrs [P] falls, she is unable  to  get  up.  She  has  real
       difficulties if she is on the ground which would be concerning if she
       did not have her telephone on her which meant she could lie there for
       days.
   13. It was submitted that the appellant's daughter was not  currently  in
       Australia. In Australia, the daughter works in a supermarket and  the
       appellant's son-in-law in a warehouse. It was submitted there was  no
       evidence of their financial means and insufficient evidence  to  show
       they could assist with rehousing the appellant if he  were  deported.
       It was submitted there is also the issue that Mr  [P]  described  his
       relationship with Kim as having changed when he left Mrs [P] in 2009,
       although they are back together now.
   14. Mr [P] argued he could  not  re-establish  himself  in  Australia,  a
       country  he  has  not  lived  in  for  30  years.  He  has  also  had
       approximately 37 years of ordinary residence in  the  United  Kingdom
       which he claims was more than  half  of  his  life  and  that  he  is
       culturally and socially integrated.  Mr  [P]  argues  that  he  faces
       significant obstacles to integration as it will be very difficult for
       him to start again. Being a person in his early  60s  makes  it  more
       difficult to adjust as opportunities are limited and had not built up
       the type of relationships that may assist in obtaining employment and
       re-establishing himself when he has been out of the  country  for  37
       years.
   15. It was argued by Mr [P] that social services could not offer his wife
       emotional support and that it will be unduly harsh in the context  of
       the couple if he was to be deported from the United Kingdom.
   16. In the alternative, it was argued on the appellant's behalf that even
       if  deportation  were  not   unduly   harsh   it   could   still   be
       disproportionate when considering all the competing factors.

Discussion

   17. In AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]
       EWCA Civ 1296 it was found that it would usually be unnecessary for a
       tribunal to refer to anything other than the  leading  Supreme  Court
       and Court of Appeal authorities.  They  are  confirmed  as  being  KO
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53;  R  (Kiarie  and  Byndloss)  v  SSHD
       [2017] UKSC 42; NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662;  and  HA
       (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.
   18. There are no dependant or minor children in  this  appeal.  The  only
       relevant UK based adults are the appellant and Mrs [P].
   19.  Paragraph  398(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides:  (b)   the
       deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the public good
       and in the public interest because they have  been  convicted  of  an
       offence  for  which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a   period   of
       imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months.
   20. The appellant was sentenced to 42 months  imprisonment  indicating  a
       sentence at the upper end of the 12 to 48-month range to which 398(b)
       applies.
   21. The exception to  deportation  most  commonly  relied  upon  is  that
       contained in section 33(2)(a): that removal of the  individual  would
       breach his or her rights  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights (ECHR), and in particular the right to family and private life
       under Article 8. That is the appellant case too.
   22. The exceptions to the respondent's ability to  deport  the  appellant
       are to be found in section 117(c)(4) and (5) Nationality, Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 which read:

           '(4)   Exception 1 applies where -


                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                for most of C's life,


                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                Kingdom, and


                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to  be
                deported.


           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh'

   23. As  a  'medium'  offender  who  falls  within  Paragraph  398(b)  the
       appellant will be deported unless he is able to  show  he  can  bring
       himself within any of the exceptions or his  circumstances  make  any
       interference with a  protected  right  disproportionate  (the  burden
       being upon the respondent to show that it is proportionate).
   24. In relation to the private life exception Mr [P] needs to show he had
       been (a) lawfully resident in the  UK  for  most  of  his  life,  (b)
       socially and culturally integrated into the  UK  and  (c)  there  are
       significant obstacles to his integration to his home country,  or,  a
       relationship  with  a  British  or  settled  person   (someone   with
       indefinite leave to remain), and that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
       the partner to travel with the deported  partner,  AND  it  would  be
       unduly harsh for  the  partner  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
       deportee, or, there are very compelling circumstances.
   25. The point of the 'lawful residence' test is to remind decision makers
       that little weight should be given to a private life  developed  when
       an individual had no right to be here. I find on  the  evidence  that
       this requirement has been shown to be met by Mr [P].
   26. "For most of his life" means more than 50%: see  AS  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1284 and  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department v SC (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112  at
       [53]. On the basis the appellant was born on 2 July 1957, entered the
       UK in 1983 when he was 26 years of age and lived here  lawfully  with
       ILR until it was curtailed in 2015 which is a period of 32  years,  I
       find Mr [P] has shown this requirement to be satisfied.
   27.  "Socially  and  culturally  integrated"  means  the  acceptance  and
       assumption of the culture, core values, customs, and social behaviour
       of the UK: see [57] of Binbuga v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 551. Whilst  it
       accepted that a period of imprisonment can weaken  integrative  links
       it was not made out the nature and quality of the appellant's private
       life is reduced such  that  he  does  not  have  a  private  life  of
       sufficient substance to engage Article 8 in this appeal. I find  this
       requirement to be satisfied.
   28. The "Very significant  obstacles"  test  requires  an  assessment  of
       whether the appellant is "enough of an insider" to form a  meaningful
       private life in Australia: Secretary of State for the Home Department
       v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.
   29. It is also settled  law  that  it  should  not  be  assumed  that  an
       individual will have a knowledge  of  the  'cultural  norms'  of  his
       country of origin. Whether this is the case depends on the evidence.
   30. In this regard the appellant relies upon the following factors:

              . He is 63 years of age.


              . He has worked and lived  in  the  UK  for  38  years  having
                permanently settled during his time here.


              . He has no family support on return.


              . He is nearing retirement and the ability to start afresh  in
                Australia where he has no family, work, or  social  contacts
                or  commitments  would  be   a   significant   obstacle   to
                reintegration.


              . He has not lived in Australia since he came to the UK.


              . Neither the appellant nor  his  wife  own  property  in  the
                United Kingdom or elsewhere and have no  access  to  capital
                that he would require to fund and set up another business in
                Australia.


              . At his age  and  downturn  in  employment  opportunities  in
                Australia make finding employment challenging.


              . The issue of whether having worked most of his adult life in
                the United Kingdom  he  will  be  entitled  to  any  welfare
                benefits in Australia including a state pension.

   31. As the appellant was born after  1  January  1957,  he  will  not  be
       eligible for a retirement pension in Australia until  he  reaches  67
       years, if eligible.  In relation to eligibility, generally a claimant
       must be an Australian resident for at least 10 years before they  are
       eligible for the age pension. Out of this 10-year period,  they  must
       also have lived in Australia for at least  5  years  in  a  row.  The
       appellant is unable to fulfil this criterion and  will  therefore  be
       reliant upon an exception.  This may apply to a person if  they  have
       lived or worked in  a  country  which  has  an  international  social
       security agreement with Australia.  The  agreement  with  the  United
       Kingdom ended on 1 March 2001. It  is  therefore  not  made  out  the
       appellant will be entitled to claim an old age pension in  Australia;
       although it was submitted on the respondent's behalf by Mrs Petterson
       that even if the appellant is not entitled  to  a  pension  form  the
       Australian government he will be entitled to claim  a  UK  retirement
       pension as a result of the National Insurance contributions made  and
       his settled status. It was not made out the appellant could not  have
       his UK state pension to be paid to him in Australia. The  full  basic
       UK State Pension is �134.25 per week which converts to  approximately
       $242.467 per week, less than the basis state pension in Australia  of
       $860.60 per fortnight or $430 per week.
   32. Whilst the appellant claims he is  unfamiliar  with  modern  life  in
       Australia, 'culture shock' does not  amount  to  a  very  significant
       obstacle: SSHD v Olarewaju [2018] EWCA Civ 557.
   33. The evidence shows there are family members in Australia  namely  the
       daughter Kim, her husband, and her family.  The  evidence  shows  Kim
       works in a supermarket and her husband  in  a  warehouse.  They  have
       children. Whilst it was submitted these family members are  currently
       in the United Kingdom as a result of their having travelled  over  to
       visit a relative on the husband's side, it appears that once Covid 19
       arrangements permit they will return to Australia with there being no
       evidence of an entitlement or  intention  to  settle  in  the  United
       Kingdom from them at the date of the hearing.  Whilst  the  appellant
       also claimed that his relationship with Kim had come  strained  as  a
       result of his leaving her mother during  an  earlier  part  of  their
       relationship,  as  acknowledged  in  the  appellant  and  Mrs   [P]'s
       statements, they are now reconciled to living in the  same  household
       and there was insufficient evidence to warrant a finding that any ill
       feeling that may have been present previously  still  exists  to  the
       extent that the appellant  would  not  have  the  benefit  of  family
       support and assistance if returned to Australia.
   34. Whilst the appellant sets out a number of negative factors  which  he
       asserts will hinder his reintegration it is also the  case  that  the
       appellant ran a very  successful  business  in  the  United  Kingdom,
       albeit one that led to his conviction, and that  he  had  a  previous
       business opportunity in Italy albeit it  was  not  suggested  in  the
       evidence the same was still available to him. The appellant still has
       his business acumen and a CV that would reflect the  same,  and  even
       though Australia, like any country affected by Covid-19, has seen  an
       increase in its rates of unemployment and  difficulties  for  certain
       sectors in securing employment, the  evidence  did  not  support  the
       appellant's claim that he would face very  significant  obstacles  in
       obtaining employment. The appellant has  his  own  health  needs  but
       there was insufficient evidence to show that he would not be able  to
       receive medication required in Australia or that his health prevented
       him securing employment even if not in his chosen field. It  was  not
       made out employment  opportunities  in  other  industries  that  have
       appeared more robust than others during the Covid  19  pandemic  will
       not be able to provide a potential opportunity for the  appellant  on
       return.
   35. The appellant also fails to make out  he  will  not  be  entitled  to
       JobSeeker Payment whilst looking  for  work.  There  is  a  residence
       requirement but in  this  regard  the  definition  of  an  Australian
       resident is a person who lives in Australia and are either:

           an Australian citizen


           a permanent residence visa holder


           a protected Special Category visa (SCV) holder.

   36. 'Living in Australia' means Australia is a person's  usual  place  of
       residence which it will be if the appellant is deported from the  UK.
       The appellant satisfies the citizenship requirement too. The relevant
       authority in Australia has announced that they have removed the newly
       arrived resident's waiting period until 31 December 2020 as a  result
       of Covid-19. The appellant adduced insufficient evidence to  show  he
       will not be entitled to such assistance on the facts of this case.
   37. The guidance of the Court of Appeal in  Kamara  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant reads:

           "In my view, the concept of a  foreign  criminals  "integration"
           into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as
           set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph  399A,  is  a  broad
           one. It is not confined to mere ability to  find  a  job  or  to
           sustain life whilst  living  in  another  country.   It  is  not
           appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject  to  some
           gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court of  tribunal
           simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has  chosen
           to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a  broad  evaluative
           judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be  enough
           of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society
           in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity   to
           participate in it, so far as to have a reasonable opportunity to
           be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day to  day  basis
           in that society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
           variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
           individuals private or family life."

   38. Whilst there are cultural differences between the  UK  and  Australia
       they are similar when it comes to having an  individualistic  culture
       which roughly translates into a  high  self-image  and  a  loose-knit
       society  when  people  generally  look  after  themselves  and  their
       immediate  families.  The  appellant  speaks  the  common   language,
       English, and society in Australia thrives upon what an individual can
       do rather than qualifications. It is not made  out,  especially  with
       family still in Australia, that the appellant has become so separated
       from his understanding of life there that he would be effectively  an
       outsider. I do not find it made out the appellant does not understand
       how life is carried on in Australia or that  he  has  established  he
       would not be able to participate in it. The appellant is  a  sociable
       individual and it was not made out he would not be accepted in either
       employment or society in general or that he lacks  the  capacity  and
       ability to participate and operate on a day-to-day basis  there.  The
       appellant's experience and skill sets will enable him to build up new
       relationships and contacts and re-establish his  private  life  which
       will include his relationship with family members in Australia.
   39. Whilst accepting that any transition will be difficult, I do not find
       on the basis of the evidence made available  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
       that the appellant has established very significant obstacles to  his
       reintegration into Australia.
   40. Whether there is a "genuine and subsisting relationship" between  the
       appellant, and  Mrs  [P]  is  a  question  of  fact.  I  find  having
       considered  the  evidence  made  available  and  find  that  whatever
       problems the appellant and Mrs [P] experienced in their  relationship
       in the past, which resulted in Mr [P] leaving  the  matrimonial  home
       and setting himself up elsewhere between 2009 and 2017, at  the  date
       of decision they are  living  together  and  are  in  a  genuine  and
       subsisting  relationship.   The   respondent   made   no   persuasive
       submissions that this was not the case. I find it made out  that  the
       appellant and Mrs [P] are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.
   41. The issue in  the  case  is  therefore  whether  the  effect  of  the
       appellants removal would be unduly harsh upon Mrs [P].
   42. In relation to the question whether this would  be  so  were  she  to
       remain in the UK,  the  appellant  relies  heavily  upon  his  wife's
       medical needs and his claim he needs to remain to  provide  her  with
       care and assistance and to meet her emotional needs.
   43. There is a large volume of medical evidence which I  have  considered
       in full, but the current position is summarised in  the  most  recent
       letter from Mrs [P]'s GP, which reads:

           '7 September 2020


                           TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN






           Medical Update Report Re:






           Mrs Barbara [P]


           ...






           I can confirm that as the GP of the above patient, the following
           report is taken from her medical records and interactions with
           Barbara.


             1.   On February 13th, Barbara reported issues with urinary
                symptoms at night and decreasing eyesight. She was confused
                as having a urine infection.


             2.   In July and afterwards, she had recurrent thrush
                infection of ther [sic] mouth.


             3.   On the 12th August, she reported having a fall and
                injuring her left elbow. She has previously had issues with
                left shoulder. She had an x-ray at hospital which showed no
                fractures but she had extensive bruising and haematoma
                formation and has required follow up for this.


           As with previous medical reports, I can confirm that Barbara has
           moderate frailty (0.25 on the eFI frailty score) and has
           reported that she is dependent on Leon for significant amounts
           of help at home and for transport to appointments and
           investigations. I believe this to be the truth.


           During lockdown for Covid-19, Barbara self-isolated as she would
           be classified as being in the increased vulnerability category
           due to her medical condition and age. Going forward, with the
           distinct possibility of a re-emergence of Covid-19, she will
           need to take care and will need to ensure social distancing and
           may need to self-isolate again. She will then obviously be
           reliant on Leon even more. As can be seen, Barbara is at
           increased risk of falls and has suffered these in occasions.


           The risks will not lessen as time goes by. I have been asked to
           comment re: future long-haul travel. I think that due to her
           frailty and medical condition, this would be very difficult for
           her and certainly if attempting above. During [sic] Covid-19, I
           would not advise this unless absolutely necessary.






           Yours faithfully


           Dr D Watts'

   44. The eFI (Electronic Frailty Index) is stated on the NHS  website  not
       to  be  a  clinical  diagnostic  tool;  "it  is  a  population   risk
       stratification tool which identifies groups of people who are  likely
       to be living with varying degrees of frailty but it is not able to do
       this for specific individuals. Therefore, when the eFI identifies  an
       individual who may be living with severe or moderate frailty,  direct
       clinical assessment and judgment  should  be  applied  to  confirm  a
       diagnosis".
   45. Mrs [P] confirmed in her evidence that  she  has  not  had  any  such
       assessment.  It may  have  assisted  if  a  health  and  social  care
       assessment had been carried out by social services to find  out  what
       help and support is needed - such as healthcare, equipment,  help  in
       her home or residential care. No evidence that contact has been  made
       with the adult social services department of Mrs [P]'s local  council
       to ask for a care assessment was provided either. The letter from the
       GP refers to 'self-reporting' of needs  which,  whilst  an  important
       part of any assessment  process,  is  not  assessment  by  a  trained
       practitioner. The GP  believes  this  to  be  true  but  provides  no
       evidential basis for how  this  conclusion  is  reached  in  clinical
       terms.
   46.  It  is  accepted  Mrs  [P]'s  concerns  relating  to   falling   are
       subjectively justified as once a person has had a fall, they are more
       likely to fall again and such falls often cause injuries.  It was not
       disputed before me that Mrs [P] might find it  difficult  to  get  up
       after a fall on her own which  is  a  common  problem  often  due  to
       injury, stiff joints, weak muscles, or a number of other factors. Mrs
       [P] can clearly raise herself and get up if she has access to a stool
       or chair to right herself but, if the same is not available, she  has
       been dependent upon the help of the appellant.
   47. The subjective fear of falling and being left unable to  get  up  for
       days, whilst understandable, is also  speculative  and,  in  part,  a
       concern based upon the failure to  explore  options.   The  trend  to
       facilitate those who are elderly remaining in their homes for as long
       as possible means there are many with or without health issues living
       alone. Falling is a common issue with the elderly. There are a number
       of affordable products on the market meaning that if a person suffers
       from a fall or has a medical emergency then all they need to do is to
       either press a button on a device on a pendant they wear around their
       neck or press on an alarm base  unit  which  sends  a  medical  alert
       message through to the suppliers Response Team, who are available  24
       hours a day, 365 days a year. Most systems operate by trying to speak
       to the caller once an alarm  has  been  triggered  over  the  alarm's
       loudspeaker, to assess the situation and once  they  understand  what
       has happened  to  act  immediately  by  calling  nominated  emergency
       contacts or, if  needed, the emergency services.  The  assertion  the
       appellant's deportation will effectively  result  in  Mrs  [P]  being
       'abandoned' in such circumstances is not made out. There  is  nothing
       from the GP to say such services are not available, or that  they  or
       the Surgery's help will not be adequate, or to indicate they will not
       be able to assist in relation to both physical  and  emotional/mental
       health issues that may arise if  Mr  [P]  is  deported  and  Mrs  [P]
       remains in the UK.
   48. In relation to Mr [P] it is acknowledged he has health issues of  his
       own but it was not made out that he will not be able  to  obtain  the
       required medication or assistance in Australia without which he would
       suffer an irreversible decline in his physical  or  emotional  health
       which might adversely impact upon Mrs [P] if she was to remain in the
       United Kingdom.
   49. Although it is claimed that if the appellant is deported Mrs [P] will
       never see him again, I  find  this  to  be  an  exaggeration.  Whilst
       immediate physical face-to-face contact may be  only  something  that
       can be achieved by actual visits the  availability  of  online  video
       services such as Skype, Teams, and other similar  facilities  enables
       people to see and speak to people in real time, as occurred  in  this
       hearing. Many with family on the other side of the  world  only  have
       the ability  to  see  each  other  physically  infrequently  but  can
       communicate  as  often  as  they  wish  by  using   such   means   of
       communication.
   50. Mrs [P] has already been able to access and enjoy the services of the
       NHS including attending courses/presentations part of the "Be Stable"
       programme and in relation to the ongoing shoulder problems. It is not
       suggested she will not be able to  receive  prescription  medication,
       which  many  pharmacies  deliver  to  an  elderly  person,  and   has
       demonstrated an ability to live without the appellant  in  the  past.
       Whilst I appreciate that Mrs [P]  will  not  be  able  to  enjoy  the
       companionship of the appellant and the assistance he provides to  her
       it has not been made out that the consequences  of  not  having  such
       assistance make the appellant's deportation unduly harsh. Although it
       was said that the appellant prepares their meals,  services  such  as
       Home Help, meals on  wheels,  or  other  similar  services  could  be
       provided if deemed necessary following a formal assessment by  social
       services. Mrs [P] is entitled to the same as a result of her  British
       national.
   51. Mrs [P] also coped without the appellant whilst they  were  separated
       between 2009 and when the  appellant  was  released  from  prison  on
       licence to Mrs [P]'s address in 2017. It is accepted that at the time
       when the appellant went to prison in 2015 Mrs [P] was 77 years of age
       and in better health and that she had not suffered falls prior to the
       appellants release in 2017.
   52. There is insufficient evidence to support the claim Mrs [P] needs one
       to one help in washing, dressing or day-to-day activities, nor is  it
       made out she could not adequately feed herself if the  appellant  was
       not present and doing so.
   53. In relation to the claim there will be no visits as Mrs [P]  will  be
       unable to fly to Australia as the journey will be too much  for  her,
       the letter from the GP states that long haul travel may be too  much.
       There is no definitive statement it will be  such  that  this  option
       would not be available and no examination of whether it was  feasible
       if the journey was broken up as flights  to  Australia  could  be  by
       stays in Dubai, Singapore, or elsewhere. The GP also refers  to  such
       flights being an option if they were absolutely necessary which is  a
       judgement call for Mrs [P] to make herself.
   54. Although the appellant's deportation will result in  changes  to  Mrs
       [P]'s living arrangement, insufficient evidence has been provided  to
       warrant a finding that the effects upon  her  go  beyond  that  which
       would necessarily be involved by a person faced with deportation on a
       partner. The argument that the  required  test  was  to  undertake  a
       comparison between the impact upon Mrs [P] and what the impact  would
       be upon  a  person  who  had  no  such  health  needs  is,  arguably,
       incorrect. As found in AA (Nigeria) "it is  undesirable  to  approach
       the issue by trying to identify what is "the norm" and  what  in  the
       individual case goes beyond that: almost  all  cases  are  different,
       involving a multitude of individual factors, and it is impossible  to
       measure objectively a norm or  baseline  as  the  comparator  against
       which the individual case is to be judged".
   55. It is a fact sensitive assessment relating to whether the effect upon
       the subject being considered, in this case Mrs [P], would  be  unduly
       harsh. I accept the impact may be harsh, but it is not  made  out  it
       will be unduly harsh.
   56. It also emerged during the course of the evidence that  Mrs  [P]  had
       fallen whilst being out working  in  her  garden.  As  Mrs  Petterson
       submitted, it was not made out this was a necessary activity  or  one
       for which appropriate aids could not be provided as part of a  Social
       services review. Grab rails and other items  are  often  provided  to
       assist an individual's mobility in their property, if required.
   57. In relation to whether it will be unduly harsh for Mrs [P]  accompany
       the appellant to Australia so they may continue their family life are
       together, the comments made above in relation to the economic reality
       are equally pertinent.
   58. It has not been made out Mrs [P] could not fly with the appellant  to
       Australia even though that may be a difficult trip for her  including
       the need for a wheelchair. If she returns  with  the  appellant  this
       will only require a one-way journey.
   59.  Whilst  the  appellant  refers  to   the   prospect   of   continued
       deterioration of Mrs [P], it is the position prevailing at  the  date
       of this hearing  which  is  the  relevant  position  and  it  is  not
       appropriate to speculate what may be the case in the  future,  unless
       reasonably foreseen on the available evidence.
   60. It is also the case that if Mr and Mrs [P] return  as  a  couple  the
       assistance currently made available for Mrs [P]  will  continue  from
       either the appellant or other family members if living locally.
   61. Living in Australia in addition to her daughter Kim, are her  husband
       and Mr and Mrs  [P]'s  grandchildren.   The  finding  of  a  lack  of
       evidence that the Australia-based family would effectively refuse  to
       assist the appellant is more pertinent if  they  are  returned  as  a
       couple, when both Mr and Mrs  [P]  will  be  seeking  to  reintegrate
       themselves into Australian society.
   62. Mrs [P] appears to be able to manage without  the  benefit  of  state
       funding in the UK indicating a private source of income which, whilst
       not substantial has not been shown to be insufficient to  meet  their
       needs on return to Australia as it has been in relation to  rent  and
       associated living costs in the United Kingdom.
   63. The family members currently in the United Kingdom  as  a  result  of
       their inability to return to Australia due to the  Covid-19  pandemic
       restrictions have no settled status and nor  is  there  any  evidence
       they have applied for the same.  Any  interaction  between  the  same
       forming part of the appellant's  and  his  wife's  private  life  can
       therefore continue in Australia.
   64. I note that in HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       (Rev 1) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 the court cautioned  against  conflating
       "undue harshness" with  the  far  higher  test  of  "very  compelling
       circumstances". The underlying concept is of an "enhanced  degree  of
       harshness sufficient to outweigh the public interest  in  the  medium
       offender category".
   65. I find it not made out, when considering  the  evidence  holistically
       that the appellant has established that Mrs [P] returning with him to
       Australia or remaining in the United Kingdom whilst he returns  alone
       is unduly harsh. I come to this  conclusion  being  aware  that  when
       assessing the question of undue harshness this threshold  is  not  as
       high as s. 117C (6): see HA (Iraq) at [52]:

           "However,  while  recognising  the  "elevated"  nature  of   the
           statutory test, it is important not to lose sight  of  the  fact
           that the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by  the
           test of "very compelling circumstances" in section 117C (6).  As
           Lord Carnwath points out in the second part of para. 23  of  his
           judgment,  disapproving  IT  (Jamaica),  if  that  were  so  the
           position of medium offenders and  their  families  would  be  no
           better than that of  serious  offenders.  It  follows  that  the
           observations in the case-law to the effect that it will be  rare
           for the test of "very compelling circumstances" to be  satisfied
           have no application in this context (I have  already  made  this
           point  -  see  para.  34  above).  The  statutory  intention  is
           evidently that the hurdle representing the  unacceptable  impact
           on a partner or child should be set somewhere between the  (low)
           level applying in the case of persons who are liable to ordinary
           immigration removal (see Lord Carnwath's  reference  to  section
           117B (6) at the start of para. 23) and  the  (very  high)  level
           applying to serious offenders."

   66. In AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]
       EWCA Civ 1296 Lord Justice Popplewell confirmed at paragraph 10  that
       in relation to what is meant by "unduly harsh"  in  section  117C(5),
       the authoritative guidance is now that given by Lord Carnwath JSC  in
       KO (Nigeria) and by the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq). At paragraph 12
       he explained that the expression "unduly harsh"  does not posit  some
       objectively measurable standard of harshness which is acceptable, but
       sets a bar which is more elevated than mere undesirability but not as
       high as the "very compelling circumstances" test  in  s.117C(6).   He
       concluded that it is potentially misleading and dangerous to seek  to
       identify some "ordinary" level of harshness as an acceptable level by
       reference to what may be commonly encountered circumstances: there is
       no reason in principle why cases of  undue  hardship  may  not  occur
       quite commonly; and how a  child  will  be  affected  by  a  parent's
       deportation will depend upon an almost infinitely variable  range  of
       circumstances.  It  is  not  possible  to  identify  a  baseline   of
       "ordinariness".
   67. What remains in issue is the difficulty in reconciling  the  approach
       of the court of Appeal with the judgment  of  Lord  Carnwath  in  the
       Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) where he stated:

           "The word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It  assumes
           that there is a "due" level of  "harshness",  that  is  a  level
           which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant  context.
           "Unduly" implies something going beyond  that  level...  One  is
           looking for a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
           necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation
           of a parent. "

   68. As the Supreme Court is the higher courts whose decision are  binding
       on those below until the Supreme Court itself clarifies this apparent
       contradiction, the risk for potential confusion remains. Judges below
       are often criticized for suggesting an interpretation of the  wording
       of a judgement given by a Senior Court on the basis it  is  for  that
       court to say what they mean and not for those  below  to  suggest  an
       alternative meaning.
   69. In this appeal,  however,  on  either  interpretation  the  appellant
       cannot succeed on the facts.
   70. The outcome of this  appeal  must  be  to  produces  a  final  result
       compatible with Article 8. That comes down in the end to the question
       of the proportionality of the decision.
   71. The appellant is not able to succeed on either of the  exceptions  to
       be found in section 117 C or the Immigration Rules.  Considering  the
       substantial weight to be placed upon the right of the State to deport
       foreign  criminals  sufficiently  strong  reasons  are  required   to
       outweigh the strong public interest in the appellant's deportation.
   72. British citizenship is  important.   Whilst  it  is  a  "weighty  and
       significant" factor it is not determinative  but  has  been  factored
       into the assessment of Mrs [P]  who  holds  joint  British/Australian
       citizenship.
   73. In relation to question of rehabilitation, the  appellant  states  he
       has not and will not reoffend in the future. I accept  that  where  a
       potential deportee can establish no/low risk of reoffending this will
       be relevant to  proportionality  balancing  exercise,  although  will
       rarely be of great weight bearing in mind  public  policy/deterrence.
       In this case it has been factored in but does not outweigh the public
       interest.
   74. Having undertaken an informed evaluative assessment  of  whether  the
       effect of the deportation of the appellant would be "unduly harsh", I
       find it will be not and the respondent's decision  proportionate,  in
       the context of the strong  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
       foreign criminals.  I find that on the facts of this case that whilst
       there is sympathy for Mrs [P] who is not in any way culpable for  the
       appellant's offending, the respondent has discharged  the  burden  on
       her to the required standard to establish  that  notwithstanding  the
       difficulties that may be faced by this family unit the result of  the
       required holistic assessment of the competing arguments show that the
       scales weigh heavily in favour of the respondent.  It  has  not  been
       shown there are sufficient compelling circumstances  to  warrant  the
       appeal being allowed. The appellant's  deportation  is  proportionate
       and a decision compatible with the  accepted  interference  with  the
       protected article 8 rights.

Decision


   75. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


   76. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14 October 2020

