
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13929/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2019                  |On 27 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                              Mr Gobind Gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 16 July 1984, so he is now
some 35 years old.  He appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Seelhoff, promulgated on 16 May 2019 following a hearing some
thirteen days earlier on 3 May 2019 in which he dismissed the appellant's
appeal against a decision of the respondent refusing him entry clearance to
join his family in the UK.

The basis of the claim was that the appellant's father was a Gurkha officer
(a captain) who but for what has now been regarded as a "historic
injustice" would have been permitted to apply for entry clearance earlier
while the appellant was still a minor and that if he had done so the
appellant would have been granted settlement at a time when he would have
been entitled to it.  There have been a number of decided cases in which it
has been established that absent other considerations entry clearance is
likely to be granted to an adult child who would have been entitled to
entry clearance while he was a minor but for the historic injustice,
provided that at the time of application there is still family life between
that applicant and his family.  Accordingly, the crucial issue in this
appeal was whether or not there was family life between the appellant and
his family at the time this application was considered.

It is the appellant's case that the judge made a number of significant
errors in his decision which were sufficiently serious to be material such
that the decision must be remade.  Although it is accepted on behalf of the
appellant that there were discrepancies in the evidence which made this
appellant's case less strong than it otherwise might have been, but it is
argued that notwithstanding these discrepancies the judge failed to
consider the evidence that there was properly.

The first major error which it is said that the judge made is where he set
out at paragraph 27 what the appellant had to prove in the following terms:

"27. It is for the appellant to prove on the balance of probabilities that
family life is engaged in the case.  That means that he needs to prove that
there is family life in the Kugathas sense i.e. something beyond the normal
emotional dependency, support or commitment that one sees between adult
parents and their children".

It is accepted on behalf of the respondent by Ms Cunha, that this is not
the correct test.  Although Ms Cunha suggests that this may have just been
a typographical error she accepts that what is necessary is for an
applicant to establish that there is something beyond the "normal emotional
ties" to be expected between adult parents and their children, which is
clearly a much lower test.

The next error is at paragraph 28 where when considering whether "such
support or dependency has been demonstrated on the balance of
probabilities" the judge then stated that "starting with tangible evidence
there is no evidence of any payment of money going from the sponsor to the
appellant at any point between April 2016 and the date of application in
February 2018".  It seems clear that this statement is simply wrong because
there is evidence (for example at pages 136, 137, 138 and 139 of the
appellant's bundle which was before the judge), that money payments had
been made by the sponsors of which the obvious recipient must have been the
appellant.  Although Ms Cunha suggests that it is possible that the judge
might have intended to mean that there was no evidence that any payments
which had been made had been received by the appellant he does not say this
and it is not the natural meaning of what he says.

Another error is that at paragraph 31 the judge summarises the evidence of
the father and the mother with regard to the appellant's friends within
Nepal as follows:

"Neither the father nor the mother appeared to know even the name of any of
the appellant's friends or anything about what he does in Nepal beyond
attending a gym",

going on to state that "this either suggests that they do not know him as
well as claimed or that information is being concealed so as to suggest
that he has less ties to Nepal than they want the Tribunal to know".

This is not a fair reflection of the evidence given by the appellant's
father as recorded at paragraph 16 of the decision, which is as follows:

"16. The sponsor was asked what he talked to his son about and he said he
did not know and that his wife knew about that.  The sponsor said that his
son has no friends in Nepal and had never been in a relationship with
anyone".

The judge also records in that paragraph that although the evidence
appeared confusing and his Counsel had confirmed that his instructions were
that the sponsor was fit to give evidence, nonetheless he had had a stroke.
 The fundamental point, however, is that what the father had said was that
his son had no friends in Nepal, and not that he had said that he did not
know the name of his friends.  The inference that the judge made at
paragraph 31 that this suggested either that the parents did not know him
as well as claimed or that information was being concealed is difficult to
sustain.

Then, at paragraph 33, the judge stated as follows:

"33. Last is the very obvious point taken by the respondent in the decision
that these are parents who left the appellant behind in Nepal eleven years
ago and did not choose to apply for him to join them at any stage even when
he was under the age of 31.  Were I to accept that there have been legal
obstacles at times ... I note that there were prolonged periods of several
years where there were no visits and no contact at all".

In fact, the witnesses in their witness statements had dealt with this
issue.  The sponsor in his statement at paragraph 13 had said that he and
his wife did not have money to visit his children and that they were saving
the money for the children's applications to join them when he had a stroke
in 2009.  His job had ended with that stroke and he became very weak.  He
had, he said, made efforts in December 2010 to go to Nepal and had stayed
with the children for one month.  His evidence was that they had spoken
with the children over the phone at least two to three times in a week but
it was the most that they could do because of the time difference and the
network problems in the UK and Nepal.

At paragraph 14 he said that he and his wife had visited Nepal every year,
and that when the settlement policy was changed in 2015 he and his wife
were very hopeful that they could bring their children in.  The difficulty,
however, was that he did not have sufficient money to apply for both
children to come in.  The appellant's mother's evidence was that their
other child had died in 2018 but that she spoke to the appellant now every
day to express each other's griefs and worries (see para 12 of her witness
statement) and (at paragraph 14) they have been supporting him financially
and emotionally.  The judge did not appear to take any of this evidence
into consideration within his decision and accordingly, in light of this
evidence, which was not considered by the judge, his finding that there had
been prolonged periods of several years when there were no visits and no
contact at all is not consistent with the evidence which had been given on
behalf of the appellant.  Ms Cunha accepted that the judge's reference at
paragraph 31 to the father and mother appearing not to know even the name
of any of the appellant's friends was an error and was not justified by the
evidence which had been given and she also accepted, as already indicated,
that the legal test set out by the judge at paragraph 27 was wrong.  Also,
the judge had been wrong to state that there was no evidence of any payment
of money going from the sponsor to the appellant (although, as I have
already indicated above, she suggested that it was at least possible that
the judge had in mind, although he did not state this, that there was no
evidence that payments that had been made had gone to the appellant
himself).

In my judgment, there are a sufficiently large number of errors which go to
the crucial issue of whether or not there remained family life between the
appellant and his parents that this decision is unsustainable and must be
remade.

In light of this decision both parties are in agreement that the
appropriate course is to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal
so that the decision can be remade.  There will have to be a complete
rehearing of the evidence and it is appropriate for this to be conducted in
the First-tier Tribunal.  I accordingly will set aside Judge Seelhoff's
decision and order that the decision be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff as
containing a material error of law and direct that this appeal be remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross for rehearing before any
judge other than Judge Seelhoff.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
          Dated:  23 September 2019
