
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13734/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2017                            |On 06 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mr Hafiz Muhammad Fawad Ul-Haq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M A Saeed, Solicitor, Legal Solutions Advocates &
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lodge dated 13 October 2016 which allowed the human rights appeal of Mr
    Ul-Haq.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to Mr Ul-Haq as the appellant
    and to the Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appeal was brought before the First-tier Tribunal by the  appellant
    against a   decision made by the Secretary of State on 8 December 2015.
     The decision concerned the widely known issue of using a proxy to  sit
    an ETS/TOEIC test.  The facts of this case are slightly different  from
    the mainstream of those cases, however.

 4. The appellant here applied in time on human rights grounds for  further
    leave to remain with his wife and stepchildren.  The  respondent  found
    against him under the family life provisions of Appendix FM as follows:



          "It is not accepted that you meet the  requirements  of  S-LTR  in
         paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) for the following reasons.  Paragraph S-
         LTR.1.6 states that an applicant will normally be refused if

             'The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to
             the public good because their conduct  (including  convictions
             which do not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to  1.5.),
             character, associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable
             to allow them to remain in the UK.'

         You were invited for an interview on  16  January  2015  which  was
         deemed as non credible as the interviewer felt  that  you  had  not
         entered the UK to study and you had  not  completed  none  of  your
         courses.

         At the interview, you spoke of your second English  test  taken  at
         Harrow International Business School, 3 months after  the  original
         test which was taken on 5 February 2014 at Queensway College.

         Your representative's letter of 2 December 2015 confirms  that  you
         took the second test because your were not issued a certificate  in
         respect of your first test on  5  February  2014.   Therefore  this
         confirms that the you took the invalid test.

         In  fraudulently  obtaining  a  TOEIC  certificate  in  the  manner
         outlined above, you willingly participated in what was  clearly  an
         organized and serious attempt, given the  complicity  of  the  test
         centre itself, to defraud the SSHD and others.  In  doing  so,  you
         displayed a flagrant disregard for the public  interest,  according
         to which migrants are required to have a certain level  of  English
         language ability in order  to  facilitate  social  integration  and
         cohesion, as well as to reduce  the  likelihood  of  them  being  a
         burden on the taxpayer.

         Accordingly, I am satisfied that your presence in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive  to  the  public  good  because  your  conduct  makes  it
         undesirable to allow you to remain in the UK.  Your application  is
         therefore refused under  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  of  the  Immigration
         Rules."

 5. The respondent referred to  the  appellant  "fraudulently  obtaining  a
    TOEIC certificate".  Her evidence, however, at appendix H of her bundle
    showed only two parts of the ETS/TOEIC test  at  Queensway  College  in
    February 2014 as "invalid" but not all four of the components  of  that
    test. As the refusal letter also indicates the appellant did  not  rely
    on these invalid test but  provided  an  English  language  certificate
    obtained via Harrow International Business School in May  2014.  It  is
    undisputed that this certificate was valid. The  respondent's  case  at
    its highest therefore could only be that the appellant had  taken  half
    an "invalid test" and never sought to rely on that in an application to
    the respondent. That, in my judgement, is a different situation from an
    applicant who seeks to rely on a false test certificate in  support  of
    an application for leave.

 6. When the case came before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant did not
    dispute that he had sate the two modules  he  had  taken  at  Queensway
    College or that they had been declared to be invalid. As in his earlier
    correspondence with the respondent, his case was that  he  had  been  a
    victim of dishonesty by Queensway College. He had taken the  first  two
    parts of the test but had been unable to  arrange  to  sit  the  second
    part. Knowing that he needed an English language test result,  he  went
    to another college to obtain one.

 7. The judge makes his findings on the appellant's conduct at [16] to [22]
    of  the  decision  and  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  meet  the
    suitability  requirements.   At  [16]  and  [17]  the  judge  correctly
    indicated that the Secretary of State's refusal  was  somewhat  unclear
    because of the reference to a false TOEIC certificate when  it  is  not
    disputed that no such certificate has ever existed in  this  case.  The
    judge goes on at [18] and [19] to make his findings on suitability:

         "18. The Appellant's case  is  that  he  sat  half  the  test,  two
             modules, and was awaiting details of the second half but never
             received an appointment  letter.   He  tried  to  contact  the
             centre but they would not respond.  That scenario has  a  ring
             of truth and is corroborated to some extent by the  fact  that
             the Appellant never  submitted  an  invalid  certificate.   He
             never did that I find because he was never issued with one  in
             the first place.

         19.  On the balance of probabilities I find that the Appellant  has
             been the victim of deception and not the perpetrator.  I might
             add that at the hearing he was extremely fluent in English and
             within the Appellant's bundle are a  number  of  certificates,
             pages 7 - 12, demonstrating his English ability.   I  find  he
             had no need to cheat to obtain a TOEIC  and  that  is  another
             reason to reject the Respondent's case",

 8. It is  the  findings  in  these  two  paragraphs  that  the  respondent
    challenges  now.  The  respondent's  concern  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge did not appear to refer to the respondent's evidence, at
    appendix H, J and K of the bundle at all, or accept, in line with UTIAC
    and Court of Appeal decisions, that the respondent's  generic  evidence
    together with the invalid  test  results  showed  that  the  evidential
    burden on her was met; SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of  Proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) and Majumder  and  Qadir  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1167
    applied.

 9. The respondent is correct to point out that here there is no  reference
    to the generic witness statements. It is not correct  to  suggest  that
    the First-tier Tribunal judge was not aware of the invalid test results
    at appendix H as they are an implicit part  of  his  finding  that  the
    appellant was a victim of deception by Queensway College.

10. It is not my view that the failure to refer to or take into account the
    respondent's generic witness statements contained in appendix J  and  K
    of the respondent's bundle amounted to material  error.  Those  witness
    statements address the situation where an applicant  provides  a  TOEIC
    certificate that ETS state is invalid and fraudulently obtained using a
    proxy. They do not address the situation of an applicant relying  on  a
    valid certificate and being shown to have taken only  half  an  invalid
    test, rthen approaching another, genuine test centre. The inference  of
    dishonesty drawn from the first scenario is not as  easily  reached  on
    the circumstances of this appellant. In my judgement  the  respondent's
    generic evidence did not address the circumstances of this case and the
    FTTJ did not err materially in failing to  accept  it  as  meeting  the
    evidential burden.

11. It is therefore my conclusion that a material error does not  arise  as
    the respondent's generic material did not meet the different evidential
    burden on her here as it addressed different facts from those  of  this
    appellant. It is worth noting also that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    having heard the appellant's evidence and so being in a  good  position
    to make findings on his credibility, had the type of detailed  personal
    evidence found in the above cases of being capable of showing the legal
    burden as not met even in a standard ETS/TOEIC case.

12. For these reasons I do not find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    materially in the approach to the respondent's generic evidence.

DECISION

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 2 February 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

