
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/13862/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 January 2018                         |On 8 February 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                               mrs lucky begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Chowdhury
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 8 August  1977.   She
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the spouse  of  Mr
    MD Soyfur Rahman, born on 8 June 1972, who is a British  citizen.   The
    application was submitted online on 23 March 2016.  On 12 May 2016  the
    respondent refused the appellant's application.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer did not accept that the sponsor and appellant are in a  genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship.   The  Entry  Clearance   Officer   also
    considered that the appellant was not exempt from the English  language
    requirement and that  she  had  not  passed  the  required  test.   The
    application was also refused under Article 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.


 2. The appellant appealed against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


 3. In a decision promulgated on 1 August 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wright dismissed the appellant's appeal.   The  judge,  as  a  starting
    point, when determining the appeal on human rights  grounds  considered
    the appellant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules. The judge  found
    that the appellant was not exempt from the English language requirement
    and therefore does not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
    The judge found that refusal of entry clearance would not constitute  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights  or
    those of her sponsor.


 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 31  October  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Doyle granted permission to appeal.


The hearing before the Upper Tribunal


 5. The grounds of appeal argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not
    consider  appropriately  the  requirements  for   the   respondent   to
    demonstrate  that  the  refusal  meets  a  legitimate  aim   and   that
    immigration controls can only be used  for  the  prevention  of  crime.
    Reliance was placed on paragraph 34 of R (on the  applications  of  Ali
    and Bibi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  UKSC  68.
    Mr Chowdhury submitted that the appellant has no criminal record and is
    not dependent on the state  so  that  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control cannot be relied upon and the appeal cannot be refused  on  the
    basis that that is a legitimate aim.


 6. He submitted that the judge had applied the wrong  standard  of  proof.
    At paragraph 21 the judge set out that it  was  for  the  appellant  to
    prove on the balance of probabilities that  her  circumstances  qualify
    her for admission to the UK.


 7. He submitted that the judge had imposed a threshold test under  Article
    8.  Reliance was placed on the case of Nagre, R (on the application of)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin).
    It submitted that because the appellant will never be able to join  her
    spouse in the UK as a result of the refusal  of  entry  clearance  that
    this amounts to exceptional circumstances  resulting  in  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences for the appellant.  He relied on the case of Shahzad
    (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).


 8. The judge erred by failing to consider that  the  sponsor  stated  'the
    test' this meant a mock test. The judge did  not  confirm  whether  the
    Mentors Education letter is wrong or her statement  was  wrong  as  the
    letter provided from Mentors Education referred to a mock test.


 9. In oral submissions Mr  Chowdhury  referred  to  the  English  language
    exemption and submitted that the judge had sufficient evidence to  make
    findings on the English language exemption.  It  was  for  a  judge  to
    determine whether or not there are exceptional circumstances  resulting
    in the appellant not  being  required  to  meet  the  English  language
    requirement.


10. Mr Chowdhury accepted that there was no appeal right against either the
    respondent's decision under the Immigration Rules or indeed the  First-
    tier Tribunal's findings in relation to that matter and  therefore  did
    not press the English language exemption issue further.


11. He submitted that at paragraph 34 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    the judge set out a number of factors.  The judge erred in finding that
    some of these factors, for example 34(iii), i.e. with regard to Section
    117B(iii) of the 2002 Act that in the interest of  the  economic  well-
    being of the UK that persons are financially independent can only be  a
    neutral factor.  He submitted that all these factors as set out by  the
    judge as being neutral should be considered to  be  in  favour  of  the
    appellant.  He relied on the case of Shahzad and  submitted  that  this
    demonstrates that these should be positive factors.


12. Mr Walker submitted that there may have  been  an  error  of  law  with
    regard to setting out the wrong standard of  proof  but  that  was  not
    material when considering paragraph 33  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision when undertaking consideration of Article 8.  The judge  found
    on the evidence there was nothing to give rise to a strong claim.   The
    judge refers to the case of Kaur at paragraphs 35 and  38.   The  judge
    had not made any material errors  of  law.   The  appellant  had  never
    actually taken the  English  language  test  and  there  was  no  other
    evidence from the appellant that she was incapable of passing the test.
     The conclusion reached by the judge on this  issue  was  open  to  the
    judge.


13. I reserved my decision.


Discussion


14. Recording the burden and  standard  of  proof  the  judge  set  out  at
    paragraph 21 "It is for  the  appellant  to  prove,  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, that her circumstances qualify her for admission to  the
    UK".  The judge was considering both the Immigration Rules and  Article
    8.  The judge's setting out of the burden and standard of proof must be
    considered in light of the  fact  that  the  judge  did  consider  both
    matters.  I do not consider that any error amounts to a material  error
    of law when the decision is read as a whole.


15. The judge set out at paragraphs 26 to 30 thus:


         "26. As my starting-point for deciding whether the  ECO's  decision
             is unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  ("the  HRA
             1998"),  I  take  "the  state  of  the  evidence   about   the
             appellant's  ability  to  meet   the   requirements   of   the
             immigration rules" (see Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015]
             UKUT 00487 (IAC) (Storey SIJ) albeit,  for  the  avoidance  of
             doubt, the present appeal is not a "visit appeal").


         27.  The ECO put in issue the Relationship requirements of  (1)  E-
             ECP.2.6  of  Appendix  FM  ("The  relationship   between   the
             applicant [appellant] and  their  partner  [sponsor]  must  be
             genuine and subsisting"); and (2) E-ECP.2.10  of  Appendix  FM
             ("The applicant [appellant] and partner [sponsor] must  intend
             to live together permanently in the UK").


         28.  The ECO also put in issue the English language requirements of
             E-ECP.4.1  of  Appendix  FM  ("The  applicant   must   provide
             specified evidence that  they  -  (a)  are  a  national  of  a
             majority English speaking country ... ;  (b)  have  passed  an
             English language test in speaking and listening at  a  minimum
             level A1 of the CEFR for languages with a provider approved by
             the SSHD; (c) have an academic qualification ... Bachelor's or
             Master's degree or PhD .... ;  or  (d)  are  exempt  from  the
             English language requirement under paragraph E-ECP.4.2").


         29.  Despite misgivings about some of the evidence (for example the
             appellant is described as a "Maiden" in the Nikah Nama at pp29-
             30 of A's bundle, as opposed to a "widow" following the  death
             of her first husband - the sponsor's older brother  [in  2012]
             but the actual validity of the marriage not being put in issue
             by the ECO ... nor challenged in  cross-examination  ....   In
             light of (1) the  evidence  of  the  periods  of  post-wedding
             cohabitation by the appellant and sponsor  in  Bangladesh  ...
             (2) the  evidence  of  continued  financial  support  for  the
             appellant by the sponsor; and (3) the  evidence  of  continued
             telephone contact between the appellant and the sponsor ...  I
             find  I  am  satisfied  ...  that   there   the   relationship
             requirements of ... Appendix FM are met.


         30.  However, I find that I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  English
             language requirement ... is met, because I do  not  find  that
             the appellant is exempt  from  the  requirement  (as  claimed)
             under E-ECP.4.2.(c) of  Appendix  FM  ...  for  the  following
             reasons:


             (i)  According to [5] of  the  appellant's  witness  statement
                  (dated 19/4/2017) "I have tried several times to pass  the
                  required English language test.  I sat for the examination
                  numerous times but could not pass" and also  according  to
                  [3] of the sponsor's witness  statement  (dated  7/7/2017)
                  "she [appellant] tried numerous times to  pass  the  exam.
                  Unfortunately  she  could   not   manage   to   pass   the
                  examination",  whereas  according  to  the   letter   from
                  'Mentors' education ... the appellant was "unable  to  ...
                  pass in mock test that we arranged to assess  her  ability
                  of [sic] English.  We then recommended her not to sit  for
                  IELTS Life Skill main exam conducted by 'British Council'"
                  and (also) whereas the appellant "has  never  sat  English
                  test" according to the sponsor in  cross-examination  (see
                  Appeal Hearing above);


             (ii) No evidence is adduced (expert of otherwise)  in  support
                  of the claim that it is "impossible  for  anyone  to  pass
                  English Language Requirement whoever has not get [sic] any
                  primary education" ... or in support of the claim that  it
                  is "impossible for me to pass English Language Requirement
                  as I have not received any primary education" ... and even
                  taking the letter from the 'Mentors' education' ... at its
                  highest the most that can be said is  simply  that  during
                  what can only be  described  as  a  very  short  "learning
                  period" ... the appellant was "unable  to  deal  with  her
                  course and pass in mock test that we  arranged  to  assess
                  her ability of [sic] English";


             (iii)    there is no evidence that the English  language  test
                  (examination) was unavailable prior to  the  date  of  the
                  application, i.e. could not be sat in Bangladesh or  could
                  not be physically accessed by the appellant ... "


16. The issue raised in the grounds of appeal with regard to  the  mistaken
    translation regarding "maiden" or "widow" is irrelevant  as  the  judge
    found that  the  marriage  was  a  subsisting  marriage  and  this  was
    essentially ignored by the judge.


17. With regard to the English language requirement it is  clear  that  the
    judge considered all the evidence.  There was a difference between  the
    evidence in the appellant's and sponsor's witness  statements  and  the
    Mentors  education  letter  which  referred  to  taking  a  mock  test.
    However, although the judge took this difference into consideration  as
    part of the reason for finding that the  English  language  requirement
    was not  met  it  is  clear  from  paragraphs  30(ii)  that  the  judge
    considered that no evidence had been adduced to support the claim  that
    it was impossible to pass the English language requirement.  The  judge
    considered the Mentors education letter.  The letter does not  indicate
    that the appellant is incapable of passing the English language test or
    that it is impossible for her to do so.  The appellant had attended the
    course for a very short period as set out by the judge. The  judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion that the appellant could not meet  the
    English language requirement and that the exemption did not apply.   In
    any event as accepted by Mr Chowdhury  there  is  no  right  of  appeal
    against the decision on the Immigration Rules or the  findings  of  the
    judge in this regard.


18. The judge did consider Article 8  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Therefore the judge has not incorrectly applied a threshold test  prior
    to considering Article 8 outside the Rules.  At paragraph 32 the  judge
    clearly commences examination of the claim under Article  8  indicating
    that following her finding that there was  a  subsisting  marriage  and
    that the couple enjoyed family life and  that  interference  in  it  is
    established the judge made a specific finding that Article 8(1) of  the
    ECHR is engaged.


19. The judge indicated in paragraph 32 that she had applied the five stage
    Razgar test.  At paragraph 33 the judge considered:


         "33.  However,  I  do  not   consider   on   the   (fact-sensitive)
             circumstances of this case there are compelling  circumstances
             here not sufficiently recognised under the Rules that  can  be
             said to render refusal of entry clearance  for  the  appellant
             disproportionate under Article  8  (having  applied  the  five
             stage  Razgar  test  ([2004]  UKHL  27)  concluding  with  the
             proportionality balancing  exercise,  answering  the  first  4
             questions in the  affirmative  with  the  public  interest  in
             maintaining effective immigration control being as  strong  as
             usual and having had regard, as I must, to the relevant public
             interest considerations in s.117B of the 2002 Act ... and also
             seeking to strike a fair balance, as I must, pursuant  to  s.6
             of the HRA 1998)."


20. At paragraph 34 the judge set out factors that must be considered under
    Section 117B noting  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest, that the ability  to  speak  English
    and  financial independence could only be  neutral factors.  The  judge
    then considered that Article 8 of the ECHR does not confer an automatic
    right of entry to the UK  to  join  family  members.   The  judge  also
    considered that it would be in the best interests  of  the  appellant's
    dependent child from her first marriage for the appellant  to  be  with
    him and remain with him in Bangladesh  (he  was  not  included  in  the
    application to come to the UK. The intention was for him to  remain  in
    Bangladesh). The judge considered that the appellant's application  for
    entry clearance does not meet all the requirements of the  Rules,  that
    the appellant can continue to be visited in Bangladesh as at present by
    the sponsor, that the appellant can continue contact by  telephone  and
    that there is no reason that the sponsor's financial support should not
    be continued.  At paragraph 35 the judge found:


         "35. The upshot is that I find that the  appellant  has  not  shown
             "that there are  individual  interests  at  stake  covered  by
             Article 8 'of a particularly pressing nature' so  as  to  give
             rise to a 'strong claim'  that  compelling  circumstances  may
             exist to justify the grant of LTE [Leave to enter] outside the
             rules'" (see headnote 3 below of Kaur (visit appeals;  Article
             8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC) (SIJ  Storey))  and,  therefore,  I
             find that refusal of entry clearance for the  appellant  would
             not constitute a disproportionate interference with, or a lack
             of respect for ... her  Article  8  rights  or  those  of  her
             sponsor."

21. It is clear that the judge considered fully and appropriately  all  the
    factors in this case. There is nothing to indicate that this  case  has
    any specific features that renders it  unjustifiably  harsh  to  refuse
    entry clearance.


22. It is  argued  that  the  Judge  did  not  consider  appropriately  the
    requirements for the respondent to demonstrate that the refusal meets a
    legitimate aim and that immigration controls can only be used  for  the
    prevention of crime.  Reliance was placed on paragraph 34  of  Ali  and
    Bibi. The appellant has no criminal record and is not dependent on  the
    state so that the maintenance of immigration control cannot  be  relied
    upon and the appeal cannot be refused on  the  basis  that  that  is  a
    legitimate aim.  Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT  00085
    (IAC) was also relied on. In Ali and Bibi the  court  considered  inter
    alia the requirement in the rules that an  applicant  meets  a  certain
    level of proficiency in English and whether that rule was  lawful.  The
    appeal in that case was a challenge to the validity of the rule itself.
    The argument was that the Rule is an  unjustifiable  interference  with
    the right to respect for private and family life. The court  held  that
    the rule was lawful. The concern identified was in the  need  to  cater
    for cases where the it is genuinely impractical to meet the requirement
    - see paragraph 55:


             55. This does not mean that the Rule itself has to  be  struck
             down. There will be some cases in which  the  interference  is
             not too great. The appropriate solution would be to recast the
             Guidance,  to  cater  for  those  cases  where  it  is  simply
             impracticable for a person to learn English, or  to  take  the
             test, in the country of origin, whether because the facilities
             are non-existent or inaccessible because of the  distance  and
             expense involved. The guidance should be sufficiently precise,
             so that anyone for whom it is genuinely impracticable to  meet
             the requirement can predictably be granted  an  exemption.  As
             was originally proposed, those granted an exemption  could  be
             required to undertake, as a condition of entry, to demonstrate
             the required language  skills  within  a  comparatively  short
             period after entry to the UK.

23. There was no requirement on the judge to consider the lawfulness of the
    rule. The appeal was not brought on that basis  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal would be bound by the decision of the
    Supreme Court in Ali and Bibi  in  any  event.  Ali  and  Bibi  is  not
    authority for the proposition that immigration control grounds can only
    be used for the prevention  of  crime.  As  set  out  above  the  judge
    considered in  detail  the  limited  evidence  produced  regarding  the
    appellant's assertion that  she  could  not  pass  a  test  in  English
    proficiency so should be exempt from that  requirement  and  reached  a
    finding that was open to him.


24. With regard to  the  section  117  factors  the  judge  indicated  that
    proficiency in English  (not  that  this  applies  in  this  case)  and
    financial independence are neutral  factors.  As  held  in  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803
    1. If the appellant had not been able to speak English, that would have
       been a negative factor under section 117B(2) to be brought into
       account in considering the public interest question of whether an
       interference with the appellant's private life was justified under
       Article 8(2) (see section 117A(2) and (3)). That is for the reason
       stated in section 117B(2), namely that it is in the public interest
       that persons who seek to enter or remain in the UK are able to speak
       English, because they are less of a burden on taxpayers and are
       better able to integrate into society. Those are factors relevant to
       the grounds on which interference with the right to respect for
       private life can be justified under Article 8(2) ("in the interests
       of ... the economic well-being of the country ...", highlighted in
       section 117B(2) itself), which again underlines that an absence of
       the ability to speak English is a negative factor.
    1. However, as the FTT observed, it does not follow that because a
       person is able to speak English that it is in the public interest
       that they should be given leave to enter or remain. Section 117B(2)
       simply does not say that. Therefore the FTT was correct to reject
       the appellant's argument that section 117B(2) meant that it was in
       the public interest that she should be admitted. Within the scheme
       of Part 5A, her ability to speak English was only a neutral factor.
    1. The same reasoning applies in relation to section 117B(3). Contrary
       to the appellant's argument, it does not provide that if she were
       financially independent it is in the public interest that she be
       granted leave to remain. It only indicates that it is a negative
       factor, potentially capable of justifying her removal from the UK
       compatibly with Article 8, if she is not financially independent.
       Again, under the scheme of Part 5A, the fact that a person is
       financially independent is a neutral factor.


25. The judge was correct to consider  that  these  factors  were  at  best
    neutral. They do not give rise to any positive obligations.


26. There was no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  decision
    such that it should be set aside.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
stands.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 6 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

