


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13508/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2019 and 5th August 2019|On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   Huo [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz and Mr Howells, HOPOs


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Hands made
    following a hearing at North Shields on 23rd November 2018.

 2. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her
    family life with her partner Zhao [M] but was refused on 30th May  2018
    on the basis that she did not meet the Immigration Rules and there were
    no exceptional circumstances which required a grant of  leave   outside
    them.   The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  she  had   provided
    sufficient evidence to establish that she had a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship  with  her  partner.  Judge  Hands  dismissed  the  appeal
    concluding that the appellant did not enjoy family life in the UK  with
    her sponsor.

 3. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    reasons given by the judge for her  decision  were  immaterial  to  the
    question of whether  the  couple  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and in any event were insufficient and based on  factually
    incorrect reasoning and  speculation.   In  particular  she  failed  to
    attach appropriate weight to the evidence provided  in  the  bundle  in
    relation to IVF treatment which the appellant had undertaken.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Simpson on 12th February 2019
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

 5. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to defend this determination.

 6. The judge  appeared to accept that the  appellant  had  undertaken  IVF
    treatment. She said "it cannot be ignored that the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were both fully aware that the appellant had no legal right  to
    be the UK when they met and chose to embark on their quest  to  have  a
    child together".

 7. Choosing to have  a  child  together  is  very  strong  evidence  of  a
    subsisting relationship.

 8. There  was  also  a  considerable  body  of  other  evidence  including
    photographic evidence, and supportive evidence from witnesses.

 9. The judge erred in law because she did not give  adequate  reasons  for
    her decision. Her decision is set aside.

10. Unfortunately, the decision could not be  remade  on  the  day  because
    neither the appellant nor the sponsor were  present.   Apparently,  the
    sponsor has recently undergone  a  kidney  transplant  operation.   The
    appellant's representatives must serve  any  additional  evidence  upon
    which they wish to rely on the Tribunal and on the  Presenting  Officer
    seven days before the hearing

The resumed hearing

11. At the commencement  of  the  hearing  Mr  Howells  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent conceded that the appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with the sponsor and that that aspect of the appeal was no
    longer contested.

12. I heard brief oral evidence from  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  in
    relation to the sponsor's present medical condition.

13. He has a difficult medical history.  He has suffered from severe kidney
    problems for many years.  He had his first kidney  transplant  in  2005
    which failed in August 2015 when he returned  to  haemodialysis.   From
    2015 until December 2018 he required dialysis three times  a  week  for
    four hours.  In December 2018 he underwent a second  kidney  transplant
    because of end stage renal  failure.   According  to  the  most  recent
    letter from Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals  he  has  recovered  well
    from his transplant operation and has satisfactory kidney function.  He
    is being reviewed every two weeks.

14. In oral evidence he said that in May he was readmitted to the  hospital
    because there was a danger of his rejecting  the  new  kidney  but  the
    medication was altered and this kept his kidney functioning.   He  does
    however require help to go to the toilet from his wife who also has  to
    do all of the cooking, cleaning and washing as his feet swell and he is
    unable to stand for any period of time.  Because of an implant  in  his
    arm he is unable to carry heavy things.  Aside from that he  would  not
    appear to need nursing care from her as such.

Submissions

15. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant did not meet the stringent test
    set out in paragraph EX1(b), namely that whilst the Secretary of  State
    no longer argued that the couple were not in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    with  the  appellant  continuing  outside  the  UK.   The  sponsor  had
    recovered from the latest operation and  his  kidney  functioned  well.
    There was no documentary evidence to suggest that he  would  be  denied
    medical support in China where both he and  the  appellant  had  family
    members who would be able to assist.   He  had  run  his  own  takeaway
    business in the UK which  indicated  that  he  was  someone  who  could
    prosper upon return.

16. So far as Article 8 outside the Rules was concerned the  appellant  had
    arrived in the UK in 2009 and made no attempt to  regularise  her  stay
    until 2015.  The relationship had started at a time when both  she  and
    her partner were fully aware of her illegal status  and  little  weight
    should be given to family life which commenced when one of the  parties
    was here unlawfully.

17. Mr Ahmed submitted that the sponsor and appellant  had  given  credible
    evidence.   His  health  was  very  uncertain  having  had  one  kidney
    transplant which had failed.  He would not be able to obtain  treatment
    in China if he went with his partner there  without  relinquishing  his
    British nationality.  The couple were financially independent and there
    was no public interest in separating them.

Findings and Conclusions

18. Paragraph EX1(b) states that this paragraph applies  if  the  applicant
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in  the
    UK and is a British citizen settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee
    leave or humanitarian protection and there are insurmountable obstacles
    to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

19. The sponsor is a British citizen who is in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the appellant. However EX1(b) sets a very high hurdle
    requiring there to be very significant difficulties which could not  be
    overcome.

20. The appellant has not been well served by her representatives.  At  the
    last hearing I indicated that it would be helpful if further  evidence
    was produced and none has been forthcoming.  This case  hinges  on  the
    sponsor's medical condition and any treatment which he could expect  to
    receive for it in China should he require it.   No  evidence  has  been
    produced in relation to the facilities in China.  Most  importantly  it
    was the appellant's case  that  the  sponsor  could  not  access  those
    facilities  without  relinquishing  his  British  citizenship  but   no
    evidence was produced to support that assertion.

21. Fortunately Mr Howells was able to assist and confirmed that  according
    to Article 3 of the Chinese nationality law China does not  admit  dual
    nationality.

22. The position therefore is as follows.  The facts are  not  disputed  by
    the respondent.  The sponsor has had one kidney transplant which lasted
    for ten years and then failed.  He then required dialysis three times a
    week before receiving a second transplant in December 2018. He required
    inpatient treatment for one week in May to deal  with  problems  around
    the rejection of the new kidney and  he  is  presently  on  two  weekly
    monitoring appointments.

23. He is therefore not someone who could  confidently  relocate  to  China
    without a significant likelihood of requiring medical treatment  there.
    The Secretary of State  does  not  argue  that  he  could  access  that
    treatment without giving up his British nationality.

24. He has been in the UK for 22  years  and  runs  a  successful  takeaway
    business here.   Whilst he and the appellant have family in China it is
    difficult to see what practical help they could be.

25. He is therefore someone who is likely to require medical  treatment  in
    China but  could  not  access  it  without  relinquishing  his  British
    nationality.  That situation, it seems to me, meets the  insurmountable
    obstacles test,  as   a  significant  difficulty  which  could  not  be
    overcome. Since the appellant could not  enjoy  family  life  with  her
    spouse in China she meets the requirements of paragraph EX1(b).

26. Accordingly there would be no public interest in her removal  which  in
    any event would have  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  rendering  it
    disproportionate.

Decision

27. The original judge erred in law.  Her decision has been set aside.   It
    is remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 18 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



