
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13176/2019(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2021                 |On 26th February 2021                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     K I
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, instructed by M A Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 7 February 1990. He
appeals against the decision to deport him under Section 3(5) of the
Immigration Act 1971 on human rights grounds.  The Appellant's appeal was
heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke on 25 November 2019 and dismissed
for the reasons given in his decision dated 16 January 2020. Permission to
appeal against this decision was granted by the Upper Tribunal and an error
of law was found by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? for the reasons given in her
decision promulgated on 28 August 2020. The appeal was adjourned for re-
hearing and the matter came before me.

2.   In summary, Judge Keki? found that Judge Clarke had erred in his
assessment of the Appellant's private life in failing to undertake a full
balancing exercise of the factors in favour of the Appellant such as his
good behaviour record in the probation officer's report, his long
residence, the low level prison sentence he received and the moveable
quality of the public interest. These were matters which were relevant to
the balance sheet assessment and, as the judge appeared to have misapplied
the guidance on weight to be given to private life, it could not be said
that his conclusions as a whole could be sustained.

3.   Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? preserved the following findings of fact:

i)   The Appellant entered in December 2002 aged 12;
             ii)  He was remained in the UK with various grants of
             discretionary leave from May 2003 until the grant of
             indefinite leave to remain in September 2010;
iii) He visited Bangladesh in 2011 for two and a half months;
             iv)  In February 2018, he was convicted of two counts of
             supplying class A drugs and received a ten month prison
             sentence. He did not appeal against the conviction or
             sentence;
             v)   The Appellant is a foreign criminal under Section 117D(2)
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;
             vi)  The exceptions under paragraph 399 of the Immigration
             Rules cannot be met;
vii) The requirements of paragraph 399A(a) and (b) have been met;
viii)    The Appellant does not have family life in the UK;
ix)  He speaks both Bengali and English;
         x)   He has had periods of depression for which he was prescribed
             antidepressants;
         xi)  Prior to losing his jobs and becoming involved with drugs he
             had a good work record;
         xii) He was involved with the local mosque and Bangladesh
    community.

4.   At paragraph 34 Judge Keki? concluded:

"The issues of whether there are very significant obstacles to his re-
integration on return to Bangladesh or whether there are very compelling
circumstances over and above those contained in paragraphs 399 and 399A
will need to be re-assessed in the context of the years he has spent here
including his six years here as a child. The judge did not make clear
findings as to the family remaining in Bangladesh and the contact the
Appellant has with them. That will also need to be addressed. The public
interest arguments made in the grounds can also be argued at the resumed
hearing which shall take place before the Upper Tribunal."


Immigration history

5.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 24 December 2002 and
claimed asylum as an unaccompanied minor. On 21 May 2003 he was granted
discretionary leave to remain following the refusal of his asylum claim.
His discretionary leave was extended and, on 21 September 2010, he was
granted indefinite leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. On 13
January 2011, the Appellant went on a short holiday to Bangladesh. He
returned to the UK on 30 March 2011.

6.   On 23 February 2018, the Appellant was convicted at St Albans Crown
Court of two counts of supplying class A drugs. The Appellant pleaded
guilty and was sentenced to ten months' imprisonment and ordered to pay a
victim surcharge of �140. On 26 April 2018, the Appellant was served with a
notice of a decision to deport him under Section 3(5) of the Immigration
Act 1971.  He filed Article 8 submissions on 24 May 2018 and his human
rights claim was refused on 26 July 2018.


Submissions

7.   Mr Miah relied on the skeleton argument dated 15 September 2020
submitted on the Appellant's behalf. He confirmed that there were preserved
findings by the Upper Tribunal and the two issues remaining in this appeal
were whether there were very significant obstacles to re-integration in
Bangladesh and whether there were compelling circumstances over and above
those in the Immigration Rules.

8.   In relation to very significant obstacles, Mr Miah submitted that the
Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a minor and he knew very little
about the country where he was born. He had mental health issues, as a
result of experiences in Bangladesh, and was taking medication. He had
visited Bangladesh once, without seeing his family, and then returned to
the UK because he did not feel safe. The absence of family support and ties
in Bangladesh, and the difficulty the Appellant would experience in re-
establishing himself, finding housing and building a support network
amounted to significant obstacles to re-integration. The facts of this case
and the matters referred to at paragraph 7 of the skeleton argument were
sufficient to meet that threshold.

9.   Mr Miah submitted the Appellant had lived in Bangladesh until the age
of 12 and therefore his memories of the country would be extremely limited.
In contrast, he had spent 18 years in the UK. The Appellant would be
considered an outsider on return to Bangladesh and would be a target as
someone who had returned from the United Kingdom. He would be considered to
be someone whose friends or family would be able to pay considerable sums
for his release. There was an undisturbed finding in the First-tier
Tribunal decision that the Appellant was trafficked from Bangladesh to the
United Kingdom.

10.  Mr Miah submitted that there was nothing else that could be required
in order to establish very significant obstacles to integration. The fact
that the Appellant came to the UK as a minor and had lengthy residence
here, which was lawful not precarious, together with the other factors
taken cumulatively meant that he could meet the threshold of very
significant obstacles.

11.  In relation to compelling circumstances, Mr Miah relied on paragraph 9
of the skeleton argument and the cases referred to therein, Akinyemi v The
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2098 at [44] to
[51] in support of the proposition that the public interest has a flexible
or moveable quality and KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] UKSC 53 that it makes a difference whether a foreign
criminal came to the UK as a child or as an adult. In this case, the
Appellant came to the UK as a minor and although the Appellant had
committed a serious crime, he was sentenced to a heavily reduced term of
ten months, having pleaded guilty and expressed remorse.

12.  Mr Miah submitted the Appellant's offending behaviour was out of
character as was evident from the sentencing remarks, the letters of
support from his employer, his school, his friends and members of his
extended family. Prior to the offence the Appellant's behaviour had been
beyond reproach and, but for a minor offence in 2009, he was of good
character. The Appellant had engaged with probation at all times and was
considered by the probation officer to be someone who was honest and
forthright. The Appellant had worked in Marks & Spencer's as a trainee
customer assistant and Sainsbury's. His previous employer referred to him
as a valued, loyal and hardworking member of staff.  The Appellant had also
studied in the United Kingdom and obtained vocational qualifications in
carpentry and joinery, and had obtained GCSEs.

13.  The Appellant had spent much of his youth in the UK and committed
offences as an adult. The probation report showed that the likelihood of
reoffending was low. The letters of support and employment references
demonstrated that the offence was out of character. On these particular
facts, the Appellant's offending behaviour was outweighed by the specific
facts of his Article 8 private life.

14.  Mr Tufan relied on the skeleton argument dated 29 September 2020. He
submitted that the two issues were significant obstacles to integration and
very compelling circumstances: Sections 117C(4)(c) and 117C(5) and (6) of
the 2002 Act. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom aged 12 and
therefore had spent his formative years in Bangladesh. The Appellant was
aware of the circumstances faced by all visitors in Bangladesh, having
returned there for two and a half months in 2011. The Appellant was
bilingual and, having maintained contact with the Bangladeshi community in
the UK, he was aware of the culture in Bangladesh. The Appellant claimed
that his mental health issues were as a result of issues arising in
Bangladesh. There was no evidence save the Appellant's assertion that this
was the case and no protection claim had been made in response to the
notice of intention to deport.

15.  In relation to compelling circumstances, the only thing that could be
balanced in the Appellant's favour was his sentence of ten months. The
sentencing guidelines demonstrated that the starting point was a sentence
of three years. The Appellant's sentence had been reduced because of his
guilty plea and good character. Mr Tufan referred to HA (Iraq) v Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 at [92] and [93]. He
submitted the relative seriousness of the offence could be deployed at the
second stage and only came into play if there were other compelling
circumstances. The fact that the offence was viewed as less serious could
inform the weight to be attached to the public interest and could inform an
opinion that the Appellant's Article 8 rights outweighed the public
interest, but on the facts of this particular case, the ten months'
sentence of imprisonment did not come into the equation. It was not capable
of tipping the balance.

16.  Mr Tufan referred to the case of Secretary of State for the Home
Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, in which the Appellant had come to
the UK at the age of six and the Appellant's circumstances amounted to very
significant obstacles because of the particular situation existing at the
time in Sierra Leone.  Mr Tufan relied on Mwesezi [2018] EWCA Civ 1104, in
which Lord Justice Sales concluded at [36] that there were no compelling
circumstances even though the Appellant came to the UK aged 2 years old.
The particular circumstances of Kamara resulted in that appeal being
allowed.  The fact that the Appellant had lost all connections to
Bangladesh was not sufficient.  The Appellant would have to demonstrate a
strong Article 8 claim in order to outweigh the public interest in
deportation.

17.  In response, Mr Miah submitted that the Appellant did have a strong
Article 8 claim because he came to the UK at the age of 12.  He had spent
six years in the UK as a child.  This was relevant because a seven year
period was considered significant in establishing private life in respect
of a child. In this case the Appellant had six years' residence as a child
plus the remaining 12 years as an adult. This made his claim particularly
strong.

18.  I asked whether the Appellant could meet paragraph 276ADE without
criminality.  Mr Miah submitted that the Appellant's position was different
to somebody who had been here without leave for twenty years. The Appellant
had indefinite leave to remain. His lawful residence meant that his case
should be assessed differently to those under paragraph 276ADE. He relied
on ZH (Bangladesh) (no reference) that described the Appellant as having
worked illegally and holding a false bank account. That conduct was
sufficient to establish private life.

19.  The distinctive feature in this case was the Appellant's significant
amount of time as a minor and his significant amount of time residing in
the UK with lawful leave. The probation report was important and the
factors referred to at [31] of Judge Keki?'s decision should be taken into
account. This case was different to the other situations cited. It was not
a case where the Appellant was arguing he could not obtain medication in
Bangladesh. It was the case that the Appellant was suffering from
depression. He had the benefit of a support network in the UK but he would
not have the benefit of a support network if he returned to Bangladesh. The
fact that he was suffering from depression was relevant, not his access to
medication.  The position was that the Appellant accepted that there were
relatives in Bangladesh including his mother but he did not have contact
with anyone there.


Discussion and conclusions

20.  The Appellant is 30 years old and came to the United Kingdom in 2002
when he was 12 years old. He has spent six years in the UK as a minor and
12 years in the UK as an adult. He has been living in the UK lawfully for
18 years. He has visited Bangladesh once for a period of two and a half
months in 2011. The Appellant was educated and has been in employment in
the UK. The Appellant's conviction in 2009 at Haringey Magistrates' Court
was not relevant to this appeal. The relevant conviction is the 23 February
2018 for which the Appellant received a sentence of ten months'
imprisonment. The Appellant is a foreign criminal because the offence was
considered to cause serious harm.

21.  I have taken into account the preserved findings at paragraph 3 above.
The matters relied on to establish very significant obstacles to re-
integration are that the Appellant has lengthy lawful residence in the UK,
he came as a minor in 2002 and has only returned to Bangladesh once. He has
no material family ties in Bangladesh and having arrived in the UK at the
age of 12, he has little memory of the country. The Appellant suffers from
depression and has the support of family and friends here in the UK which
he would not have if he returned to Bangladesh. The Appellant had been
trafficked to the UK from Bangladesh when he was young.

22.  There was insufficient evidence before me to show that the Appellant's
depression was caused by previous experiences in Bangladesh or to show that
he would be targeted on return because he was someone from the United
Kingdom. The other factors raised by Mr Miah in oral submissions and in the
skeleton argument are relevant to the assessment of very significant
obstacles and very compelling circumstances.

23.  I find that those factors do not give rise to very significant
obstacles to integration.  Although the Appellant has spent a significant
amount of time in the UK, he lived in Bangladesh until the age of 12 and he
has returned there as an adult, travelling around the country for a period
of two and a half months. Even if he no longer has any contact with his
mother or siblings in Bangladesh, he has not lost all ties with the culture
of Bangladesh because he lives with extended family members in the UK and
he speaks Bengali. His qualifications and his work history in the UK would
not inhibit his employment prospects. The Appellant's depression does not
prevent him from working and he is able to obtain medication in Bangladesh.
There is no reason to believe the Appellant would be unable to re-establish
himself in Bangladesh within a reasonable amount of time.

24.  Looking at all factors cumulatively, I am not satisfied, on the
particular facts of this case, that the Appellant has shown very
significant obstacles to integration, applying the test in Kamara. The
Appellant has failed to show that he would not be able to find
accommodation and support in Bangladesh so that he would be seen as enough
of an insider to be able to live and function there on a daily basis. The
Appellant's mental health condition is not so severe as to prevent him from
doing so and a lack of support from relatives, given his age, education and
work experience, would not prevent him from integrating. Accordingly, I
find that the Appellant has not shown that he meets the exceptions in
Section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act.

25.  There is a preserved finding that the Appellant does not have family
life in the UK. There were many letters of support from family members in
the UK, most of whom are adults, and whilst the Appellant has grown up with
some of those family members and has been taken care of by some of those
family members, that was not considered to be sufficient to establish
family life.

26.  However, those relationships have been established over a significant
period of lawful residence and are relevant to the Appellant's private
life. The Appellant came to live with extended family members in the UK
when he was only 12 years old and he has grown up as part of their family.
He has continued to be supported by his extended family members into
adulthood. The Appellant is socially and culturally integrated into life in
the UK and has lived in the UK for most of his life.

27.  The Appellant has a significant length of lawful residence in the UK,
18 years in total, six years as a minor and 12 years as an adult. He has
established very close relationships with family and friends who provide
support for his mental well-being. He has been employed in the UK and he
clearly has a private life which merits substantial weight. In relation to
the offence, the Appellant's sentence was significantly reduced because of
his guilty plea and remorse, and he cooperated with probation. I take into
account, in his favour, his good behaviour record, his long residence, his
low level prison sentence and the low risk of reoffending. I accept that
the Appellant's offending behaviour was out of character.

28.  The weight to be attached to the public interest is significant and
the Appellant has been convicted of an offence which has caused serious
harm. Taking all these factors into account, the issue is very finely
balanced. However, I find that the particular facts of the Appellant's
private life established over a lengthy period of lawful residence in the
UK is sufficient to reach the threshold of very compelling circumstances
and to outweigh the public interest in deportation. I allow the Appellant's
appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify his  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                  J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


                  J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).
 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
