

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13895/2017
                                                               PA/04385/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RN
                                     IP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr E Mackay, McGlashan Mackay Solicitors


Anonymity Direction

I make an order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 whereby the disclosure or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify either of  the  respondents
to these proceedings or their child is prohibited.  Failure to  comply  with
this order may result in contempt proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the  decision  of  FtTJ
    Doyle who allowed the appeal by the respondents  who  are  husband  and
    wife and nationals of Sri Lanka where they were  born  respectively  in
    1982 and 1990.  Their child was born in the United Kingdom in 2017.   I
    shall refer to them as the claimants.

 2. The first claimant entered the United Kingdom in September 2002 when he
    claimed asylum which was refused.  An adjudicator  of  the  Immigration
    Appellate  Authority  dismissed  his  appeal  after  a  hearing  on  22
    September 2003.  Another appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Scobbie  on  6  January  2014  following  the  rejection   of   further
    submissions by the first claimant.  He dismissed the appeal  on  asylum
    and humanitarian  protection  grounds  but  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 ECHR based in large part on medical reports by  Dr  Gillespie
    and Ms Marshall, a counsellor with the Medical Foundation on the  basis
    that if the first claimant were returned  to  Sri  Lanka,  he  posed  a
    serious suicide risk.  Although the first claimant may objectively have
    had nothing to  fear  from  the  authorities,  taking  account  of  his
    previous experience, Judge  Scobbie  considered  that  his  fears  were
    understandable.  The judge also took account of the fact  that  several
    of his closest relatives were no longer  in  Sri  Lanka  to  offer  him
    support.  Accordingly, the first  claimant  was  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain until 6 August 2016.

 3. During the currency of  that  leave  the  first  claimant  applied  for
    further leave to remain which was refused on 16 January 2017.  This led
    to the appeal before Judge Doyle on 10 April 2018.

 4. The second claimant arrived in the United Kingdom as a student in  2009
    and following her return to Sri Lanka in October 2011, came back to the
    United Kingdom and made a protection claim.  This was rejected and  she
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal who dismissed  her  appeal  on  all
    grounds for reasons given in a decision dated  18  August  2017.   That
    decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 4 January 2018 and  the
    case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where it was heard at the same
    time as the first claimant's appeal by Judge Doyle.  By then the second
    claimant's appeal was confined to Article 8 only.

 5. The first claimant's case before Judge Doyle was on grounds relating to
    the impact of his mental health and  suicide  ideation.   In  addition,
    both claimants relied on their marriage and their child in  support  of
    their family and private life in the United Kingdom.

 6. Judge Doyle found that the first claimant's mental health  and  suicide
    ideation amounted to very significant obstacles to his integration into
    Sri Lanka and therefore concluded that  he  succeeded  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  He considered this impacted on the decision  to  return
    the second claimant and decided that both appeals succeeded on  Article
    8 grounds.  Judge Doyle ended his decision with  the  observation  that
    neither claimant argued that Article 3 was engaged.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge E Grant granted permission  to  appeal.   She
    took into account of the Secretary of State's challenge that the  judge
    had  failed  to  apply  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    correctly and had failed to  clarify  the  weight  to  be  attached  to
    medical reports provided, including a  more  recent  report  indicating
    that the first claimant's mental health had improved.  In addition, she
    considered that the judge had erred in not taking the approach in  J  v
    SSHD cited below.

 8. After hearing detailed submissions from the parties in relation to  the
    error of law challenge, Mr Matthews confirmed that, in the event that I
    set aside the decision of Judge Doyle and remade the decision,  he  had
    covered all the points wished to rely on. Mr MacKay confirmed  that  he
    had no new evidence to rely on in such an event.  He wished  to  obtain
    more medical evidence but acknowledged that application for  legal  aid
    funding would have been available for a new medical report prior to the
    hearing which had not been pursued.  The directions were clear that any
    new evidence would need to be provided in advance of the  hearing.   By
    way of further submissions, Mr Mackay relied on grounds under Article 3
    and contended that the evidence before me would not  justify  departure
    from the earlier decision by Judge Scobbie on this ground.   He  placed
    reliance on the approach by the Court of Appeal in Y & Z v SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 362 as indicative of the approach I should take.   I  reserved
    my decision.

Did the FtT err in law?

 9. Mr Mackay confirmed that the grounds of challenge to the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 29 August 2017 relied on Article 3 grounds.   He
    had represented the claimants in the First-tier Tribunal  and  recalled
    making submissions on this basis, including reference to Y & Z.  It  is
    therefore unclear why the judge had observed that neither claimant  had
    argued that Article  3  was  not  engaged.   In  the  course  of  their
    submissions neither Mr Matthews nor Mr Mackay were able to explain  why
    the judge had focused on paragraph 276ADE in the  light  of  the  first
    claimant's mental health grounds.   Article  3  should  have  been  his
    starting point as that was the basis on which the  first  claimant  had
    put his case.

10. Paragraph 276ADE is an expression of the Secretary of State's policy in
    the Rules setting out requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
    to remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life.   Whilst  paragraph  276
    ADE(1)(vi) requires  consideration  of  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the  first  claimant's  integration  into  Sri
    Lanka having lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  less  than
    twenty years, the  judge's  reasoning  for  his  conclusion  that  this
    provision was made out is also not entirely clear.   He  sets  out  the
    argument before him that the first claimant met the requirements of the
    rule because there were very significant obstacles to his  integration,
    relying entirely on his mental illness.  After considering  the  report
    by Dr Gillespie that was before Judge Scobbie in 2012 and a more recent
    report dated 6 December 2017 by  Dr  Ramsay,  the  judge  concludes  at
    paragraph 12(i) and (j):

         "(i) The weight of evidence indicates that the treatment the  first
             [claimant] has had for his mental illness  in  the  last  four
             years has reduced the severity of  his  illness,  from  severe
             depression to moderate depression, but the fact  remains  that
             the first [claimant] suffers from  mental  illness  and  still
             entertains suicidal ideation.  The availability of psychiatric
             treatment in Sri Lanka is almost irrelevant.  What is relevant
             is  the  first  [claimant's]  mental  state.   The  weight  of
             evidence indicates that at the very least the first [claimant]
             will suffer a deterioration in his condition if he thinks that
             he will  be  removed  to  Sri  Lanka.   The  first  [claimant]
             previously had a severe depressive  illness  with  significant
             suicidal ideation.  He now has a moderate depressive  illness,
             but suicidal ideation continues.

         (j)  On those facts, it seems to me that there are very significant
             obstacles to  the  first  [claimant's]  integration  into  Sri
             Lanka.   He   must,   therefore,   succeed   under   paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi)."

11. As Mr Matthews pointed out in his submissions, Dr Ramsay expressed  her
    opinion on four aspects in her report.  The first  is  that  the  first
    claimant ".... has suffered with a moderate depressive  episode".   She
    reports  his  description  of  low  mood,  feelings  of  worthlessness,
    bleakness about the future  and  a  reduced  appetite,  accompanied  by
    difficulties with self-esteem and confidence, with a loss  of  interest
    and poor concentration.

12. The second aspect expressed is that the  first  claimant  is  receiving
    "...appropriate treatment for his depressive disorder" by reference the
    anti-depressant medication that he is taking.

13. The third aspect  relates  to  the  first  claimant's  descriptions  of
    symptoms associated with  traumatic  experiences.   However  Dr  Ramsay
    explained that it was "not [her] opinion that he currently would fulfil
    the diagnostic  criteria  for  a  diagnosis  of  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder".

14. The final aspect relates to the first claimant's suicidal ideation.  At
    [3] of her report Dr Ramsay refers to this being longstanding  and  the
    first claimant's previous attempts at harming himself.  She continues:

         "He is very clear that due to his previous experiences should he be
         returned to Sri Lanka he would seek to harm  himself  fatally.   He
         has no current plans, although has continued to be  negative  about
         his current situation.  However he has thought of how he would harm
         himself if he  were  to  discover  he  was  to  be  deported.   His
         relationship  and  recently  becoming  a   father   is   protective
         currently.  He is of the opinion that if he were forcibly separated
         from his wife and child, he would  have  little  left  which  would
         protect him from harming himself."

 1. Significantly, Dr Ramsay does not provide any opinion or assessment  on
    this aspect the suicide intentions and only records what she was  told.
    She simply concludes  the  report  with  the  opinion  that  the  first
    claimant is currently receiving appropriate treatment  for  his  mental
    disorder.

15. Some six years earlier Dr Gillespie  examined  the  first  claimant  on
    three occasions and refers in respect of his past health  history  that
    in December 2011 he had self-harmed with a kitchen knife leaving a scar
    on his left arm.  She observes  that  the  incision  was  not  sutured.
    After setting out the first claimant's own reports of  his  state,  she
    expresses her opinion on the scars and physical lesions and  thereafter
    on his psychological state.  She considered  that  the  first  claimant
    undoubtedly met the criteria for a diagnosis of severe  depression  and
    she also concluded that he was at  significant  risk  of  contemplating
    suicide.  She considered the first claimant would be at particular risk
    if told of planned removal from the UK.  She considered it likely  that
    his severe depression was a consequence of his experience of  captivity
    in Sri Lanka, nevertheless did not consider that he met the  diagnostic
    criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder.

16. Unlike  Dr  Ramsay  who  is  a  consultant  forensic  psychiatrist,  Dr
    Gillespie is not.  She reports  that  she  completed  her  training  in
    general practice in 2006 and works as a GP in an  area  of  significant
    deprivation.  In respect of her psychiatric  training  and  experience,
    she explains that over 60% of consultations in general practice have  a
    psychological element and GPs managed over  80%  psychiatric  patients.
    Psychiatric training forms part of the training of all  GPs.   She  has
    also  received  specialist  training  at  the  Medical  Foundation   by
    consultant psychiatrists.

17. The judge correctly summarises the essence of Dr Gillespie's report  at
    paragraph 11(f) of his decision.   As  to  a  summary  of  Dr  Ramsay's
    report, whilst he is correct with  reference  to  her  diagnosis  of  a
    moderate  depressive  episode  and  the  first  claimant's  receipt  of
    appropriate treatment, he was not correct in observing that "Dr  Ramsay
    was  concerned  that  the  [claimant]  has  had  longstanding  suicidal
    ideation ...".  As acknowledged  by  Mr  Mackay,  no  such  concern  is
    expressed in Dr Ramsay's report. As I have observed above, she gives no
    opinion on the strength of  the  first  claimant's  intentions  or  the
    likelihood of risk that he would, if confronted with  removal,  attempt
    suicide.  Either Dr Ramsay was not asked to give  an  opinion  on  this
    aspect or considered that she was unable to  do  so.   To  this  extent
    therefore it was  necessary  for  the  judge  to  consider  what  other
    evidence was available to assess the risk.  This  would  have  required
    examination of the credibility of the first  claimant's  assertions  in
    the context of the changed medical evidence which included confirmation
    that he did not meet the criteria for PTSD.

18. Judge Scobbie had credibility concerns over the account  by  the  first
    claimant of the events that gave rise  to  his  flight.   Reliance  was
    placed on a statement before Judge Doyle dated 29 March 2018  in  which
    the first claimant continues to refer to his escape from  army  custody
    despite the rejection by  Judge  Scobbie  of  this  aspect.   The  2018
    statement also refers to the first claimant having received  punishment
    from the LTTE as a result of not having killed himself once  caught  by
    the army.  This aspect does not  appear  in  a  summary  of  the  first
    claimant's claim in Judge Scobbie's decision.

19. Specifically in respect of his suicidal ideation,  the  first  claimant
    explains in his 2018 statement his fears at [7]:

         "I wish to explain that my circumstances remain the same as at  the
         time of the last appeal hearing.  I am not afraid to  kill  myself.
         If I am told that I am going to be sent back to Sri  Lanka  I  will
         definitely kill myself.  I do not wish to be tortured  by  the  Sri
         Lankan Government again; I do not want  to  be  killed  by  them  I
         rather kill myself.  I know  that  if  I  am  returned  I  will  be
         captured, brutally tortured and ultimately killed."

20. Although Mr Mackay argued that there might be questions over the way in
    which the judge undertook the assessment in this case, he obtained  the
    right answer.  I am unable to accept this  submission.   The  Court  of
    Appeal set out the test to be applied in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  629
    in relation to the possibility that enforced return might  bring  about
    suicide:
         "25. In our judgment, there is no doubt that in foreign  cases  the
             relevant test is, as Lord Bingham said in Ullah, whether there
             are strong grounds for believing that the person, if returned,
             faces a real risk of torture, inhuman or  degrading  treatment
             or punishment.  Mr Middleton submits that a different test  is
             required in cases where the article 3 breach relied  on  is  a
             risk of suicide or other self-harm.  But this submission is at
             odds with the Strasbourg jurisprudence: see, for example, para
             [40] in Bensaid and the suicide cases to  which  we  refer  at
             para 30 below.  Mr Middleton makes two  complaints  about  the
             real risk test.  First, he says that it leaves out of  account
             the need for a causal link between the act of removal and  the
             ill-treatment relied on.  Secondly, the test is too  vague  to
             be of any practical utility. But as  we  explain  at  para  27
             below, a causal link is inherent in the real  risk  test.   As
             regards the second complaint, it is possible to  see  what  it
             entails from the way in which the test has been applied by the
             ECtHR in different circumstances.  It should be stated at  the
             outset that the phrase "real risk" imposes  a  more  stringent
             test than  merely  that  the  risk  must  be  more  than  "not
             fanciful".  The cases show that it is possible to amplify  the
             test at least to the following extent.

          1. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed.  This must attain a minimum level  of
             severity.  The court has said on a number  of  occasions  that
             the  assessment  of  its   severity   depends   on   all   the
             circumstances  of  the  case.   But  the  ill-treatment   must
             "necessarily be serious"  such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment":  see
             Ullah paras [38-39].
          1. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights.  Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:
                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).
             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the court said that
             the examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the applicants to
             Sri Lanka..."
          1. Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.
          2. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).
          3. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.
          1. Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.   If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."

21. There is no indication that a less demanding test applies when  suicide
    is considered in an article 8  context  which  however  embraces  other
    factors such as the availability of medical treatment. In the light  of
    the improvement of the first claimant's  depressive  disorder  and  the
    absence any comment or opinion by Dr Ramsay it was incumbent  on  Judge
    Doyle to carry out an assessment of the evidence to  establish  whether
    the suicide risk that previously existed prevailed and to give  reasons
    for his findings.  It required an enquiry into the credibility  of  the
    claimed intentions in the 2018 statement and to  assess  these  against
    the unchallenged finding by Judge Scobbie that the first  claimant  was
    not in need of protection.  Implicit in that  finding  was  that  there
    would not be a repetition of the torture that had been accepted.

22. In error Judge Doyle did not carry out a proper assessment of the  risk
    of the first  claimant  committing  suicide  and  appears  to  have  to
    proceeded on the basis that the first claimant's  intentions  could  be
    accepted as stated despite the absence of any opinion by Dr Ramsay  and
    the concerns expressed by Judge Scobbie regarding the first  claimant's
    credibility.  With Dr Gillespie's report being some six years ago, that
    could not be a reliable basis for risk assessment today.   Furthermore,
    I consider it significant that Dr Ramsay did  not  consider  the  first
    claimant's condition could fulfil the  diagnostic  criteria  for  PTSD.
    Judge Doyle failed to ask the  important  question  whether  the  first
    claimant's fears were objectively well-founded  having  regard  to  the
    fifth test in  J.   He  failed  also  to  consider  whether  they  were
    subjectively held which would have been relevant to the approach in Y &
    Z.  In deciding that there were very significant obstacles to the first
    claimant's integration into Sri Lanka it was incumbent upon Judge Doyle
    to examine the evidence  of  the  availability  of  treatment  and  the
    mechanisms whereby the first claimant might be assisted once  the  risk
    had been assessed.  For these reasons I conclude that  his  conclusions
    under the Rules and on article grounds is marred by error  and  is  set
    aside.

Re-making the decision

23. As I have observed above Mr Matthews relied on the  matters  raised  in
    the course of his initial submissions relating to  error  of  law.   Mr
    Mackay  supplemented  the  points  that  he  had  made   with   further
    submissions with particular reference to the decision by the  Court  of
    Appeal in Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
    362.  Lord Justice Sedley sets out the J test and  develops  a  further
    aspect where it is factually appropriate as follows, at [16]:

         "16. One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that  what
             may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine
             fear which the appellant  may  establish,  albeit  without  an
             objective foundation, is such as to create a risk  of  suicide
             if there is an enforced return."

24. The first claimant relies in his grounds on Article  3  and  Mr  Mackay
    urged in  his  supplementary  submissions  to  accept  that  the  first
    claimant came within the category envisaged by Sedley LJ on  the  basis
    that although the first  claimant's  fear  was  not  objectively  well-
    founded, it was sufficient to create a risk of suicide.

25. Sedley LJ considered how this might come about in [15]:

         "15. ... The corollary of the final sentence of [30] of J  is  that
             in the absence of an objective foundation for  the  fear  some
             independent basis for it must be established if weight  is  to
             be given to it.   Such an independent basis may lie in  trauma
             inflicted in the past on the appellant in (or,  as  here,  by)
             the receiving state: someone who has been tortured  and  raped
             by his or her captors may be terrified  of  returning  to  the
             place where it happened, especially if  the  same  authorities
             are in charge, notwithstanding  that  the  objective  risk  of
             recurrence has gone."

26. In my judgment that is not the case for  the  first  claimant.   It  is
    undisputed  that  there  is  no  objective  foundation  to  the   first
    claimant's fear of ill-treatment by the Sri Lankan authorities.   There
    is no current medical opinion as to the intensity or genuineness of the
    first claimant's suicidal ideation in the context of his mental  health
    which is described as moderate depression for  which  he  is  receiving
    appropriate treatment.   The  opinion  by  Dr  Ramsay  that  the  first
    claimant does meet  the  criteria  for  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD  invites
    skepticism over the first claimant's claimed suicide intentions  as  do
    the credibility doubts expressed earlier by Judge Scobbie. The fact  of
    the improvement in the first claimant's depression is also relevant.

27. Judge Scobbie found at [59]:

         "59. My overall conclusion is that I do not accept  everything  the
              Appellant has said overall but I  do  accept  that,  as  many
              Tamils were, he was held by the Sri Lankan army at one  point
              and tortured in the manner  that  he  described.   I  am  not
              prepared to go any further with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
              account in general terms because of  the  various  unanswered
              inconsistencies in his account."

28. Furthermore, he observed at [63]:

         "63. I have borne in mind the low standard of proof with regard  to
             this matter but I do not believe that the Appellant  has  done
             enough to demonstrate even to the lower standard  that  either
             he or his family were people of  high  profile  in  the  Tamil
             community in Sri Lanka.  While his family members may  now  be
             in India that does  not  mean  that  they  were  high  profile
             Tamils.   Nothing  in  the   evidence   demonstrates   to   my
             satisfaction that the  Appellant's  father  was  at  the  high
             level. Photographs in my  view  do  not  show  a  great  deal.
             Bearing  in  mind  my  concerns  relative   to   the   overall
             credibility of the Appellant I did not accept that his  family
             were of a high profile nor that the evidence demonstrated they
             were."

29. In my judgment, having taken all these factors in the round, the  first
    claimant has failed to demonstrate on the lower standard  that  he  has
    credible suicidal ideation or that there is a real risk he  would  seek
    to commit suicide were he to be returned or  on  return.   He  has  not
    demonstrated that his case reaches the high threshold in Article 3.

30. Before considering Article 8 it is necessary to examine the case  under
    paragraph 276ADE which indicates where, in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    view the public interest lies. The rule is focused on the obstacles the
    first claimant may face to his integration.  In the light of my finding
    that the first claimant does not have a credible  intention  to  commit
    suicide at any point of the removal process or on arrival in Sri  Lanka
    where he will be safe from harm, the factor I need to consider  whether
    his mental health will pose difficulties in reintegration.  There is no
    evidence to rebut the Secretary of State's case on the availability  of
    treatment which is set out in the refusal letter dated 5 October  2017.
    This refers to the range of psychiatric care  available  in  Sri  Lanka
    with quotations from a MedCOI report dated 6 May  2016  and  the  World
    Health Organisation Mental Health Act 2011 in relation  to  Sri  Lanka.
    There is  no  evidence  that  the  medication  the  first  claimant  is
    currently receiving would not be available nor any indication that  the
    Sri Lankan state would hold back treatment for the first  claimant  due
    to his adverse encounter with the army seventeen  years  ago.   He  has
    family in Sri Lanka as noted by Dr Ramsay whom he can turn  to  and  he
    will be accompanied by his wife and child who  will  provide  him  with
    emotional and practical support.  There is no evidence that he will  be
    unable to continue with the medication for his  depression.   I  accept
    that after such a long absence it  will  be  challenge  for  the  first
    claimant to adjust to life again in Sri Lanka but such difficulty falls
    well short of the demanding test in the rule.

31. As explained in JS (Suicide risks, Articles 3 and 8) [2005] UKIAT 83 at
    [34], a decision that was cited with approval in J,

         "...the answer under Article 8 as a whole will rarely be  different
         from what it would be under Article  3  if  the  same  factors  are
         relied on. Bensaid reflects that same  approach  while  considering
         Articles 3 and 8 separately ".

32. Article 8 was considered in R v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar  where  it  is
    explained how Article 8 is engaged by the effect of removal for  mental
    health. Unlike Article 3 interference may be justified  by  immigration
    control.  As observed by Lord Carswell in [74]:

         "The precise extent of the interests which article 8 is capable  of
         protecting still remains to some degree uncertain and, as my  noble
         and learned friend Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe pointed out in  his
         opinion in  the  present  appeal,  the  language  of  some  of  the
         statements in the Strasbourg jurisprudence  must  be  treated  with
         some caution.  It does appear to be clear enough, however, from  pp
         219  -  220,  para  47  of  the  judgment  in Bensaid  v   United
         Kingdom (2001)  33  EHRR  205  that  the  preservation  of  mental
         stability can be regarded as a right protected by article  8.   The
         issue therefore is whether the removal of the appellant to a  third
         country Germany could arguably be said  to  amount  to  a  flagrant
         denial of his article 8 right to the  preservation  of  his  mental
         stability."

33. Examination of first claimant's case under Article 8 does not lead to a
    different result. There is no basis on which removal would  impugn  his
    moral and physical integrity under article 8.  Treatment  be  available
    for his moderate depression  to  maintain  his  mental  stability.  The
    evidence does not show that he was be unable  to  function  in  society
    with the help and support of his family and readjust  to  life  in  Sri
    Lanka.  There will be no flagrant denial of his rights to private life.



34. Mr Mackay accepted that the second claimant's case stood or  fell  with
    the first claimant.  They will be removed together.  Their child's best
    interests are served by remaining in the united  family.   In  my  view
    Judge Doyle correctly reached the following unchallenged conclusion  on
    this aspect at [16] of his decision:

         "16. Family life exists because the two appellants are husband  and
             wife and they now have a  young  baby.   In  the  simplest  of
             terms, if the first appellant's appeal does not  succeed  then
             the second appellant cannot succeed on article 8 ECHR  grounds
             because it is the respondent's intention to return the  entire
             family as one unit.  They will not be separated."

35. By way of conclusion therefore the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside for error of law.  I re-make the decision and dismiss  the
    appeals by the claimants against the Secretary of State's decisions.


Signed                                  Date 14 February 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson













