
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/13264/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th January 2018                       | On 5th March 2018               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 RAFIDA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim of the Legal Rights Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Thomas
    made following a hearing at Birmingham on 4th April 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10th August  1987.   She
    applied to come to the UK as a spouse but was refused on  26th  October
    2015 on the grounds that the Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied
    that the parties were in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   He
    also refused the application on financial grounds.

 3. The judge found in the appellant's favour so far as the marriage itself
    was concerned and recorded that the  respondent  had  conceded  in  the
    review that the required pay slips and  corresponding  bank  statements
    showing income had been provided.  However  she  dismissed  the  appeal
    because she was not satisfied  that  a  letter  of  employment  in  the
    specified format had been provided.

 4. The appellant appealed against the decision on the  grounds  that   the
    judge had accepted that the job letter issued by  HSBC  Bank  had  been
    submitted as a part of the application but, because the letter was  not
    contained in the bundle, of her own volition  had  concluded  that  she
    could not be satisfied that the  letter  was  in  the  correct  format.
    Furthermore a copy of the employer's letter was in fact provided to the
    judge after the hearing but before promulgation of the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Brunnen  on  13th  December
    2017.

 6. At the hearing Ms Pal, on behalf of the Entry Clearance  Officer,  said
    that she did not oppose a reversal of this  decision  and  was  content
    that the appeal ought to be allowed.

 7. The judge erred in law.  The Entry Clearance Officer had  never  raised
    any issue as to the format of the employer's letter  and  nor  had  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing.  The judge erroneously raised a  new
    issue without giving the parties an opportunity to make representations
    and had speculated on the contents of the employer letter.   The  judge
    further erred by failing to take  into  account  all  of  the  relevant
    evidence  i.e the employer's letter which was sent  after  the  hearing
    but before the determination was promulgated.

Notice of Decision

The original judge's decision is set aside.  It is re-made as follows.   The
appellant's appeal is allowed.  Given the very lengthy delay in  this  case,
and the length of time that the couple have  been  separated,  it  would  be
helpful if entry clearance could be issued as soon as practicable.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 24 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
