
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13020/2017






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2018                  |On 22 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                NABEEL AHMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Gaffar instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan. On 10  July  2017  he  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence  and  his
    rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.  His  application
    was refused on 9 October 2017  and  he  appealed.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cohen dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds in a  decision
    promulgated on 20 August  2018.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal and First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson granted  him  permission
    to appeal on 26 September 2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

2.   The  legal  representative  for  the  Appellant  and  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer both made oral submissions and I  have  taken  these
    into account when reaching my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

3.   The Appellant  had  been  refused  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules   and   paragraphs   R-
    LTRP.1.1.(c)(i) and R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) of Appendix FM to the Immigration
    Rules on the  basis  that  he  had  failed  to  disclose  two  previous
    convictions of theft by employee, which took place on  15  August  2005
    and 30 August 2007.

4.   It was the Appellant's case that he had suffered a trauma to  his  head
    when he was younger and that this had left him with  continuing  memory
    loss and that he had not remembered  these  offences.  He  relied  upon
    medical  evidence  and  evidence  provided   by   his   girlfriend   to
    substantiate this claim.

5.   The first ground of appeal was that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen
    erred in law in so far as he failed to make any findings in relation to
    the credibility of the evidence provided by the Appellant's girlfriend.
    In paragraph 13 of his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  recorded
    that the Appellant's girlfriend's witness statement indicated that  the
    Appellant had significant problems with his memory and that she had  to
    do everything for him.  In particular, she said that he cannot remember
    key dates or their relationship or holiday plans and that  she  had  to
    keep track of his appointments with doctors and consultants

6.   Towards the end of paragraph 18 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cohen stated:

         "I  do  not  find  that   the   appellant   could   have   achieved
         qualifications that he has to date and to contemplating studying on
         the ACCA course if his degree of memory loss and mental  impairment
         was as indicated by himself and his girlfriend".

7.   By implication, this indicated that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen
    preferred the evidence of his educational and intellectual achievements
    to the content of his girlfriend's witness statement.

8.   However, the Appellant also  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not given sufficient weight to the medical evidence which had
    also been provided. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen did  refer  to  the
    medical evidence provided by Dr.  Chaudhry,  in  paragraph  18  of  his
    decision, but attached little weight to it. He did not give any reasons
    for not doing so which related directly to the evidence. He also failed
    to remind himself that the MRI scan taken in 2011  indicated  that  the
    Appellant had sustained slight damage to the temporal lobe of his brain
    and that he was suffering from a weak memory. Neither  did  he  connect
    this evidence  with  that  provided  by  Dr.  Radunovic,  a  consultant
    neurologist, in a letter, dated 11 July 2018,  which  stated  that  the
    Appellant's mini mental state score was such that it was  necessary  to
    undertake a  further  MRI  scan  and  to  refer  him  to  a  Consultant
    Neuropsychologist for a formal neuropsychometry. The fact that  further
    results were not available at the date of the hearing did  not  detract
    from this diagnosis and referral.

9.   This medical evidence taken together with that of  his  girlfriend  was
    capable of indicating that he suffered from an  operative  memory  loss
    despite his ability to study.

10.  For these reasons I find that the decision made by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cohen contained errors of law and must be set aside.

Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen or First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 16 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



