
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13326/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 30 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                        mr Emmanuel Abiodun Osisanya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel, instructed by David A Grand
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant born in January 2000, has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Bart-Stewart of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on
    1 August 2017 dismissing his appeal against  the  refusal  of  the  ECO
    dated 10 May 2016 to grant entry clearance to join his  father  in  the
    UK.

2.   The principal ground raised by the appellant is that  the  judge  erred
    in failing, when assessing the appellant's Article 8 circumstances,  to
    attach any weight to the fact  that  the  appellant  met  the  relevant
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  In a Rule 24 response  sent  on
    27 November 2017 the respondent stated  that  the  respondent  did  not
    oppose the appellant's appeal.  The response  went  on  to  invite  the
    Upper Tribunal to determine the appeal by way of a further hearing  but
    both representatives agreed that there was in  fact  no  reason  why  I
    could not proceed to re-make the decision without further ado.  I heard
    brief submissions from both parties.  Mr Avery said he could not resist
    Mr Al-Rashid's submission that I should allow the appellant's appeal.

3.   It is manifest that the FtT Judge  materially  erred  in  law.   Having
    found  that  the  appellant  met  the  relevant  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules, he  should  have  recognised  this  factor  as  very
    significant in the conduct of the Article 8 proportionality assessment:
    see Agyarko [2016]  UKHL.   The  judge's  decision  is  set  aside  for
    material "error of law".

4.   In light of the above the decision I re-make can be  set  out  briefly.
    The judge accepted that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph
    297(i)(d) and that the sponsor had established that he can maintain and
    accommodate the appellant without recourse to public funds.  The  judge
    also accepted that within the meaning of Article 8(1) there was  family
    life between the appellant and his father.  Given that  the  respondent
    now  accepts  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules governing children of persons settled in the UK,  and
    that the appellant and his father have an existing family  life,  there
    is no longer any discernible public interest in refusing the  appellant
    entry clearance to join his father.  The outcome of the proportionality
    assessment  is  that  the  decision  refusing  entry  clearance  was  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's right to respect for
    family life.

5.   To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal  against  the
    refusal of the respondent to grant entry clearance.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 28 January 2018

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
