
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13749/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2018                            |On 20 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           PATRICK LEONARD BENNETT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Ali, Counsel instructed by Brys Immigration
Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I refer to the Appellant  as  the  Secretary  of  State  and  to  the
       Respondent as the Claimant  in  this  decision.  The  Claimant  is  a
       national of Jamaica who was born on 17 January 1974.  He entered  the
       United Kingdom on 16 July 2001 on a visit visa valid until 31  August
       2001. On 14 November 2002 he submitted an application  for  leave  to
       remain in the United Kingdom as a student which was granted until  30
       September 2003. On 22 July 2009 he submitted an application for leave
       to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  his  human  rights
       which was refused on 5 April 2011. On 16 May 2011 he was served  with
       a notice informing him of his liability to removal.  On  7  September
       2012 he submitted an application for leave to remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom on the basis of his human  rights  which  was  refused  on  4
       October 2013. On 17 September 2016 he made a human rights application
       for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his
       relationship to a British national. That application was  refused  on
       12 May 2016.


    2. The  Claimant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal under Section 82(2)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 (NIA 2002) and alleged that the Respondent's decision
       breached his  human  rights.   That  appeal  came  before  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal who in a decision and reasons  promulgated
       on 27 June 2017 allowed his appeal on human rights grounds.

    3. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
       decision and permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hodgkinson who considered that it was arguable that the  Judge  erred
       as follows: first, having indicated, at [26-31] of her decision, that
       family life could be conducted in Jamaica, and then  concluding  that
       the decision was disproportionate; second,  in  allowing  the  appeal
       outside the rules, in failing to identify exceptional  factors  which
       warranted such consideration and in misapplying the question of,  and
       the  applicable   facts   relating   to,   delay   when   considering
       proportionality;    third    in    failing    to     consider     the
       viability/reasonableness of the appellant returning to Jamaica,  with
       a view to applying for entry clearance.

    4. The appeal therefore comes before the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
       determine whether there was a material error of law in  the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal such that it must be set aside.

The Grounds

    5. The Secretary of State argues that it is clear from the  findings  of
       the First-tier Tribunal that the Claimant  could  return  to  Jamaica
       with his wife without encountering any significant obstacles.  It  is
       submitted that the First-tier Tribunal used Article 8  as  a  general
       dispensing power. It is further  argued  that  the  Judge  failed  to
       identify what about this particular case was so  exceptional  on  the
       facts  to  even  warrant  consideration  outside  the  rules.  It  is
       submitted that the Secretary of State had not  remained  inactive  in
       relation to his attempts to remove the Claimant  and  issued  removal
       notices to him on a number of occasions which resulted in him  making
       further  applications  which  then  caused  a  barrier  to   removal.
       Furthermore, it is asserted that he remained under the  radar  for  a
       period of six years following the expiration  of  his  student  leave
       until he met the sponsor. Consequently, it is asserted that the First-
       tier Tribunal Judge misdirected herself in placing the burden at  the
       feet of the  Secretary  of  State  for  not  enforcing  return.  When
       balanced against the Claimant's disregard for the  Immigration  Rules
       and the fact that both he and his wife were aware at all  times  that
       his status was precarious and he illegally accessed the  NHS,  it  is
       asserted that insufficient  weight  had  been  given  to  the  public
       interest in removal. Further, it is  submitted  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal gave no consideration to the Claimant returning  to  Jamaica
       on a temporary basis to put his immigration matters in order  and  no
       evidence had been put before the Tribunal that  would  indicate  that
       this was an unreasonable measure in the circumstances of the case.


       The Rule 24 Response


    6. It is submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Claimant  that  the  First-tier
       tribunal was entitled on the evidence before it to allow  the  appeal
       under Article 8. It is further submitted that the Judge did  not  err
       in her approach to the application of  Article  8  and  the  relevant
       public interest considerations under sections 117 A to D of  the  NIA
       2002. It is asserted that the Judge set out her reasons clearly as to
       why less weight was to be attached to  the  public  interest  against
       removal and the approach was justified and supported  by  established
       case law including EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL  41.  It  was  made
       clear that delay on the Secretary of State's part was relevant to the
       development of close personal ties and that the tentative quality  of
       a relationship could be diminished as time  elapsed  and  enforcement
       did not take place. It is submitted that the Judge  was  entitled  to
       weigh the Secretary of State's delay in the proportionality  exercise
       before  allowing  the  appeal.  It  is  further  submitted  that  the
       Secretary of State has provided no explanation for the inordinate and
       lengthy delay  in  this  case.  It  is  further  submitted  that  the
       Secretary of  State  had  failed  to  provide  evidence  of  anything
       effective being done to enforce removal. It  is  submitted  that  the
       viability of the Claimant returning to Jamaica was not  envisaged  by
       section 117B of the NIA 2002.

The hearing

    7. I heard submissions from both representatives which I summarise here.
       Mr Mills submitted that the Secretary of  State  did  not  know  what
       delay the Judge was referring to. The Claimant overstayed  a  student
       visa and did not make himself known to the Secretary of  State  until
       July 2009, which application was refused in 2011  and  thereafter  he
       was served papers telling him he should leave the United Kingdom.  He
       put in further representations and May 2011 and thereafter there were
       further applications and decisions. The decision giving rise  to  the
       right of appeal in this case was made in 2016 and it was hard to  see
       where there was a protracted delay. This was not  a  case  where  the
       Secretary of State had waited years  and  years.  A  Judge  would  be
       entitled to place some weight on delay but it was neither  a  weighty
       nor determinative factor. Further, the Judge  was  required  to  give
       little weight to the Claimant's family life under section 117  B  (4)
       of  the  NIA  2002  but  this  was  not  mentioned.  The   Claimant's
       relationship was established in 2009 and he had no leave since  2003.
       The test to be applied was therefore that in R (on the application of
       Agyarko) and the Judge did not apply that test.


    8. Mr Ali submitted that the Judge set out the  immigration  history  of
       the Claimant as included in the reasons for refusal  letter  but  the
       Claimant's full immigration history was not set out by the  Secretary
       of State anywhere. He was reporting  since  2009  and  there  was  no
       evidence  of  an  attempt  to  forcibly  remove  him.  He  did   make
       applications and was still reporting on a monthly  basis.  The  Judge
       took into account relevant evidence and also had regard to the public
       interest. She went through all of the relevant factors  and  consider
       them in turn and while she did not mention section 117B  (4)  it  was
       clear she had in mind. Delay was a very relevant factor and  did  not
       have to be of a certain type. The grounds were mere disagreement with
       the decision and with the weight attached to the delay.

    9. Mr Mills replied that it was absolutely apparent that the  Judge  had
       not applied the right test. The Judge had  to  demonstrate  what  the
       compelling circumstances were because nothing less  than  that  would
       do. That test had not been applied at all or set out  and  the  Judge
       had entered into  a  free-wheeling  proportionality  assessment.  For
       delay to be determinative it needed to be egregious and it was not in
       this case.


       Discussion


   10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Claimant did not satisfy
       the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  either  with  regard  to
       family or private life. She found at [26] that the evidence  did  not
       suggest that there were insurmountable obstacles to the Claimant  and
       his wife continuing family life outside the UK. She found that  there
       would not be serious hardship which could not be overcome.  She  also
       found that there would  be  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
       integration into Jamaica [27 to 29]. She  directed  herself  at  [31]
       that little weight should be placed upon the Claimant's private  life
       as his status was and had always been precarious. She then considered
       whether the decision to remove was proportionate having regard to  EB
       (Kosovo) UKHL 41. The reasons for allowing the appeal  on  the  basis
       that the Secretary of State's decision was not proportionate  are  at
       [32-33]:

           "33.   The respondent has been aware of the  appellant  from  at
           least 2009 when he  made  his  first  application  and  she  has
           certainly been aware of him since 2011 when he was  served  with
           form IS 151A, notice of liability to removal. Yet she  has  done
           nothing about removing  him  even  though  this  is  the  second
           application he has made subsequent to that notice  being  served
           upon him. She cannot say that the appellant has not been visible
           because he has been reporting regularly since 2009.


           34.     Having  regard  to  Jeunesse  and  the  fact  that   the
           respondent has not really concerned herself with the appellant's
           removal despite serving that notice in 2011, I have to  question
           whether there is  really  a  public  interest  in  removing  the
           appellant and I am not satisfied that it is given the  fact,  as
           in Jeunesse, the respondent has tolerated his presence in the UK
           for several years. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the
           evidence  before  me   does   outweigh   the   public   interest
           considerations which justify maintaining the decision, given the
           above I am satisfied that the decision to refuse leave to remain
           is not proportionate and the appeal should  be  allowed  because
           the decision is unlawful under  section  6  of  the  1998  Human
           Rights Act."

   11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was required to  take  the  factors  in
       section 117 B of the 2002 Act into consideration. She did not  direct
       herself in relation to s117 B (4) that little weight should be  given
       to the Claimant's  relationship  with  his  wife  because  it  was  a
       relationship formed with a qualifying partner that was established at
       a time when he was in the United Kingdom unlawfully. He had  been  in
       the UK unlawfully since 2003 and his relationship was established  in
       2009 and hence the little weight provisions applied.


   12. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 10 Lord Reed held at [54-57] that:

           Exceptional circumstances


           54.    As explained in para 49 above,  the  European  court  has
           said that, in cases concerned with precarious family life, it is
           "likely" only  to  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           removal of the non-national  family  member  will  constitute  a
           violation of article 8. That reflects the weight attached to the
           contracting states'  right  to  control  their  borders,  as  an
           attribute of their sovereignty, and the limited weight which  is
           generally attached  to  family  life  established  in  the  full
           knowledge that its continuation  in  the  contracting  state  is
           unlawful or precarious. The court  has  repeatedly  acknowledged
           that "a state is  entitled,  as  a  matter  of  well-established
           international law, and subject to  its  treaty  obligations,  to
           control the entry of non-nationals into its territory and  their
           residence there" (Jeunesse, para 100). As  the  court  has  made
           clear, the Convention is not intended to undermine that right by
           enabling  non-nationals  to   evade   immigration   control   by
           establishing a family life  while  present  in  the  host  state
           unlawfully or temporarily, and then presenting it  with  a  fait
           accompli.  On  the  contrary,  "where  confronted  with  a  fait
           accompli the removal of the non-national family  member  by  the
           authorities  would  be  incompatible  with  article  8  only  in
           exceptional circumstances" (Jeunesse, para 114).


           55.    That statement reflects the strength of the  claim  which
           will normally be required, if the contracting  state's  interest
           in immigration control is to  be  outweighed.  In  the  Jeunesse
           case, for example,  the  Dutch  authorities'  tolerance  of  the
           applicant's  unlawful  presence  in  that  country  for  a  very
           prolonged period, during which she developed strong  family  and
           social  ties  there,  led  the  court  to  conclude   that   the
           circumstances were exceptional and that a fair balance  had  not
           been struck (paras 121-122). As the court put it, in view of the
           particular  circumstances  of  the  case,  it  was  questionable
           whether general immigration considerations could be regarded  as
           sufficient justification for refusing the applicant residence in
           the host state (para 121)."

   13. Whilst it is clear therefore that  delay  is  capable  of  being  an
       exceptional factor, the delay relied on by the Judge in finding that
       the public interest in removal was outweighed  dated  from  2009.  I
       have set out his immigration history above. His application in  2009
       was determined in 2011 and he was served with a notice informing him
       of liability to removal. He then made a further application in  2012
       which was determined in 2013. He then made a further application  in
       2016 which is the subject of this  appeal.  Between  2009  and  2016
       therefore he made three applications all of which were determined in
       between a 3 month and two year period.  In the circumstances this is
       not a case where the delay  in  either  decision-making  or  removal
       could be reasonably characterised as the tolerance of  his  unlawful
       presence for a very prolonged period.

   14. In the circumstances, the Judge,  having  found  that  the  Claimant
       failed to satisfy the Immigration Rules failed to accord  sufficient
       weight to the public  interest  in  the  removal  of  the  Claimant,
       placing undue weight on delay as an exceptional factor  and  failing
       to address the precariousness of  the  Claimant's  status  when  his
       family life was established.

   15. In the light of the fact finding required in accordance with part
       7.2 of the Practice Statement and with the agreement of the parties
       I remit this matter for a de novo hearing before a Judge other than
       Judge Hawden-Beal.

Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
and I set it aside.

I remit the appeal for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 31 October 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


