
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13234/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2019                    |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                               Mr zahid hafeez
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Talbot dated 23rd April 2019 in which he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's human rights appeal.  Before the Upper Tribunal  today  the
    Appellant has been represented  by  Mr  Jafferji  of  Counsel  and  the
    Secretary of State has been represented by Mr  Bramble  a  Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.  Permission to appeal in this case has  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan on 28th May  2019  having
    considered the Grounds of Appeal.

 2. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it is argued at Ground 1 that there is  a
    failure to take account or make findings of fact on a material  matter.
    It is argued that the judge failed to consider or determine whether and
    if so, to what extent the Appellant's circumstances  triggered  any  of
    the exceptions under paragraph 399A or B of the Immigration  Rules  and
    Section 117(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and
    whether or not his deportation would be unduly harsh on any or  all  of
    his six British citizen children and his British citizen  wife.  It  is
    argued that such an assessment  was  material  to  determining  whether
    there were very compelling circumstances for the purposes of  paragraph
    398 of the Rules and 117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 which outweighed the public interest in deportation  following
    the Court of Appeal case of NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662. It is further  argued  there  were
    other matters which were not taken account of and given weight  in  the
    exercise. In ground 2 it is said  there  was  a  material  misdirection
    given the lack of an assessment of undue harshness and that  the  judge
    erred in determining that the question of very compelling circumstances
    could only be met by a determination of the children's best interests.

 3. At the appeal hearing before me today, Mr  Bramble  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State concedes  that  having  considered  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal and the grant of permission and the First-tier Tribunal decision
    that there is a material error of law in this case.

 4. Both parties accept that  the  judge  has  given  at  first  glance  an
    exceedingly thorough and detailed analysis of the circumstances of  the
    Appellant, his wife and his children.  But Mr Bramble on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State conceded that when approaching the  question  as  to
    whether or not there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above
    the exceptions whether under the Immigration  Rules  or  under  Section
    117C that the court has to actually take a structured  approach,  first
    considering the exceptions themselves and then determining  whether  or
    not the circumstances of the individual Appellant  and  his  family  go
    distinctly beyond that, such that the circumstances are very compelling
    over and above the exceptions themselves.  In this regard I  have  been
    referred to two authorities on  that  issue  both  from  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The first in time was relied upon  by  the  Appellant  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal being the case of NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 where at paragraphs  28  to
    30, Lord Justice Jackson giving the judgment of the court stated:

         "28. The next question which arises concerns the meaning  of  'very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2'.  The new  paragraph  398  uses  the  same
             language as Section 117(6).  It  refers  to  'very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those  described  in  paragraphs
             399 and 399A'.  Paragraphs 399 and  399A  of  the  2014  Rules
             refer to the same subject matter as  Exceptions  1  and  2  in
             Section 117C, but they do so in greater detail.

         29.  In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             Section 117C(6), in paragraph 398 of the 2014 Rules and  which
             we have held is to be read into Section 117C(3) does not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely upon matters  falling  within
             the scope of the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  'there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, which he will need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of the kind mentioned in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paragraphs 399 or 399A of the  2014
             Rules) or features falling outside the circumstances described
             in those exceptions and those paragraphs which make his  claim
             based on Article 8 especially strong.

         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond with circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and  2
             but where he could only just succeed in such an  argument,  it
             would not be possible to describe his situation  as  involving
             very compelling circumstances, over and above those  described
             in Exceptions 1 and 2.  One might describe that as a bare case
             of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On the other hand
             if he could point to factors identified in the descriptions of
             Exceptions 1 and  2  of  an  especially  compelling   kind  in
             support of an Article 8 claim going well beyond what would  be
             necessary to make out a bare case of  the  kind  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2, they could in  principle  constitute  very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             Exceptions  1  and  2,  whether  taken  by  themselves  or  in
             conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to  application  of
             Article 8."

 5. Subsequently in the Court of Appeal case of the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department v OP (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 316 at paragraph  19
    of the decision the Senior President has stated,

         "A Tribunal that is considering  the  circumstances  of  a  serious
         offender  should  first  of  all  consider  whether  any  of  those
         circumstances are of the kind  described  in  the  exceptions.   It
         should then consider whether any of the factors identified of  such
         force whether by themselves or taken in conjunction with any  other
         relevant factors not covered by the exceptions to satisfy the 'very
         compelling' test."

 6. Sadly here, as Mr Bramble  concedes  the  learned  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has not adopted that structured approach when making findings  in
    this case.  He has not looked at it first in terms  of  the  exceptions
    and as to whether or not the circumstances would be unduly harsh before
    going on to say whether or not there are very compelling  circumstances
    beyond that.  In addition, the learned  judge  has  not  actually  made
    findings as to whether or not the circumstances would be  unduly  harsh
    or there are very compelling circumstances.  He mentions a  test  on  a
    number of occasions and has not made actual findings  on  those  issues
    before then determining whether there is  a  breach  of  Article  8  in
    paragraph 44 of the judgment.  On  that  basis  the  judge  not  having
    adopted the correct approach to the consideration of the  human  rights
    appeal and that being conceded by the Secretary of State in this  case,
    I do find that the decision does contain a material error of  law  such
    that the decision is set aside and  as  both  parties  agree  the  case
    should be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing
    before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Talbot with no preserved findings for a hearing de-novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.  The matter is remitted back  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for a de-novo re-hearing before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot.

No application for an anonymity order was made before me and no  such  order
was made before the First-tier Tribunal and therefore I  make  no  anonymity
order in this case.


Signed                                  Date 3rd July 2019

DJ McGinty

District Judge McGinty sitting as a

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

