
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13185/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24 January 2018                     |On 26 March 2018                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ms olubunmi oyegunle
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adewoye, Prime Solicitors


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge who allowed the appeal of  Ms  Oyegunle.   I  shall
    refer to her as the  'appellant'  as  she  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She was born  on  27  September
    1964 and is now 53 years old.  She is the unmarried partner of Mr Soile
    who is a British citizen.  I can give a very brief immigration history.

 3. The appellant arrived on 8 July 1997.   She  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom now for twenty years but, at the time the decision was made  on
    2 February 2017, she had been in the United Kingdom for  some  nineteen
    years.  During that time she had overstayed for  the  entirety  of  the
    period unless, as she claimed, she entered as a visitor at which  point
    she would have had some  six  months'  leave  to  remain.   The  judge,
    however, in paragraph 48 found there was no evidence that  she  entered
    the United Kingdom lawfully.  It does not  make  very  much  difference
    whether she entered as  a  visitor  in  1997  or  whether  she  entered
    unlawfully.  The fact remains that she has  overstayed  in  the  United
    Kingdom for nineteen years or thereabouts.

 4. Various applications were made.  There was an application for leave  to
    remain made in 2010 which was refused.  A further application based  on
    human rights grounds was refused in October  2010  and  thereafter  she
    commenced a relationship with Mr Soile which commenced in June 2012.  I
    am satisfied that this is a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  and
    that they would very much like it to continue.  Unfortunately, she  was
    convicted on 30 April 2015 of an offence of  using  a  false  document.
    This arose from her attempts to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In
    paragraph 18 of the determination it describes how, after  meeting  her
    partner in 2012, they tried to regularise  her  status  but  they  were
    advised that there were no grounds to do so.  She  attempted  therefore
    to 'regularise' her stay, as it were, by using what is called  a  false
    instrument.  She continued to use it until she was convicted  of  doing
    so in 2015.

 5. I can  perhaps  say  a  little  something  about  the  nature  of  that
    offending.  The appellant was of course in a cleft stick but it  was  a
    cleft stick  of  her  own  making.   She  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally.   She   could   not   of   course   obtain   benefits   and,
    understandably, were she to have attempted to do so, it would have been
    deception and a serious criminal offence.  If she worked, as  she  did,
    she would have been working illegally on the black market and she would
    have paid no tax or national insurance, the illegality and the free use
    of benefits for which others had  to  pay  being  a  double  burden  to
    society.

 6. On the other hand, if she used a false document, as she  admitted  that
    she did on and off since 2006 - see paragraph 25 of the determination -
    she was committing a further criminal offence.  It  was  this  criminal
    offence of which she was convicted.  Whilst this was a route which  was
    plainly unlawful, it did have the effect that she paid tax and national
    insurance which was, at least, of some benefit to  the  community.   At
    the same time, however, it had the possible effect of  paving  the  way
    for an eventual claim for settlement.  For my part, I  am  not  drawing
    any distinction between somebody who remains unlawfully  and  works  on
    the black market and somebody  who  does  as  the  appellant  does  and
    manages to find work on the basis of false  documentation.   These  are
    the consequences and the inevitable result of surviving in  the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal  entrant  or  as  an  overstayer.   There  is  no
    material distinction.  Both are working illegally;  one  on  the  black
    market, the other on the strength of false documents.   The  fact  that
    the latter using false documents has rendered the appellant a convicted
    criminal rather than an unconvicted criminal adds little to the  public
    interest in removing her.  Both are liable to be  removed  save  for  a
    successful human rights claim.  Consequently the time that was spent in
    seeking to marginalise or minimise the criminal wrongdoing  was  in  my
    judgment largely misplaced because  what  we  have  is  the  result  of
    somebody living unlawfully in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  substantial
    period of time.

 7. The application had to be advanced on the basis of an Article 8  claim.
    That required consideration which was provided by the decision-maker as
    to the relevant paragraphs of the Rules.  The  decision-maker  accepted
    that the eligibility requirements of the Rules had been met  but  then,
    when dealing with the suitability requirements, found that  those  were
    not met.  For the reasons that I have stated, I am  not  over-concerned
    about those requirements because what we are really concerned  with  is
    whether there would be insurmountable obstacles for  the  applicant  or
    her partner continuing their family life together  outside  the  United
    Kingdom which would  not  result  in  very  serious  hardship  for  the
    applicant or her partner.

 8.  Not  dissimilar  considerations  enter  into  the  Immigration  Rules,
    although they are somewhat  differently  expressed  when  it  comes  to
    dealing with her private life.  The  appellant  had  now  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for twenty years and, in any event, the short period  of
    imprisonment  had  in  fact  severed  the  continuity  of  her   living
    continuously in the United Kingdom for that period.  That is the effect
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  We are however principally concerned with
    the effect of paragraph 276ADE(vi).  This applies to  someone  who  has
    not lived continuously in the United Kingdom for twenty years but where
    there are very significant obstacles to the applicant's  re-integration
    into Nigeria.  It is important that very significant obstacles  is  not
    to be treated literally as that would be too high a  hurdle.   Instead,
    we are concerned with a test which is a significant one but as referred
    to in the Rule 24 response made  by  the  applicant.   This  refers  to
    serious difficulties in removal and relocation  elsewhere.   The  judge
    considered this in the context of  whether  it  would  result  in  very
    serious hardship to them both.

 9. The judge considered the material factors.  The appellant  herself  has
    no job.  She has two children aged 25 and 26 who live in Nigeria.   She
    stated that she had irregular contact with them.  There is something of
    a conflict of evidence in relation to the level of contact that she has
    with her children.  In paragraph 43  of  the  determination  the  judge
    refers to this.  She has a mother who is in Nigeria.  Her  partner,  Mr
    Soile is a United Kingdom citizen.  He is now aged 55  or  was  at  the
    time of the decision which suggests that he was born in about 1962.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in September 1995 and that is now some 21
    years ago.  The relationship commenced in 2012 and the parties had been
    cohabiting for that period.  It is a relationship which  is  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship.  At the time that cohabitation  commenced,
    the parties were aware of the legal situation.   Indeed  that  was  the
    reason recorded in paragraph 18 of the determination why they attempted
    to regularise her status but were told that  there  was  no  basis  for
    doing so.  Consequently, the relationship has always been on the  basis
    that the appellant has no right to remain in the United Kingdom.

10.  Mr Soile is a self-employed cab driver.  He owns some five  properties
    in the United Kingdom and he lives in one of those.   Those  properties
    are mortgaged but information as to the exact nature of the equity  was
    not available.  The judge said that she did not know  their  value  and
    she only had what the appellant said as to their equity which she  said
    was not very great.  However, as the judge  herself  stated,  it  would
    have been helpful to have had some valuation.  In my judgment it  would
    have been more than helpful.  It  was  essential  because  one  of  the
    matters that one had to take into account was the financial standing of
    this family  and  the  amount  of  assets  that  they  had  which  were
    available.  The properties, or at least four of them,  are  rented  out
    and we do not know what the rental incomes are or, if they were  known,
    they are not something that was recorded by  the  judge.   Accordingly,
    the judge found that the appellant's partner was  a  self-employed  cab
    driver who had a portfolio of properties, subject to mortgage.  She did
    not know how much the properties were worth and therefore was not  able
    to make any assessment of the equity.

11. In paragraph 56 of  her  determination  she  heard  evidence  from  the
    sponsor that it would take three or four years  for  him  to  sell  the
    properties.  She did  not  accept  this,  making  the  point  that  she
    considered that to be "rather excessive".  In my judgment it was simply
    wrong.  If an individual has to sell a property, he  sells  it  on  the
    market and it does not take four years for that to be  realised  unless
    the asking price is substantially overstated.  Consequently, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge approached the appeal on the basis  that  she  knew
    there were sources of income  from  the  appellant's  partner  who  was
    described as a businessman who was operating  as  a  self-employed  cab
    driver and was in receipt of income.

12. In addition, the judge took into account  the  fact  that  the  sponsor
    suffers from Type 2 Diabetes.  He  has  a  bladder  problem  which  was
    surgically treated but no medication appears necessary for this and  he
    has a mother and sister who live in Nigeria.   He  visited  Nigeria  in
    2015 and 2016 and, as I said, the appellant has her mother in  Nigeria.
    Accordingly, it is quite clear that they maintain links with Nigeria as
    a result of those members of the family quite  apart  from  any  others
    that there may be who are in Nigeria.  Nevertheless the judge  came  to
    the conclusion that there would be insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life continuing in Nigeria.  She did so on the basis  of  a  number  of
    reasons set out in paragraph 55.

13. The first was a reference to their ages.  The couple are aged 55 and 53
    respectively.  It does not seem to me that this is a  point  which  can
    even conceivably be treated as an insurmountable  obstacle.   They  are
    not old and they are both capable of working.  The  sponsor's  diabetes
    and bladder problems do not prevent him doing so in the United Kingdom.
     It is also said that there was an insurmountable obstacle  because  of
    the length of absence from Nigeria.  For the reasons that I have  said,
    the parties had in fact maintained  contact  with  Nigeria  because  of
    relatives that are living there.  Whilst it is perfectly true that  the
    appellant will not have visited Nigeria for a great  many  years,  that
    does not itself amount to an insurmountable  obstacle.   That  will  be
    determined by the situation that they  will  face  when,  and  if  they
    return there.  It has not of course prevented  the  sponsor,  Mr  Soile
    from making visits to Nigeria, as one would expect, to see  his  mother
    and sister there.  The judge however found that  it  is  reasonable  to
    assume that their long period of absence will impact on the strength of
    their ties and their knowledge of  day  to  day  matters.   Insofar  as
    inevitably they will have developed a  different  set  of  ties  and  a
    different understanding of life because they have not  been  living  in
    Nigeria  for  that  period  of  twenty  years  or  thereabouts,  it  is
    inevitable that their ties will be assessed in a somewhat different way
    but whether that means that it is an insurmountable obstacle is  in  my
    judgment an entirely different matter.

14. The judge appears to have relied upon the fact that the work  prospects
    in Nigeria are very considerably less advantageous than they  would  be
    in the United Kingdom.  I was referred to, although there may  well  be
    other material, a document which shows that the  unemployment  rate  in
    Nigeria is 13.9% but of course that is another way of saying that  some
    84% are in employment.  Apparently the judge relied on a report  of  Dr
    Oyetade who  said  it  would  be  "very  difficult  if  not  altogether
    impossible" for the appellant to find  employment  in  Nigeria.   I  am
    bound to say the fact that there is high  unemployment  does  not  mean
    that it is almost altogether  impossible  for  the  appellant  to  find
    employment in Nigeria.  She has worked in the United  Kingdom,  she  is
    able to work and it may well be that there  are  many  people  who  are
    young graduates but that does not mean that there are not  other  jobs.
    The judge however accepted that her chances of finding employment would
    be very slim. I do not understand on what basis she could not stand  up
    and be, as it were, in competition with others in  a  similar  position
    and who have obviously achieved finding employment.  It  is  also  said
    that if she were to set up in business  she  would  need  to  find  the
    capital to put into assets and find accommodation.  It  was  said  that
    this was not available to her so the prospects of the  appellant  being
    able to generate income to support herself and her partner do not  look
    realistic.  My reading of paragraph 55 of  the  determination  is  that
    there is no rational basis for making the finding that she had not  the
    ability to generate income.

15. That becomes even clearer by looking at paragraph 56 because we are not
    looking at a couple who are without resources in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The judge considered the fact that the  appellant's  partner  had  come
    into the United Kingdom 21 years ago.  By that stage he would have been
    in his 20s.  In the time that he has been in the United Kingdom he  has
    occupied himself very successfully and has managed to acquire,  and  it
    is a great credit to him, a business, a portfolio of investments and to
    derive both a capital advantage and also an income advantage both  from
    his self-employed work as a cab driver but also from the rental income.
     In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in appearing  to  accept
    that it was sufficient for her to determine that those advantages  were
    not of real substance was an error.  She needed much more in  order  to
    determine that the appellant and her partner did not  have  the  assets
    that would have permitted them to relocate bearing in  mind  the  basic
    facts that they possessed five properties and had a business.

16. The judge went on to say in paragraph 56 that the absence of meaningful
    family support, in particular the availability of financial support and
    the real prospect of  job  insecurity  would  amount  to  very  serious
    hardship.  First of all I do not  see  the  basis  upon  which  it  was
    important for the couple aged 55  and  53  to  have  meaningful  family
    support.  There is no suggestion that they rely  on  meaningful  family
    support whilst in the United Kingdom.  If they need merely the  support
    of a mother and other family members in Nigeria, then they  have  those
    but one is not looking to meaningful  family  support  as  a  necessary
    requirement to avoid there being an insurmountable obstacle  to  family
    life continuing in Nigeria.   The  availability  of  financial  support
    surely exists in the form of the properties that I have  mentioned  and
    the rental incomes that they receive.  Since we do not  know  what  the
    value of those properties are, we do not know what the result would  be
    if (on the one hand) the parties leave the  United  Kingdom,  sell  the
    property in which they live, purchase another in Nigeria but remain  in
    receipt of the income from the properties which  are  let  or  (on  the
    other hand) sell those properties which are let and reinvest those sums
    in property in Nigeria.  Since we do not know what the pros and cons of
    those various options are, it cannot be justifiably said by  the  judge
    that the absence of the availability of financial support  amounted  to
    an insurmountable obstacle.

17. Finally, the judge also referred to the real prospect of job insecurity
    but it may be that self-employed cab drivers are insecure in the United
    Kingdom with the advent of Uber but the simple fact  remains  that  the
    appellant's partner has always managed  to  run  a  business  which  is
    sufficient to support himself and, at the age of 55, he would still  be
    able to do so in Nigeria.  There is no reason why he  should  not  find
    work as a self-employed cab driver and the fact that this work  may  be
    taken up in a different working  environment  does  not  amount  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle.  Indeed  I  am  bound  to  ask  the  question,
    rhetorically, that if a  couple  who  run  a  business  in  the  United
    Kingdom, who have a portfolio of five properties,  who  receive  income
    from property rentals and who are in a position to work,  if  they  are
    not able to relocate without very serious hardship to them both, it  is
    difficult to see how anybody can relocated if  the  application  of  an
    insurmountable obstacles test renders it impossible for them.  Whatever
    therefore the arguments that might have been put forward  to  say  that
    they would face very serious hardship, I  do  not  see  that  they  are
    matters which are identified in the determination.

18. There is also a reference to  the  cost  of  medication.   The  sponsor
    receives medication for his Type 2  Diabetes  and  that  is  of  course
    managed free of charge in the United Kingdom.  We know of an example of
    someone who was spending 16,000 naira on medication.  We  do  not  know
    what the sponsor receives by way of income.  We do not know what impact
    it would be if he had to purchase  medication  for  his  diabetes.   In
    these circumstances, whilst I accept that there  will  be  interference
    and that the couple will have to readjust their  lives,  the  instances
    upon which the judge relied as amounting  to  insurmountable  obstacles
    cannot in my judgment stand as a sustainable finding  on  the  material
    that was before her.

19. In those circumstances I set aside the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal and direct that the matter is re-made.  It  is  now  the  case
    that the appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  for  twenty  years,
    albeit twenty years which have been punctuated by a very  short  period
    of imprisonment in April 2015.  However, I think that is a  significant
    enough factor to require the balance to be reassessed.   In  particular
    any  reassessment  will  have  to  be  done  on  the  basis  of  making
    sustainable findings in relation to the capital and income position  of
    this couple when it comes to deciding whether there are  insurmountable
    obstacles to their relocating to Nigeria.

DECISION

(i)  I allow the appeal of the Secretary of State.

(ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of law  and  I  set
aside his determination.

(iii)    The re-making of the  decision  will  be  made  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal and I remit the appeal for this to be done.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                         Dated 23 March 2018


