
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13927/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st July 2017                         |On 03rd August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                     mr Indrajith Hewa Alawattha Gamage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 1st August  1975.   The
    Appellant originally arrived in the UK with entry  clearance  valid  to
    4th August 2010.  That  application  was  subsequently  extended  on  a
    number of occasions and his current in-time application was made on 9th
    March 2015.  That application was made under  the  terms  of  paragraph
    295G of the Immigration Rules on the basis that  the  Appellant  sought
    indefinite leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused under  the
    Immigration Rules by Notice of Refusal dated 3rd December 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Mayall sitting at Hatton Cross on 22nd March 2017.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 8th May 2015 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. On 12th May 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 1st June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted permission to
    appeal.  Judge Andrew's reasoning is important.  He noted that  it  was
    apparent that the Respondent's representative raised a new issue during
    her submissions before the First-tier  Tribunal  thus  not  giving  the
    Appellant the opportunity to answer the issue or to  adduce  additional
    evidence.  Further it was noted that no application for an  adjournment
    was made although the Appellant's representative's note  refers  to  an
    objection as to a line of cross-examination and being told by the judge
    not to intervene.  Accordingly it was contended that the Appellant  may
    not have had a fair hearing and that that amounted to an arguable error
    of law.

 4. It was on that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law.  The Appellant appears
    by his instructed Counsel Mr Jaffar.  The Secretary of State appears by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Duffy.

 5. Mr Duffy draws to my attention a directions note dated 14th July  which
    effectively  is  a  note  provided  by   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative  who  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    He
    indicates that he does not consider it is appropriate for there  to  be
    submissions on the issue extant.  Having considered the file and having
    read the note he indicates the Secretary of State does not  oppose  the
    appeal.

The Law

 6.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 8. The acceptance by the Secretary of State to the Grounds of  Appeal  are
    well made.  It is clear that in the circumstances  described  by  Judge
    Andrew in granting permission and by Mr Jaffar in his Grounds of Appeal
    (albeit that he was not present before the First-tier Tribunal) that  a
    material unfairness may well have arisen to the Appellant and  in  such
    circumstances the correct approach is to remit the matter back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with none of the findings of fact to stand.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The following directions shall apply:-

 1) That the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross
    to be heard on the first available date 28 days hence with  an  ELH  of
    2.5 hours before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  Immigration
    Judge Mayall.

 2) None of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  are  to
    stand.

 3) That there be leave to either party to serve on  the  other  party  and
    file at the Tribunal an up-to-date bundle of documents upon which  they
    intend to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing date.

 4) In the event that the Appellant's legal representatives  consider  that
    an interpreter is required at the restored hearing they do  notify  the
    Tribunal Service within seven days of receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 26th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 26th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


