
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13652/2018
                                                HU/13662/2018, HU/13669/2018
                                                               HU/15615/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2019                          |On 9th May 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               (1) Bushra [A]
                                  (2) [M K]
                                (3) Feroz [K]
                               (4) Zaryab [K]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondents:   Mr Karnik (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Foudy, promulgated on 12th October 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 2nd  October  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellants, whereupon the Secretary of  State
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family of a mother and her three  children.   They
    are all citizens of Pakistan.  They were born on 3rd September 1976, on
    25th  April  2003,  on  25th  May  2000,  and  on  27th   August   1997
    respectively.  They applied for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of their private life in the UK and their family life with Mr  Mohammed
    [K], a British citizen, living in the UK, and the husband of the  first
    Appellant, and the father of the remaining three Appellants.

The Refusal Letter

 3. The refusal letter wrongly  stated  that  the  sponsoring  husband  and
    father of the Appellants was not a British citizen, whereas plainly  he
    was.  The refusal letter also held  that  the  eligibility  requirement
    could not be satisfied by the Appellants on that account.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In what is a careful, detailed, and thoughtful determination, the judge
    set down the circumstances of the Appellants (especially  at  paragraph
    7), before making her findings at paragraph 8.  The first  matter  that
    she asserted was that,

         "Unfortunately, the reason for refusal  letter  not  only  gives  a
         wrong name for the Sponsor, but importantly  it  asserts  that  the
         Sponsor is not British.  That  is  wrong.   The  Sponsor  became  a
         British citizen on 21st February 2017, well before  the  Appellants
         made their applications  for  further  leave.   I  find  that  this
         critical error by  the  Respondent  coloured  the  entire  decision
         making process as the Respondent refused all  the  applications  on
         eligibility grounds on the basis that the Sponsor was not British."
         (Paragraph 8)

 5. The judge then went on to record how the youngest of the Appellants was
    the son of 15 years of age, and how the older children  of  the  family
    are an integral part of the family unit (paragraph 9).   Reference  was
    made by the judge to the fact that a case may have "unusual history  of
    the family" which "may contribute to their current interdependence" but
    all would depend  on  the  circumstances.   In  this  case,  after  the
    sponsoring husband and father had come to the UK in 2005, he  had  been
    separated from the rest of his family until 2015, when they joined  him
    from Pakistan.  The second Appellant was only  2  years  old,  and  the
    third  Appellant  5  years  old,  when  their  sponsoring  father  left
    Pakistan.

 6. The judge observed that "the family is unified again they are  somewhat
    more dependent upon  one  another  than  might  usually  be  the  case"
    (paragraph 10).  She went on to observe that there was "evidence of the
    closeness of the family ties" which "emerged in oral evidence when  the
    third and fourth Appellants explained  how  they  worked  part-time  in
    order to financially assist the family" (paragraph 11).   Consideration
    was then given by the judge to the youngest  of  the  four  Appellants,
    [MK], and the judge held that, "I therefore find it is clearly the best
    interests of [MK] that he lives securely together with his parents  and
    his siblings" (paragraph 12), before giving  a  detailed  breakdown  in
    five subparagraphs, as to why this was the case.

 7. The judge then went on to consider the position  of  Zaryab,  the  only
    daughter of the family, observing that she was "in a unique position as
    she was already an adult when the decisions were made, and was now  21,
    but a full-time  student".   The  judge  held  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable or proportionate to expect her to return to Pakistan in  her
    position, explaining the situation in four subparagraphs (at  paragraph
    15).

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  by  failing  to
    apply the position under the Immigration  Rules,  before  going  on  to
    consider Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.  The grounds  also  asserted
    that the judge erred in considering each of the Appellants as  if  they
    would be returning alone.  The reality  was  that  they  would  all  be
    removed as a family unit.  The failure of the  judge  to  consider  the
    matter on this basis, and then to decide that  the  family  would  face
    insurmountable obstacles on return, was simply unsustainable.

10. The grounds also asserted that there was no evidence referred to by the
    judge to show that the Sponsor will not travel to India to be with  the
    family (which is curious because the Appellants are not from India  but
    from Pakistan).  The grounds then go  on  to  say  that  "for  such  an
    argument to succeed it is submitted that the Appellants would  have  to
    show it was unduly harsh for a British citizen to do so ..."

11. On 26th November 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 25th January 2019, Mr Bates,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, explained that this decision was unsustainable  for
    the following reasons.  First, the judge ought to  have  embarked  upon
    the exercise of fact-finding on the  basis  of  first  looking  at  the
    situation under the Immigration Rules.  If  the  Appellants  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules, then a finding in that  regard  as
    to "proportionality" of the decision by the Secretary of  State,  would
    inform the judge's  finding  on  "proportionality"  under  freestanding
    Article 8 rights as well.  The failure to look at  the  position  under
    the Immigration Rules was a fundamental error.

13. Second, that the judge looked at "insurmountable obstacles" outside the
    Immigration Rules, but in allowing the appeal on that basis, the  judge
    erred because all of  the  Appellants  were  born  outside  the  UK  in
    Pakistan, and there was no suggestion that they  could  not  return  to
    Pakistan  without  facing  an  insurmountable  difficulty.   They  have
    already lived apart from  the  Sponsor  for  ten  years.   The  judge's
    finding was that the daughter, Zaryab, had been a great  assistance  to
    the mother, the first Appellant.  That assistance could continue if the
    family were returning back to Pakistan together.

14. Third, to give such pre-eminent  importance  to  the  position  of  the
    children, was  in  any  event  incorrect  because  none  of  them  were
    "qualifying children".

15. Fourth, none of them actually met with the Immigration Rules.  For  all
    these reasons, the judge had erred in law.

16.  For  his  part,  Mr  Karnik  submitted  that   the   application   was
    fundamentally misconceived for the following reasons.   First,  it  was
    not the case that the judge began to look at the situation outside  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  was  specifically  focused  upon  the
    position under the Immigration Rules, because  it  is  only  under  the
    Immigration Rules that the test of "insurmountable obstacles" arises in
    the first place, and the judge allowed the appeal on that basis.   This
    was firmly understood by all the  parties  and  by  the  judge  at  the
    hearing.

17. Second, the initial decision had been wrong in stating that the Sponsor
    was not a British citizen, because the effect of that was to hold  that
    the Appellants could not meet the eligibility requirements,  and  that,
    as the judge found, had coloured the decision thereafter.

18. Third, the appeal before this Tribunal was on the basis that the  judge
    had failed to consider whether it was "unduly harsh" for the parties to
    return.  This, however, was  not  a  deportation  case.   The  test  of
    "unduly harsh" obstacles arose only in relation to a deportation  case.



19. Finally, the plain fact  here  was  that  the  Sponsor  was  a  British
    citizen, and the judge had found that the second  Appellant,  the  son,
    [MK], was entitled, in his best interests, to be  brought  up  by  both
    parents (see paragraph 12) and that he should not "lose the  day-to-day
    care of  either  of  his  parents  or  be  parted  from  his  siblings"
    (paragraph 12).

20. In those circumstances, the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude,  for  a
    family that had initially been separated, but had then  come  together,
    and were even more interdependent upon them than would normally be  the
    case (see paragraph 10), that their return to  Pakistan  would  present
    the family with insurmountable obstacles.

21. In reply, Mr Bates submitted that the judge gave no reasons for  why  a
    British citizen father cannot go to Pakistan and live with  his  family
    there.  Second, it was open to the entire family to go  back  together.
    Moreover, the daughter, Zaryab, could also go because the judge did not
    explain why she could not have the protection of her sponsoring  father
    in Pakistan.  Third, all that was happening  was  that  the  clock  was
    being taken back to 2015 when the family came together after a ten-year
    period of separation.  Finally,  even  if  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" the judge had failed to take into account the full impact of
    Section 117B, which required the public interest in immigration control
    to be promoted.

No Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that I should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

23. First, the points taken in the present  appeal  before  this  Tribunal,
    were not the points that were raised in the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  that
    formed part of the submissions before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    test that is operative is not one of "unduly harsh" but the  test  that
    appears in EX.1, namely, of "insurmountable obstacles", and that arises
    directly from the Immigration Rules.  The initial  decision  to  refuse
    was plainly erroneous because  it  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellants could not meet  the  eligibility  requirements  because  the
    Sponsor  was  not  British.   It  then  held   that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles.  Importantly, it also suggested that  removal
    would be pursued, regardless  of  whether  all  the  family  was  being
    returned or each one of them were being returned individually.

24. This is important because it is a matter that is expressly referred  to
    by the judge at paragraph  15,  when  the  judge  observes  that  "Miss
    Millward [for the  Respondent]  confirmed,  at  my  request,  that  the
    Respondent's position is that it pursues  the  removal  of  the  fourth
    Appellant with or without the other Appellants".  The fourth  Appellant
    here is the daughter of the first and second  Appellants,  Zaryab,  who
    had now reached the age of 21 years.  Given that this was the case, the
    judge was entitled to look at the position singularly  in  relation  to
    Zaryab, and to come to the conclusion that, "I find that removal of the
    fourth   Appellant   alone   would   be   wholly    unreasonable    and
    disproportionate", before proceeding to give reasons for  this.   These
    reasons included the fact that she would find it very difficult to seek
    employment in Pakistan, that young women who are unmarried, rarely live
    alone, and  attract  societal  disapproval,  and  that  "her  level  of
    commitment  to  her  family  is  unusually  high  for  a   21-year-old"
    (paragraph 15).

25. For this reason, it is unfair to  criticise  the  judge  for  giving  a
    particularised and careful attention to the  position  of  Zaryab,  the
    fourth Appellant.  In the same way, insofar as the judge  is  referring
    to the second Appellant, [MK], in terms of his "best interests", she is
    entitled to do so because of the express finding in  relation  to  this
    child that he would "lose the day-to-day care of either of his parents"
    which would not serve his best interests, and  the  judge  gives  clear
    reasons for this.  One of these is that, "he  has  reached  a  critical
    point in  his  education  when  he  is  approaching  his  first  public
    examinations.  His performance in those  examinations  could  determine
    his future career" (paragraph 12).

26. Second, although the judge does consider the position of the Appellants
    separately, what is plainly the case here is that, she  undertakes  the
    determination of all claims jointly, with a view to ensuring  that  all
    material facts and considerations are taken into account in each  case,
    and that cannot be an error on her part (see PD [2016] UKUT 108).

27. Third, the judge's findings that any one of the Appellants  could  meet
    the Rules, indirectly also meant,  given  the  approach  taken  by  the
    judge, that the others were also bound  to  succeed,  in  circumstances
    where the findings in relation to  the  family  life  of  this  set  of
    Appellants, is unchallenged.   Also  unchallenged  is  the  finding  in
    relation to "best interests".  If that is the  case  then  the  Section
    117B factors cannot be taken against the Appellants.

28. Fourth, the judge applied the correct test, namely, what  the  position
    would be in a real-world situation, and the ground  of  application  by
    the Respondent, being predicated on  it  being  "unduly  harsh"  for  a
    British citizen to  relocate  to  Pakistan,  is  plainly  misconceived,
    because that is not the correct test.  The reference in the grounds  of
    application to EV (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,  is  unhelpful
    because in that case no-one was settled,  leaving  aside  the  question
    whether anyone was British, as is the case here.  What is  unmistakably
    the case here is that the husband and father of  the  Appellants  is  a
    British citizen, and the Secretary of State cannot remove him, and  the
    family cannot be removed intact, in the light of the findings  made  by
    the judge in relation to [MK].  This is also the case  in  relation  to
    Zaryab, the fourth Appellant, insofar as it is the Secretary of State's
    position that he would countenance the  removal  of  individual  family
    members, as well as the family as a whole.

29. All in all, therefore, the decision was one that the judge was entitled
    to come to.  I bear in mind MA (Somalia) [2011] 2 All ER 65  where  Sir
    John Dyson, stated that "the court should not be astute to characterise
    as an error of law what, in truth, is no more than a disagreement  ..."
    It was also said in AH (Sudan) [2008] 1 AC 678 that, "appellate  courts
    should not rush to find such misdirections simply  because  they  might
    have  reached  a  different  conclusion  on  the  facts  or   expressed
    themselves differently" (at paragraph 30).

Notice of Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  an  error  of
    law.  The decision shall stand.

31. No anonymity direction is made.

32. This appeal is allowed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    3rd May 2019

