
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13186/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 30 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                           MISS JYOTI MAYA GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jaisri of Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms V Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Nepal  born  on  1  August  1977.   She
    applied in February 2018 for an entry clearance to settle in the United
    Kingdom as the dependent daughter of the sponsor, Kes Bahadur Gurung, a
    former Ghurkha soldier.  This application was refused by the respondent
    on 2 May 2018 on the grounds that she did not meet  the  conditions  of
    the policy set out in Appendix K or the requirements of Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The appellant at the age of  40  did  not  fall
    within the scope of the appendix and in any event she had not been part
    of the family unit for more than two years.  Appendix FM did not  apply
    as the appellant did not declare any personal incapacity.  The case was
    also considered under Article 8 in the  light  of  the  impact  of  the
    historic injustice identified in Gurung & Ors [2013]  ECWA  Civ  8  and
    Ghising & Ors  [2013]  UKUT  00567.   It  was  concluded  that  it  was
    proportionate to refuse the  appellant's  application.   The  appellant
    appealed and her appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 2  May  2019.
    The judge summarised the evidence before her as follows:

         "6.  The tribunal heard from the sponsor, Kes Bahadur Gurung via  a
             Nepali interpreter.  He adopted his witness statement and  was
             cross examined.  His evidence was as follows:


             a.   He was born in Nepal in 1944 and enlisted in the  Brigade
                  of Gurkhas on 28 November 1961.  He was discharged in 1970
                  after more than 8 years' service.


             b.   He was married to Kumaya Gurung until  her  death  on  23
                  September 1978.  They had two children, a son N.  and  the
                  Appellant.


             c.   He married his current wife Khum Kumari  Gurung  in  1983
                  and they have no children together.  Although  his  second
                  wife is the Appellant's stepmother, she has been  involved
                  in her upbringing since the age of 6 and they have  formed
                  a close bond.


             d.   His son lives in Nepal with his wife and two children.


             e.   He was granted settlement in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
                  former Gurkha on 28 August 2009 and arrived in the  United
                  Kingdom in October 2009.  His wife  joined  him  in  March
                  2010 and they  are  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom.


             f.   When he applied for settlement, he  would  have  included
                  the Appellant in the family application but the policy was
                  not in force at the time  and  did  not  cover  dependents
                  under the age of 30.


             g.   He had wanted to apply for settlement on retirement  from
                  the Gurkhas in 1970 but was not allowed  to  do  so  until
                  2006.  When the sponsor was discharged from the Army,  the
                  Appellant was not over 18.


             h.   Since he has  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  has
                  visited Nepal frequently to spend time with the Appellant.
                   He sends money to her and she  has  no  other  source  of
                  income.  She collects the money in cash and does not use a
                  bank account, which is not unusual in Nepal.  She  has  no
                  job and no independent life in Nepal.


             i.   She attempted to look for a job but with no success.  She
                  has no qualifications which makes  it  hard  to  look  for
                  work.  As a female, it is hard to find work but she looked
                  for work as a waitress in a hotel but she did not get that
                  job.  It is not the system to apply for jobs, just to  ask
                  around.  She has asked around and has been told that there
                  are no jobs.  She has not tried looking for jobs again  as
                  she is not physically strong.


             j.   She spends her day looking  after  herself,  cooking  and
                  living on the money sent by the sponsor.  The sponsor  was
                  not aware if the Appellant had any hobbies or if  she  had
                  any friends or boyfriends.


             k.   The Appellant and her brother get  together  at  festival
                  times and speak regularly but he has  his  own  family  to
                  worry about.


             l.   The sponsor believes that it will be in  the  Appellant's
                  best interests to come and  live  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  where she would be able to find a job and she would not be
                  a burden on the public purse.


         7.   The Appellant's  step-mother  submitted  a  witness  statement
             which was  in  virtually  identical  terms  to  the  sponsor's
             statement and she did not  give  oral  evidence  although  she
             attended the tribunal hearing".

    The judge notes the case for the respondent observing:

         "10. The Respondent submits that the application has been contrived
             to meet the considerations in Ghising and Gurung.  The sponsor
             has no information about the Appellant's day to  day  life  in
             Nepal.  It appears that she sits  at  home  and  does  nothing
             except cook her meals.  She has applied for one job  and  that
             was not even a proper job application, just an enquiry.  It is
             submitted that it is  unlikely  that  the  Appellant  has  not
             formed an independent  life  in  the  eight  years  since  her
             parents moved to the United Kingdom".

2.   It was also submitted that the relationship  between  the  sponsor  and
    the appellant did not go beyond the normal father/daughter relationship
    and it was not disproportionate to refuse  entry  clearance.   For  the
    appellant it was argued that  there  was  real  and  effective  support
    between the sponsor and her.  The sponsor looked after his family until
    he had the right to come to the United  Kingdom  and  he  continued  to
    visit his daughter and lived with her when he visited Nepal.   She  had
    no opportunity to apply to come to the UK until 2015  and  even  before
    that date he was sending her financial support and it was  denied  that
    the situation had been contrived.  There was  no  significance  in  the
    appellant not having a bank account as it was a cash economy and  there
    were no formal job application processes in Nepal "people just go round
    asking for jobs".  Family life continued between  the  sponsor  in  the
    United Kingdom and the appellant within Article 8(1).

3.   The judge reviewed the law and set out her conclusions as follows:

         "18. In January 2015, a new policy was introduced  in  relation  to
             applications for Adult Dependent Children including Annex K to
             Chapter  15,  Section  2A  of  the   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions (Annex K).  One of the requirements of Annex K is
             that the adult dependent child is between the ages of  18  and
             30 and that they have not lived apart for more than two years.


         19.  If the Appellant does not meet the requirements  of  Annex  K,
             the tribunal must consider whether Article 8 applies.  Article
             8 provides a qualified right to  respect  private  and  family
             life except where necessary in a democratic society to provide
             for the interests of national security, public safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the country.


         20.  The weight to be given to the historic injustice will normally
             require a decision in the Appellants' favour  (Ghising  [2013]
             UKUT 567).


         21.  paragraph EC-DR1.1 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules
             sets out the requirements for entry  clearance  for  an  adult
             dependent  relative.   These  include  in   E-ECDR   2.4   the
             requirement that the applicant, as a result of age, illness or
             disability,  require  long-term  personal  care   to   perform
             everyday tasks.


         22.  The Respondent must also consider the case outside  the  rules
             on the basis of exceptional circumstances as contained in  the
             published guidance.


         23.  The burden of proof lies on the Appellant.   The  standard  of
             proof is the balance of probabilities.


         F.   FINDINGS AND DECISION


         24.  I find that the Appellant does not fall within  the  scope  of
             Appendix K.  She is over 40 years of age and, at the time  the
             sponsor applied for settlement, she was over the age of 30 and
             therefore fell  outside  the  scope  of  the  adult  dependent
             provisions.


         25.  In addition, the sponsor and his wife relocated to the  United
             Kingdom in 2010 and no longer lived in a family unit with  the
             Appellant after that date.  This is a period of more than  two
             years.   Although  the  sponsor  has  visited  frequently,  he
             appears to have no knowledge of how the Appellant lives day to
             day and how she occupies her time and I do not regard them  as
             living in the same household.


         26.  Having found that Appendix K does not apply, I  must  consider
             the application under the  Immigration  Rules,  in  particular
             Appendix FM.  Section EC-DR deals with applications  by  adult
             dependent relatives.  There is no evidence that the  Appellant
             as a result of age, illness or disability, requires  long-term
             personal care to perform everyday tasks.  She  therefore  does
             not qualify under the Rules.


         27.  I now go on to consider the  application  under  Article  8(1)
             right to family life.  The case law authorities provide that I
             must take into account the historical injustice of Gurkhas not
             being able to settle in the United Kingdom  until  many  years
             after the date of their discharge.  If I am satisfied that the
             sponsor would have settled earlier if he was able  to,  I  can
             take that into account if the result of the injustice is  that
             his children, who would have qualified on age grounds then, no
             longer qualify.  The sponsor applied for  settlement  in  2009
             and there is  no  evidence  that  he  wanted  to  include  the
             Appellant on that application.


         28.  I therefore conclude that the issue of historical injustice is
             not relevant to this Appellant.


         29.  It is submitted that the Appellant does not  have  any  skills
             and qualifications which is why she  depends  on  money  being
             sent by family in the United Kingdom.  It  is  also  submitted
             that she would be able to work  if  she  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom so that she would not have recourse to  public  funds.
             There is no explanation why she would be able to work  in  the
             United Kingdom but not in Nepal, where she speaks the language
             and has experience of life there.


         30.  I find that there is no reason why the sponsor cannot continue
             to send the Appellant financial support while she is in Nepal.
              Further, there is no reason why they  cannot  continue  their
             family life in Nepal,  the  sponsor  having  lived  there  for
             nearly all his life.


         31.  I find  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant  entry
             clearance is an interference with her right to a  private  and
             family  life.   However,  I   find   that   the   refusal   is
             proportionate taking into account the Respondent's  legitimate
             aim in exercising and managing immigration controls and taking
             into account the historic injustice factor.


         32.  I find that there are no reasons  to  exercise  discretion  to
             allow the appeal outside the rules and Article 8".

4.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.  Permission to  appeal  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 17 July  2019.   In  ground  1  a
    fairness argument was deployed - issue was taken with  what  the  judge
    had said in  paragraph  25  about  the  sponsor  apparently  having  no
    knowledge of how the appellant lives day-to-day and  how  she  occupied
    her time.  It was said that this matter was not put to the sponsor  and
    she had not had a fair  hearing  -  reference  was  made  to  AM  (fair
    hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 656.

5.   In ground 2 it was asserted that the judge had erred  in  paragraph  27
    in concluding that the historical injustice did not apply given that in
    2009 over 18 dependants did not qualify.

6.   In ground 3 it was submitted that the  correct  test  was  set  out  in
    Jitendra Rai v Entry Clearance Officer New Delhi [2017] EWCA  Civ  320.
    Two extracts were quoted, one from paragraph 39 "whether the  applicant
    had demonstrated that he had a family life with his parents  which  had
    existed at the time of their departure to settle in the United  Kingdom
    and had endured beyond it, notwithstanding their having left Nepal when
    they did".  The second extract was taken from paragraph 40 "whether, as
    a matter of fact, the appellant himself still  enjoyed  a  family  life
    with his parents ...".

7.   It was submitted that the judge had  failed  to  address  this  in  her
    determination.

8.   In ground 3 it was submitted that the judge had  not  assessed  Article
    8(1) life as clarified in the case of Jitendra Rai and that the test in
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 did not require more than real or committed
    or effective support.  Reference was again made to paragraph 39 of Rai.



9.   At the hearing Ms Isherwood lodged  without  objection  the  Presenting
    Officer's notes of the proceedings before the First-tier  Judge.   This
    she said was mostly in relation to ground 1.

10.  Mr Jaisri submitted that ground 1 was not his most significant  ground.
     He referred to paragraph 42 of Rai, the crucial question was whether

         "Even though the appellant's parents had chosen to leave  Nepal  to
         settle in the United Kingdom when they did, his  family  life  with
         them subsisted then, and was still subsisting at the  time  of  the
         Upper Tribunal's decision.  This was the  critical  question  under
         Article 8(1)".

    He submitted there was real and effective and committed support at  the
    time of their departure and at the date of hearing.   The  approach  of
    the First-tier Judge had been in error.  Article 8 had to  be  assessed
    at the appropriate time.  The fundamental error in  the  case  was  the
    assessment of Article 8.1.


11.  In relation to the Record of Proceedings that had been  supplied,  this
    broadly reflected his own note.  This was not a ground he had  intended
    to pursue.  It was not a fundamental or significant point.

12.  Ms Isherwood submitted that the way ground 1 had been dealt with had  a
    knock-on effect on the remainder of the determination.  What  had  been
    said by the judge, for example in paragraph  6.j  about  the  appellant
    spending her day looking after herself, cooking and living on the money
    sent by the sponsor, had been precisely  reflected  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.  The judge had in mind as appeared from  paragraph  13  of
    the decision the submission that there was real and  effective  support
    between the sponsor and the appellant  and  she  had  not  ignored  the
    relationship prior to the sponsor's departure from the United  Kingdom.
    She had been entitled to make her findings in paragraphs 24 and  25  of
    the decision.  The judge had acknowledged the weight to be given to the
    historic injustice.  Ms Isherwood  referred  to  paragraph  43  of  Rai
    "whether the appellant did enjoy family life at the relevant time  was,
    of course, a question of fact for the Upper Tribunal ...".   While  the
    determination was short there was no material error of law.

13.  In response, Mr Jaisri submitted that it would have been  no  point  in
    applying for an entry clearance in 2009 given that the appellant  would
    not have qualified.

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

15.  The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor.  As is submitted by  Ms
    Isherwood the decision is a short one but  none  the  worse  for  that.
    Ground 1 is accepted by Counsel not to be his strongest ground and  the
    allegation of unfairness  has  no  merit  at  all  given  the  note  of
    proceedings lodged by  Ms  Isherwood.   What  the  judge  said  in  the
    determination precisely reflects the points raised at  the  hearing  in
    cross-examination.  It was  argued  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  as
    recorded in paragraph 10 that the application had been contrived.   The
    judge properly went through the appellant's case finding that  she  did
    not fall within the scope of Appendix K or the Immigration Rules before
    turning to Article 8(1), the right to family life.  The  judge  had  in
    mind the  issue  of  the  historical  injustice  and  did  not  err  in
    concluding as she did that there  was  no  evidence  that  the  sponsor
    wanted to include the appellant on that application.

16.  As Ms Isherwood submitted if ground one  failed  this  had  a  knock-on
    effect  when  considering  the  remaining  arguments.  It  is  arguably
    implicit from the judge's observations in paragraph 25 that family life
    was no longer subsisting between the sponsor and the appellant.

17.  In any event the judge in paragraph 31 made  it  clear  she  had  taken
    into account both the issue of interference  with  family  and  private
    life and the "historic injustice factor" when considering the  question
    of proportionality. It was properly open to her to  conclude  that  the
    refusal was proportionate in all the circumstances.

18.  I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Judge was  materially
    flawed in law.

    Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date: 22 August 2019
G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

