
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/13986/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision promulgated and sent|
|On 17 May 2017                        |        On 25 May 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Rabbi Rahman
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Chohan, (working under the supervision of Eton
Law)
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a Home Office appeal against a decision of Judge Kuldip  Phull,
    sitting at Birmingham on 4 October 2016.  The  appellant  was  born  in
    Bangladesh in 1994, and in 2013 he arrived here on a visa to  join  his
    mother as her dependant, which was valid until 9 September 2015.  On  8
    September he made a private  and  family  life  application  which  was
    refused, as it was said he could not meet the requirements of the Rules
    on various points, the main one for present  purposes  being  the  fact
    that he had not passed the necessary English-language test.

2.    The  judge  noted  at  paragraph  13  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were not met, and at paragraph 17 she  took  note  of
    ss. 117A and 1117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    though without setting out any of the actual provisions, and also noted
    the general point that the maintenance of immigration  control  was  in
    the public interest. The judge went on to say, correctly, at  paragraph
    18 that family life between parents and children does  not  necessarily
    finish at the age of eighteen, and she  accepted,  on  the  appellant's
    evidence and his father's, at paragraph 19, that  family  life  between
    the two of them and the appellant's mother continued to exist.

4.   The question the judge had to decide was  whether,  in  terms  of  this
    appellant's family life, it would be  disproportionate  to  the  public
    interest to remove him, and she needed to  do  that  in  terms  of  the
    provisions of s. 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  This is where the difficulty comes.  The judge is criticised for
    not setting herself a "compelling circumstances";  test  but  she  does
    note at paragraph 21: "The appellant claims that there  are  compelling
    circumstances in his case because ...", and she goes on to explain  why
    that is so in her view.

5.   It is now clear from Agyarko and Ikuga [2017] UKSC 11 that there is  no
    separate  test  for  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  to  be
    satisfied; but that one would expect to find such circumstances, if  it
    were to be decided that it was disproportionate to remove somebody  who
    could not satisfy the provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules.   So  the
    judge needed to explain quite clearly why it was that  she  found  that
    was so in terms of this case.  What she said about it was this:  "I  am
    satisfied with the appellant's evidence  that  his  mother  is  of  ill
    health and as he can read and understand English she relies on  him  to
    attend  medical  appointments  with  her  and  ensure  she  takes   her
    medication on time."

6.   It is conceded that there was no medical  evidence  at  all  about  the
    appellant's mother before the judge; so it is surprising,  to  say  the
    least, that she felt able to make this finding  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's oral evidence and his father's, however truthful  that  may
    have seemed.  The least one would expect from an experienced judge such
    as her to require would have been  medical  evidence  saying  what  the
    appellant's mother  suffered  from,  and  why  it  provided  particular
    reasons for her to need his help, rather  than  rely  on  the  National
    Health Service and Social Services. Some fully-reasoned finding  needed
    to be made, if it were to be regarded  as  disproportionate  to  remove
    him, though he could not satisfy  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Chohan accepted this difficulty, and very  frankly  accepted
    that he could not advance anything against it.

7.   The other difficulty is this, and it turns on the  requirements  of  s.
    117B (3).  The judge dealt with this as follows: "In terms  of  Section
    117B I accept that the appellant can speak English and  is  less  of  a
    burden on UK taxpayers and  better  able  to  integrate  into  society.
    However the evidence is he did not pass  his  English  language  test."
    The  judge  then  engaged  in  considering  his  explanation  for   the
    circumstances in which he had  not  been  able  to  do  that;  but  she
    acknowledges the difficulty that he simply had not passed the  test  in
    time to submit results for his application.

8.   The real problem comes with what she says there about his  means.   The
    requirement of Section 117B(3) is not to be "less of  a  burden  on  UK
    taxpayers", but to be financially independent; and one only has to look
    at Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803  to  see  that  it  means  "financially
    independent of others".  As the Court of Appeal  also  make  clear,  at
    paragraph 62, even if the appellant had been  financially  independent,
    that could only be a neutral factor in the proportionality equation.

9.   For those two main reasons it seems to me that the judge did  go  wrong
    in law on  the  basis  on  which  she  considered  the  proportionality
    exercise, and there is no reasonable alternative  to  a  fresh  hearing
    before another first-tier judge.

Appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Phull
                               [pic]                       (Judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)
                                                           Date: 25 May 2017

