
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13546/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 March 2021                           |On 22 April 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                           RAJEEVAN NAVARATHTHINAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - COLOMBO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, instructed by Patricks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  15  July  2019
    refusing his application for entry clearance to the United Kingdom made
    on the basis of family life with his spouse, the  sponsor.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer  refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant did not meet all the requirements for eligibility  for  entry
    clearance, in that it  was  not  accepted  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine and subsisting nor that the couple intended  to  live  together
    permanently.

2.   At the hearing Mr Symes, who  also  appeared  below,  stated  that  the
    legal issue was that of whether there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the sponsor and the appellant, but that there were
    issues arising relating to the  sponsor's  capacity.   The  instructing
    solicitors had not been able to take evidence from  her  or  prepare  a
    witness statement on her behalf, but it was submitted that  she  should
    participate in the hearing and give  evidence  to  the  Tribunal.   The
    Presenting Officer  stated  that  the  respondent  had  concerns  about
    capacity and had sought the mental capacity assessment which was in the
    bundle, but had concerns about the report and the relevant expertise of
    the social worker.  The judge agreed as being wholly  appropriate  that
    the medical conditions of the sponsor were  such  that  she  should  be
    treated as a  vulnerable  witness.   She  has  a  diagnosis  of  global
    development delay and microcephaly.

3.   The judge heard  evidence  from  the  sponsor's  mother  and  from  the
    sponsor herself.  In her findings and reasons the judge noted that  the
    respondent did not contest the validity of  the  marriage  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor but at issue was whether there was a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and whether the sponsor had capacity.

4.   The judge gave very detailed consideration to the  evidence,  including
    the capacity assessment report which was provided by  a  social  worker
    from the London Borough of Redbridge, and also took  into  account  the
    sponsor's  statement  of  entitlement  for  her  personal  independence
    payment (PIP) award.  The judge noted the  guidance  in  Goudey  [2012]
    UKUT 00041 in respect of the appropriate test for the subsistence of  a
    marriage.  She also noted what had been said about the Mental  Capacity
    Act 2005 in In re M (An Adult) [2014] EWCA Civ 37.

5.   The judge expressed concerns about  capacity,  and  I  will  return  to
    those concerns in more detail when considering the submissions made  in
    relation to what the judge had to say about that, and  also  the  judge
    found that it had not been shown  that  the  relationship  was  of  the
    quality of a  genuine  and  subsisting  real  relationship  beyond  the
    formality of a marriage.  As a consequence she dismissed the appeal.

6.   Permission to appeal was sought, and granted, on the basis  first  that
    the judge had made confused findings as to whether or not  the  sponsor
    had capacity to enter into marriage and secondly  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in failing to give express weight to the expertise of  the
    author of the Social Services' capacity report.

7.   In his submissions Mr Symes adopted and developed the  points  made  in
    the grounds.  In the refusal letter the respondent had  challenged  the
    genuineness and the subsistence of the marriage, stating  that  it  was
    not an ongoing constant relationship.  The Home Office view  thereafter
    had changed and capacity was also put in issue.  No fairness point  was
    taken about that, both  parties  had  the  local  authority  report  on
    capacity and it could be predicted therefore that it would be raised as
    an issue.  The judge found that there were issues about capacity as  to
    whether or  not  the  sponsor  sufficiently  understood  what  marriage
    involved and therefore the marriage was not genuine and subsisting.

8.   The judge had referred repeatedly  to  issues  of  capacity  which  had
    taken a central importance in the appeal so it needed a  clear  finding
    on the balance of probabilities.  What the judge  had  had  to  say  at
    paragraphs 78, 79  and  80  was  inconclusive.   At  paragraph  64  she
    mentioned the fact that under section 1(2) of the Mental  Capacity  Act
    2005 it was provided that a person should be assumed to  have  capacity
    unless it was established that they did not.   This  was  an  important
    issue.  If the evidence were uncertain it seemed the  appellant  should
    win on the point and the judge had noted that and it was necessary  for
    there to be a clear finding on that and  that  had  never  really  been
    done.

9.   As to whether the matter of capacity might be irrelevant  in  light  of
    the finding at the end of paragraph 74 where the judge did  not  accept
    the relationship was of the quality of a genuine  and  subsisting  real
    relationship beyond the formality of marriage, and whether or not  that
    had been challenged, Mr Symes argued that there had been a challenge by
    implication in the second ground.  The evidence base about  genuineness
    was unduly reliant on the DWP  assessment  in  contrast  to  the  local
    authority assessment.  The latter had been commissioned with regard  to
    the issue of capacity but was material from which it could be concluded
    that the appellant did  understand  the  institution  of  marriage  and
    should  not  be  trumped  by  a  proforma  DWP  report.   It   was   an
    administrative report, rather than a professional report.  The clash of
    evidence  had  not  been  adequately  resolved.   The  social  worker's
    evidence was relevant to the genuineness of the marriage.

10.  In his submissions Mr Clarke argued that capacity was  a  term  of  art
    and he did not see that the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing  had
    argued or understood the connotations of the use of the word within the
    Act.  He said a secondary meaning was the ability to do something.   If
    the judge were open to any criticism it was with regard to the language
    used.  It was not true that there were no clear findings  on  capacity,
    as such findings were made for example at paragraph  64  and  paragraph
    78.  As regards the term of art under the Act there were clear findings
    that it had not been rebutted by evidence.

11.  The question of capacity within the Act was not  determinative  of  the
    issue of a genuine and subsisting relationship.   The  finding  on  the
    latter point at  paragraph  74  was  not  challenged.   The  judge  had
    referred to capacity with regard to the appellant's ability to contract
    a genuine and subsisting marriage.  There was no witness statement from
    the sponsor or any explanation as to why not.

12.  The sponsor had given evidence for example set  out  at  paragraphs  27
    and paragraph 30 and there  were  clearly  communication  issues.   She
    could not read or write.  There had been no  romantic  relationship  so
    far.  They had married in another country in  circumstances  where  she
    had given her communication via emojis.   Answers  had  been  given  in
    interview not by the sponsor but by her mother.  It was a long distance
    relationship.  When the judge had considered the legal connotations  of
    capacity within the Act, she had to consider  the  circumstances  about
    communication/contact between the appellant  and  the  sponsor.   There
    were unchallenged findings with regard to the relationship at paragraph
    71 and paragraph 72 and  this  was  significant.   On  the  paucity  of
    evidence it should be questioned how  the  judge  could  make  findings
    other than those she had.  The findings at paragraph 72  were  critical
    and there was no real challenge to those findings.

13.  At ground 2 issues were raised with regard to the capacity report,  but
    it did not really take matters further.  The findings  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 74 were quite devastating.  Ground 1 could not be  made  out.
    It could be there was a failure to explain capacity as a  term  of  art
    but there was no error of law.

14.  With regard to ground  2  the  judge  rejected  the  local  authority's
    report it was said but that was not correct.  She had said it should be
    given limited weight  but  had  not  gone  behind  the  presumption  of
    capacity.  The report had been agreed between the parties.   The  error
    alleged went to weight together with the point about  the  DWP  report.
    The judge had considered the latter report  at  paragraph  69,  placing
    reliance on it, and the problem in the grounds  was  that  it  was  not
    argued before the judge that it was not a reliable document.  It  could
    not be said  that  the  judge  should  have  criticised  a  report  not
    challenged before her.  In any event the way in  which  she  had  dealt
    with it was wholly sustainable.  What arose from paragraph  59  and  in
    reality the way the Presenting Officer had put the case at paragraph 34
    there was no apparent knowledge of the act or presumptions of  capacity
    being a term of art.  The judge considered the content of the  evidence
    at paragraphs 60 and 61 and it did not help  the  appellant  about  the
    genuineness or subsistence  of  the  marriage.   There  was  detail  at
    paragraph 61 and  the  judge  noted  limited  scope  about  ability  to
    communicate and this fed into the genuineness and subsistence issue  as
    did paragraph 62.  The judge set out criticisms  at  paragraph  63  and
    these were fair in the context of the genuineness and subsistence test.
     So whether the appellant met the capacity definition under the Act  or
    not should perhaps have been a reference to vulnerability, rather  than
    culpability but the findings were made in respect  of  the  genuineness
    and subsistence of the marriage and the decision was sustainable.

15.  By way of reply Mr  Symes  argued  there  was  material  in  the  local
    authority report that was relevant to capacity  in  the  broader  sense
    with regard to the ability to participate  in  a  genuine  relationship
    which the person genuinely understood.  Reference was made to  this  at
    paragraph 10(f) of the skeleton before the judge.  With regard  to  the
    sponsor speaking about the appellant and messages between them and body
    language it was relevant to the broader capacity sense of participating
    in the relationship.

16.  I reserved my decision.

17.  I consider first the judge's findings on the point  of  capacity.   She
    set out at paragraph 64 the gist of section 1(2) of the Mental Capacity
    Act 2005, which provides that  a  person  should  be  assumed  to  have
    capacity unless it is established that they do not.  The judge went  on
    to say that the difficulty in the case was that it was not  established
    by any medical evidence before her upon which reliance could reasonably
    be placed that the sponsor did not  have  capacity  in  relation  to  a
    decision to marry.  She went on to say that  she  shared  the  concerns
    raised by the respondent in relation to the  quality  of  the  capacity
    report but it did however provide a view of the  social  worker  tasked
    with preparing such a report by her local authority employer  that  the
    sponsor did have capacity.  The judge went on to say  that  she  placed
    limited weight on that conclusion due to the concerns as to whether the
    assessment  was  properly  and  thoroughly  focused  on  all   relevant
    considerations, but the result remained a position  where  it  was  not
    established that the  sponsor  did  not  have  capacity,  and  in  such
    circumstances a person was to be assumed to have capacity.   The  judge
    regarded this as deeply unsatisfactory in all the circumstances of  the
    case and given the evidence overall which she was shortly to go  on  to
    address as to the limitations  on  the  sponsor's  abilities,  she  had
    serious concerns as  to  the  sponsor's  capacity  with  respect  to  a
    decision to marry  and  thereafter  engage  in  consequences  including
    sexual relations.  She went on to note that  the  sponsor  had  clearly
    affirmed her belief that she was in love with her  husband,  that  they
    would get to know each other better over time but the report which  had
    recorded that also recorded that  to  date  despite  having  celebrated
    their wedding and entered into married  life  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was "shy" there had been no affection  or  romantic  activity
    between the couple.

18.  At paragraph 63 the judge noted the contents  of  the  local  authority
    assessment.  It clearly recorded areas in which the sponsor  could  not
    recall simple information such as her surname or how long she had known
    her husband and the assessor's doubts as  to  whether  the  failure  to
    recount details was due to not remembering or an  inability  to  recall
    related to a possible learning disability.  In evaluating  whether  the
    sponsor understood the consequences and possible risks of the decision,
    the record did not point  to  any  evidence  that  she  understood  the
    possible risks of entering into a marriage or the marriage not  working
    out, rather it recorded her belief that the couple loved each other and
    would get to know each other.  The assessor interpreted  the  sponsor's
    body language as demonstrating that she was deeply  in  love  with  the
    appellant but did not explain what this  body  language  was  and  how,
    given the  linguistic  and  cultural  differences,  the  body  language
    displayed denoted a person deeply in love  or  the  relevance  of  that
    assessment to the analysis of  whether  or  not  the  sponsor  had  the
    relevant capacity.  The report  did  not  record  that  there  was  any
    discussion or questions raised with the sponsor as to sexual  relations
    within the context of the marriage and her understanding of that.   The
    sponsor had indicated that no "romantic activity" had taken place.

19.  As regards the DWP report, this reported such matters  as  the  sponsor
    needing supervision or assistance from another  person  to  prepare  or
    cook a simple meal; she could eat or drink unaided, she could wash  and
    bathe unaided and manage her toilet needs or incontinence  unaided  and
    dress and undress unaided and express and understand verbal information
    unaided.   She  needed  prompting  from  another  person  to  read   or
    understand complex written information; she needed  support  to  engage
    with other people from someone who is trained or experienced in helping
    people  to  engage  in  social  situations;  she  needed  prompting  or
    assistance from another person to make simple budgeting decisions.

20.  The judge found it reasonable to place reliance on the  DWP  assessment
    which the sponsor and her mother clearly accepted, and  therefore  made
    findings based on that, including the fact that though she could engage
    in  oral  communication  she  could  not  read  or  understand  complex
    information or engage with others  in  social  situations  without  the
    support of someone else who was trained or experienced in helping  her.
    The judge found that the sponsor was not  able  to  live  independently
    without support.  She was deeply vulnerable and somewhat isolated given
    her inability to travel independently outside her home  or  look  after
    her  finances  or  securely  feed  herself  without  any  provision  of
    services.

21.  The judge referred again at paragraph 78  to  her  concerns  about  the
    sponsor's capacity, saying that whilst accepting pending an unequivocal
    demonstration that she did not have capacity she must be considered  to
    have capacity.   She  said  that  in  paragraph  79  that  if  it  were
    unequivocally beyond doubt that the sponsor had capacity, the  evidence
    as to the relationship between the couple would still amount to  little
    more than an assertion of a relationship given  the  formality  of  the
    marriage, the short  period  of  time  together  without  any  romantic
    activity or  documented  demonstration  of  affection  other  than  the
    exchange of picture messages and calls during which the  sponsor  could
    not converse with any  level  of  sophistication  or  spontaneity.   At
    paragraph 80 she said that where it is not established  that  a  person
    does not have capacity, capacity is to be assumed but the issue was  of
    such gravity that where there were given concerns or reasonable  doubts
    as to capacity, the public interest surely could not and  in  her  view
    did not lean towards a grant  of  entry  clearance  on  the  basis,  as
    submitted, that this was not a settlement route and  matters  might  be
    audited in  five  years  but  rather  away  from  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance.  She said "if I  consider  the  sponsor  as  a  person  with
    capacity to enter into marriage,  I  remain  unsatisfied  that  on  the
    evidence before me there is a genuine relationship akin to and  of  the
    nature and quality of marriage between the couple."

22.  The challenge in this case, as set out above,  is  as  to  the  judge's
    findings or as it is contended lack of clear findings, on capacity, and
    her treatment of the local authority capacity report.  In my view,  the
    findings in this regard, to which I shall return shortly, may, even  if
    they are vulnerable to the challenge to  them  made  by  Mr  Symes,  be
    severable from the findings as to the genuineness  and  subsistence  of
    the relationship between the couple if such severance can  properly  be
    made.  After all, capacity is not normally an issue in a marriage entry
    clearance case, and if one took the capacity issue out of this case, in
    my view if the findings on  the  genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the
    relationship between the couple are sound ones  and  untainted  by  any
    flaws in the capacity findings, then the decision can stand.

23.  In this regard it is necessary to look at the  decision  of  the  judge
    where it  concentrates  on  the  genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the
    marriage.  She set out detailed reasons in this regard at paragraphs 70
    to 72 of the decision in particular.  She noted that the basis  of  the
    refusal in this regard was because the answers given by  the  appellant
    and the sponsor in interview demonstrated they did not know details  of
    each other's lives which was to be expected  after  several  months  of
    marriage where they were stated to  be  in  daily  communication.   The
    appellant's witness statement gave explanations to the discrepancies in
    part based on the fact of the marriage being arranged  meant  that  the
    couple did not know a great deal about each other at that stage.  It is
    accepted that the mother answered for the sponsor during the interview.
      There  was  no  photographic  evidence  of  the  couple  together  or
    documenting the wedding celebration.  A discrepancy  as  to  where  the
    sponsor stayed after the wedding was identified but regarded as lacking
    substance, in the judge's paragraph 71.  She also considered there  the
    evidence of a visit to Sri Lanka in November 2019 where she found  that
    the couple had spent time together but it had  always  been  under  the
    auspices of their families and in  particular  the  sponsor  had  never
    spent time with her husband when her  mother  had  not  been  in  close
    proximity.  She did not find that the couple had  "lived  together"  in
    any meaningful sense.  She considered this to be  consistent  with  the
    limitations on the sponsor's ability  to  be  independent  and  conduct
    herself without support and that it demonstrated the limitations on her
    ability to exercise personal autonomy.

24.  Having reminded herself that  the  sponsor  (she  wrote  appellant  but
    clearly meant  the  sponsor)  was  properly  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness, the judge found that her ability  to  communicate  orally  was
    clearly very limited.  Communications appeared to be through emojis and
    picture messaging.  The sponsor's mother  said  in  evidence  that  the
    couple talked on the phone daily  and  this  had  continued  while  the
    appeal had been pending.  There was no evidence before the  judge  such
    as telephone records which would support the frequency  and  regularity
    of contact between the couple or that they had maintained conversations
    together or were in contact with each other for  any  length  of  time.
    There  was  no  evidence  of  any  written  communications   or   video
    communications or texting or  picture  messaging  between  the  couple.
    There was no evidence of demonstrations of affection such as  greetings
    cards or gifts.  The appellant's  witness  statement  referred  to  his
    awareness that the sponsor could  not  read  and  write  and  that  her
    talking "was not as spontaneous as mine" and that she "does not have  a
    lot of words to carry out the  interview  even  when  she  talks".   In
    evidence she was able to communicate  the  single  word  "happy"  as  a
    response to her husband coming to the United Kingdom and "crying" if he
    could not come.

25.  The judge found that the sponsor did have  positive  feelings  for  her
    husband and the assessor clearly recorded her repeated affirmations  of
    love for her husband.  However there was no  detailed  evidence  before
    the judge or  clear  articulation  as  to  the  sponsor's  position  or
    knowledge regarding her marriage and the nature of the relationship she
    had entered  into.   The  judge  found  the  sponsor  did  not  readily
    understand certain matters and was heavily dependent on her  mother  to
    manage and mediate her interactions.  Taking account  of  the  evidence
    available, she also found that it was more likely  than  not  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were not able to communicate orally with  any
    detail or depth or in a  manner  approximating  to  talking  given  its
    ordinary meaning in the  context  of  chatting  or  conversing  between
    couples.  She found that the sponsor relied  heavily  on  her  mother's
    presence to support her with communication.  She found that  she  could
    not  read  or  write  or  articulate   her   feelings,   thoughts   and
    understanding with any level of sophistication.   She  found  that  the
    sponsor's mother was overoptimistic even if earnest in seeking  to  put
    across that the couple "talk" daily.  She found it was more likely than
    not that the couple's "talk" on the telephone was severely limited  and
    not sufficient to develop knowledge of each other so as  to  develop  a
    genuine or real relationship beyond the formality of being married.

26.  The judge went on at paragraph 74 in her consideration of the  marriage
    to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  not  satisfied  her  that  the
    relationship was of the  quality  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  real
    relationship beyond the formality of a marriage.

27.  In my view it is clear that the judge came to her  conclusions  on  the
    genuineness and subsistence of the marriage without factoring into that
    what she had concluded or failed to conclude  about  capacity.   In  my
    view the appeal therefore falls to be dismissed on the basis that there
    has not been shown to be any error of law in the judge's assessment  in
    this regard.

28.  On the capacity point, the judge clearly had concerns  about  this  and
    there is undoubtedly concern expressed in her decision  as  to  how  to
    address the consequences of the absence of evidence to  show  that  the
    sponsor did not have capacity with her  concerns  about  the  marriage.
    However she made it sufficiently clear at  paragraph  80  that  if  she
    considered the sponsor to be a person with the capacity to  enter  into
    marriage she remained unsatisfied on the evidence before her there  was
    a genuine relationship akin  to  and  of  the  nature  and  quality  of
    marriage between the couple.  As regards the  findings  on  capacity  I
    consider that the judge, though  she  wavered  to  an  extent,  clearly
    regarded herself as bound by section 1(2) of the 2005  Act  and  though
    she  came  close  at  times  in  her  decision  to  going  against  the
    presumption, ultimately her decision was faithful to  the  presumption.
    I also consider that she was entitled to express the concerns  she  had
    about the capacity report for the reasons that she gave.   But  in  the
    end, if I am wrong in the analysis set out above in this  paragraph,  I
    do not  consider  that  any  flaws  that  might  have  existed  in  her
    assessment of the capacity point are material errors of law  given  the
    soundness and untainted nature of her findings on the  genuineness  and
    subsistence of the marriage.  I also consider that she gave proper  and
    appropriate consideration to the DWP report.

29.  I can only conclude by expressing my own sympathy for  the  sponsor  as
    the judge did at her paragraph 81, given the circumstances in which she
    has clearly wanted to be married for some time, but nevertheless on the
    judge's findings I consider that there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    assessment of the genuineness and subsistence of  the  marriage  or  in
    respect of her findings  on  capacity  and  therefore  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                                                  Date
14 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

