
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13191/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2019                      |On 15 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                 AISSAH [J]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Ostradsaffar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia born on  12  December  1990.  She
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chohan
      sitting at Birmingham on  11  May  2018  in  which  he  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  9
      October 2017. That decision was to  refuse  the  applications  of  the
      Appellant and her 2 children, A born on 13 September  2010  in  Gambia
      and N born on 19 June 2015 in the United Kingdom, for leave to  remain
      under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  on  the
      basis of their family life in this country.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom with  entry  clearance  as  a
      Tier 4 (General) student valid until 25 September 2014. This leave was
      curtailed on 16 June 2014 to expire on 15 August 2014.  The  Appellant
      applied for an EEA residence card on the  basis  of  her  relationship
      with her former partner, a Portuguese national, Mr [SJ] on  11  August
      2014 and was issued with a residence card valid until 11 October 2019.
      This residence card was revoked when the  Appellant  made  her  second
      application for a residence card also on the basis of her relationship
      with her former partner. That second application for a residence  card
      was refused on 16  June  2016.  The  Appellant  then  made  a  further
      application on 29 July 2016 for leave to remain the refusal  of  which
      has given rise to the present proceedings.


The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant argued that if she and the two children were returned to
      Gambia the youngest child  N  would  be  at  risk  of  female  genital
      mutilation (FGM). Both the Appellant and A had been  made  to  undergo
      FGM in the past in Gambia. A was now receiving primary  education  and
      had lived the first five years of her life in  Gambia.  The  Appellant
      was fluent in the English language  and  was  in  employment  and  not
      dependent on the state. She had an  HND  in  Business  Management  and
      Administration and did a one-year top up  degree  at  Birmingham  City
      University. She worked as  a  manager  for  30  hours  per  week.  The
      Appellant also relied on a  report  prepared  by  Warwickshire  County
      Council Social Services department based on an assessment made in 2017
      following a referral due to a disclosure that FGM had been carried out
      on A.


The Decision at First Instance

   4. At [8] to [13] of his determination the Judge set out his findings  in
      this case. At the outset of the hearing it had been made clear by  the
      Appellant's solicitor that the appeal was proceeding on the  basis  of
      Article 8 only and there was not going to be a separate  asylum  claim
      in respect of the risk of FGM to N, see [5]. At [9] the Judge directed
      himself on the best interests of the two children  which  were  to  be
      with their mother. Wherever the Appellant would go the children  would
      go with her. The only family the children  knew  was  each  other  and
      their mother. There was no evidence to indicate that either child  had
      any link or contact with their respective fathers. N was just under  3
      years of age and A had  lived  in  Gambia  with  her  grandmother  for
      approximately three years before coming to the United Kingdom. She was
      5 years of age when she arrived in the United Kingdom and may have had
      some memory of life in Gambia. Neither child was in poor health. Apart
      from the issue of FGM no other issue had been  raised  in  the  appeal
      about return to Gambia. The family would not be split. The bulk of the
      Appellant's family life had  been  spent  in  Gambia  not  the  United
      Kingdom.


   5. At [10] the Judge stated: "the Appellant's eldest daughter was made to
      undergo circumcision in the absence of the Appellant. The situation is
      now different. The Appellant would be returned to Gambia with her  two
      daughters. According to the Appellant's oral evidence when she was  in
      Gambia she had moved out of her parents' home. As such upon return  to
      Gambia there would be no need for  the  Appellant  to  return  to  her
      family home and she could live elsewhere". The  Judge  also  dismissed
      the claim in respect of private life. A's private life was limited and
      N was too young to have  established  any  meaningful  or  independent
      private life. The  Appellant  could  return  to  Gambia  and  put  her
      education to good use there. He dismissed the appeal.


The Onward Appeal

   6. The Appellant appealed against this decision  arguing  that  the  best
      interests of the children were inadequately addressed. The application
      for permission to appeal came on the papers before Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Chambers on 13 July  2018.  In  granting  permission  to
      appeal he wrote that: "it would appear at [10] that  the  finding  was
      made  that  the  Appellant's  eldest  daughter  was  made  to  undergo
      circumcision but that it occurred in the absence of the Appellant  who
      now would be returning with her daughters. It  is  arguable  that  the
      best interests of  the  children  were  not  adequately  addressed  in
      relation to the risk of FGM."


The Hearing Before Me

   7. In consequence of the grant of permission to appeal  the  matter  came
      before me to determine in the first place whether there was a material
      error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. If there was,
      the decision would be set aside, and I would make directions  for  the
      rehearing of the appeal. If there was not, then the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal would stand.


   8. At the outset of the hearing the Presenting Officer informed  me  that
      the Appellant had made an application for asylum on 8 August 2018 that
      is two months after the determination in this appeal. She  had  had  a
      screening interview  but  had  not  yet  had  her  substantive  asylum
      interview. The Appellant had changed representatives since the  appeal
      was heard in the First-tier and  was  now  represented  before  me  by
      another firm of solicitors Stuart and Co. They were  also  acting  for
      the Appellant in her asylum application although  that  point  appears
      not to have been passed on  to  counsel  instructed  for  the  hearing
      before me. I indicated that as the case was at error of law stage  and
      there was no application for an adjournment notwithstanding the recent
      instruction of the Appellant's present solicitors I would proceed with
      the appeal.

   9. Counsel submitted that according to the medical evidence the Appellant
      had been subjected to type I FGM as had her  oldest  daughter  A.  The
      issue was whether the best interests of the Appellant's  two  children
      had been taken into consideration  adequately  by  the  Judge  in  his
      decision. At [9] when referring to the best interests of the  children
      he had noted that the children would be returned to Gambia with  their
      mother the Appellant. There was country guidance both in the  form  of
      the case of K [2013] UKUT 62 and in the  Respondent's  Country  Policy
      and Information Note on Gambia dated December 2016 which  stated  that
      the Upper Tribunal in K had found that as a general matter a person at
      real risk of FGM in her home area was unlikely to  be  able  to  avail
      herself of internal relocation. Cogent reasons needed to be given  for
      a finding that  the  individual  would  be  able  to  relocate  safely
      especially given the  evidence  that  ethnic  groups  were  thoroughly
      interspersed, the country was small and  ethnic  groups  in  different
      parts of the country were highly interconnected.

  10. The Judge's conclusion that the Appellant could relocate was wrong  in
      law. The Appellant's parents would come to know that the Appellant and
      the daughters had returned and the younger daughter would  be  subject
      to FGM. Should the Appellant return to Gambia she would have to go  to
      her parents' home as there was nowhere else for  her  to  go  and  she
      would have to start again.

  11. In reply, the Respondent argued that there was no  material  error  of
      law. The case was not put sufficiently  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      There was not enough to re-argue the point. It had not been argued  at
      the First-tier that the Appellant's family would be able to find her.

  12. In conclusion counsel argued that the risk was real, and one could not
      go behind that. Relocation was not viable. An  incorrect  standard  of
      proof had been applied and even on an Article 8 only basis there would
      be an interference with the best interests of the children  which  had
      not been properly assessed by  the  Judge.  The  local  authority  had
      expressed concerns in their report that the  younger  child  might  be
      subject to FGM upon return.


Findings

  13. I indicated to the parties that one of the difficulties in  this  case
      was that because the Judge had been told by the  Appellant's  advocate
      at first instance that this was an Article 8 appeal only  and  not  an
      Article 3 appeal he was obliged to apply the ordinary  civil  standard
      of proof of the balance of probabilities not  the  lower  standard  of
      proof that was more applicable  to  either  an  asylum  claim  as  the
      Appellant had now made or an Article 3 claim. In  those  circumstances
      and subject to argument, I envisaged there were two courses of action.
      Either to find a material error of law and remit the  appeal  back  to
      the First-tier to be heard again in  some  way  linking  in  with  the
      asylum application made by the Appellant (if that was practicable)  or
      assessing this case on the basis of the balance of probabilities under
      Article 8. In the event that the determination  was  upheld  it  would
      have to be made clear that that of itself  should  not  prejudice  the
      Appellant's asylum claim which would need to  be  looked  at  in  more
      detail than had been possible thus far with the limited arguments  put
      to the Judge in the First-tier.

  14. The Respondent's CPIN states at 3.1.3 that if a person is at real risk
      from non-state agents in their home area it is unlikely they  will  be
      able to relocate to a part of the country where they would not  be  at
      risk but each case must be considered on its own facts. In the case of
      K the head note states, inter-alia, that the evidence as  at  November
      2012 fell short of demonstrating that intact  females  in  the  Gambia
      were as such at a real risk of FGM. The assessment of risk of FGM  was
      a fact sensitive exercise which  was  likely  to  involve  the  ethnic
      group, whether parental or marital, the attitudes of parents,  husband
      and wider family and socio-economic media.

  15. The head note also listed significant  variables  which  affected  the
      risk and gave some indication of the risk  to  members  of  particular
      ethnic groups within Gambia. The Appellant's  witness  statement  does
      not state from which ethnic group in Gambia she comes. The report from
      social services relied upon by the Appellant stated at page 12  of  16
      that should the family be deported to the Gambia this would mean  that
      N [the youngest daughter] would  become  a  victim  as  well  and  the
      Appellant would be unable to stop the procedure from being carried out
      on her. In her witness statement the Appellant had said that  she  had
      learnt that her oldest daughter A was made to undergo FGM without  her
      consent when she the Appellant left A in Gambia to come to the  United
      Kingdom and she had regretted the decision ever since.

  16. There is no doubt that the infliction of FGM would amount to treatment
      contrary to Article 3 and would certainly not be in the best interests
      of a child. The test under Article 3, as I have indicated, is  whether
      to the lower standard  there  is  a  real  risk  of  such  harm  being
      inflicted. The test under Article 8 by  contrast  is  whether  on  the
      balance of probabilities it is more likely than not that  there  would
      be a derogation from the best interests of the child. The Judge  found
      that there would not be because the Appellant  would  be  present  and
      able to protect her daughter. FGM on A had  been  inflicted  when  the
      Appellant had been absent. On the balance of  probabilities,  I  would
      accept that that is an analysis that does not demonstrate  a  material
      error of law, as far as it goes.

  17. The Appellant has now made an asylum claim and that will be considered
      by the Respondent to the  lower  standard.  I  do  not  consider  that
      anything in the determination of the First-tier in this case should be
      taken as definitive of  the  risk  under  Article  3  since  the  case
      proceeded on the basis of Article 8.

  18. There is one further relevant point I need to address. Notwithstanding
      the submissions made to him by  the  Appellant's  solicitor  at  first
      instance, should the Judge nevertheless have said that the  Article  3
      risk in this  case  was  "Robinson  obvious"  and  regardless  of  the
      submission should he have proceeded  to  consider  the  point  in  any
      event? There are three difficulties with that argument. Firstly, these
      were adversarial proceedings not  inquisitorial  proceedings  and  the
      Judge was obliged to deal with the case that was presented to  him  by
      the advocate who may or may  not  have  had  a  good  reason  for  his
      submission but in any event it was not for the  Judge  necessarily  to
      enquire into it.

  19. The 2nd difficulty is that an analysis of the  Article  3  risk  would
      involve an investigation into the factors set out  in  K  which  would
      have involved substantially more evidence  than  was  put  before  the
      Judge and as a result, on the limited evidence  the  Judge  did  have,
      might have led to a very imperfect analysis of the risk to N.  Thirdly
      the Appellant has now made an asylum application and all  matters  can
      be considered properly rather than the incomplete  investigation  that
      would have been carried out if the Judge had decided to deal with this
      matter under Article 3 on a "Robinson obvious" basis.

  20. Although not cited to me, I have had regard to  the  Court  of  Appeal
      decision in KC Gambia [2018] EWCA Civ 2847. The  Court  described  the
      case before them as one where "the Secretary of State's  decision  was
      centrally based upon a rejection of the truth of KC's assertions about
      the risks she faced in the Gambia. When that account was vindicated by
      the FTT, the Secretary of State fell back on her alternative arguments
      relating to internal relocation and state protection. When  these  too
      were rejected, the appeal to the UT was  based  upon  narrow  forensic
      arguments concerning the reasoning of the FTT. After the  UT,  wrongly
      in my view, allowed itself to intervene in a case that  it  considered
      to be finely balanced, the Secretary of State has been driven to  seek
      to bolster that decision with yet more elaborate arguments by way of a
      Respondent's Notice."

  21. KC turned  on  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  claims  of  the
      likelihood of harm upon return. It was decided to the  lower  standard
      in the course of an asylum claim and an Article  3  claim.  Relocation
      had not been found to be an option for the Appellant in that case. The
      position was thus very different from the case before Judge Chohan  in
      this appeal.

  22. I therefore dismiss the appeal in this case because I consider that it
      is more likely than not that the Judge was correct in law to find that
      the Appellant could protect her daughters  upon  return.  However,  an
      Article 3 or an asylum analysis would have to probe the case  in  more
      detail looking at the factors set out in K and  applying  a  different
      standard of proof. As illustrated by KC Gambia, the position may  then
      be very different. That will be a matter for the parties,  subject  to
      the observations that I have made in this determination.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 26 March 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 26 March 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge






