
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13551/2016
     HU/13552/2016
     HU/13554/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 16 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Harinder [S]
                               Dharminder [K]
                                    [A S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Claimants:     Mr M Brooks, counsel, instructed by Super
                        Immigration Service Limited
For the Secretary of State:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Claimants, nationals of India, made applications in April 2015  and
    appealed against the refusal of those applications for leave to  remain
    based around human rights  based  grounds  on  3  August  2015.   Their
    appeals against that decision came before the First-tier Tribunal on  4
    July 2017 in which their appeals were allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S D Lloyd (the Judge).  Permission to appeal those decisions  was
    given by the Upper Tribunal on 30 April 2018.

2.   The basis on which Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington gave  permission  was
    that all the grounds were arguable and as she put it:

         "The Judge appears at [38] to find that the threshold of Articles 2
         and 3 are not reached but allows the appeal on  Article  8  grounds
         because of the problems with inter-caste marriages in India.  There
         would appear to be an equation of very significant  obstacles  with
         'societal issues' and discrimination and lack  of  family  support,
         but there is no consideration of the ability  to  relocate  or  any
         available health provision in India for the husband's mental health
         condition.  As part of that assessment the Judge  also  factors  in
         the child, as apparently having resided in the UK for seven  years.
         This contradicts the finding at [19]."

3.   The realities of the grounds are slightly different because  they  are,
    it seemed to me likely, drafted carefully but  really  derive  from  an
    interpretation of the decision itself rather than from  any  access  to
    the information that had been pressed on the Judge for and on behalf of
    the Claimants.  Thus as Mr Mills correctly, it seemed to  me,  accepted
    and identified, the issue of whether or not the child was  7  years  of
    age and had been in the United Kingdom for  that  period  of  time  was
    simply not in consideration because in any event, as acknowledged,  the
    child was only 3 but more importantly the Judge accepted that the child
    had been born in the UK at a time when he could not have acquired seven
    years let alone any greater consideration under Section 117B(6) of  the
    NIAA 2002 as amended.  Similarly the  issue  of  the  first  Claimant's
    mental health was really of nothing to the matter because the case  was
    not being run on the basis that his mental health was  a  justification
    for not removing him back to India but rather that that  was  a  factor
    which had come about through  the  later  circumstances  and  certainly
    would not get any better as a result of a return to India.   Ultimately
    therefore it did not seem to me the Judge was ever  trying  to  justify
    the issue of return of the Claimants by reference to Articles 3  and  8
    on the grounds of health.

4.   The principal ground of challenge really  was  the  first  one  in  the
    grounds which essentially asserted that the Judge in  considering  this
    matter simply failed to address  the  possibility  that  the  Claimants
    could  relocate  elsewhere  in  India  where  the  impact  of  societal
    discrimination, ostracism and the like arising from  their  inter-caste
    marriage: She being a Jat (higher caste) and  he  being  a  untouchable
    (lowest caste), was simply not engaged with by the evidence before  the
    Judge.

5.   The fact is, as the Secretary of State no doubt  rightly  pointed  out,
    India has a population of over 1.2 billion individuals.   As  Mr  Mills
    helpfully put it, there was no evidence  to  show  that  there  was  no
    place, no village, no town, no city in the whole  of  India  given  the
    population where someone would not encounter the problems  of  societal
    discrimination arising  from  an  inter-caste  marriage  and  with  the
    drawbacks it might give in terms of preventing employment and so forth.
     With him I agree on that point but it did not seem to me that was  the
    issue.  In terms of proportionality, as reflected through the prism  of
    the Rules, the Secretary of State had identified that there need to be,
    albeit it is put in different ways in different  parts  of  the  Rules,
    significant obstacles to a return and an integration into  India.   The
    issue is not that there is absolutely nowhere in  the  country  that  a
    person could not live and/or a period of time do so without any adverse
    attention arising or enquiries into his or her  background  and  caste.
    The problems of associating not  least  with  persons  who  are  still,
    despite the legislation, regarded by many as  untouchable  and  treated
    accordingly.  It therefore seemed to me  that  consideration  that  the
    Judge was having to address with reference to Article 8  ECHR  and  the
    provisions under the Rules are somewhat  different  from  the  somewhat
    absolutist position that the Secretary of State chose to take in  terms
    of the availability of somewhere to go and live.

6.   Having considered the bundle and the skeleton argument and  the  issues
    raised before the Judge insofar as I can, it did not appear to me  that
    the issue of internal relocation was actually particularly  pressed  by
    the Secretary of State.  Nor was there any evidence  before  me  as  to
    whether or not the issue was even raised and challenged in the  conduct
    of the hearing before the Judge.  Be that as it may what the Judge  did
    have, for good or ill, was both adult Appellants' evidence  as  to  the
    fact of their marriage, the significance of caste generally and both of
    them described to the Judge their belief that simply wherever they went
    the issue of their castes would be discovered, it would be  effectively
    revealed, they would face the discrimination, stigma so associated with
    it and it would have the effect of forcing them to be "outcasts".

7.   It was clearly said  to  the  Judge  by  the  Claimants  that  societal
    opposition to inter-caste marriages was nationwide and its consequences
    would be inescapable wherever they went in India.

8.   At worst the Claimants said they were in fear of their lives  but  also
    of the difficulties that there would be in employment and making a life
    for themselves.  It is fair to note that the Judge did not make adverse
    credibility findings on the Claimants' claims and the  Judge  expressed
    himself, as I have been taken, in his decision in a number of places in
    generally favourable terms to the basis of their claims and fears.   It
    was clear that from D26 to D31, combined with some background  evidence
    on social ostracism, the human rights  material  which  I  take  to  be
    background material and some newspaper article  or  reports,  that  the
    Judge was alive to such material.  There  also  was,  particularly  the
    Human Rights Watch material, as  to  the  consequences  of  inter-caste
    marriages, how difficult life may become not just within  villages  but
    generally.  It was fair  to  say,  within  villages  the  discovery  of
    relationships and their caste basis would be more  readily  discernible
    but there was no evidence provided to the Judge on that issue.   I  was
    therefore satisfied that the Judge had before him evidence, he had some
    background evidence, and he was able to form a view about the risks  of
    discrimination and exclusion.

9.    Whilst I might not have reached the same decision as  the  Judge  that
    is not the basis on which an error of law is established. It seemed  to
    me [D42] the Judge, albeit fairly tersely, succinctly set  out  why  he
    thought there would be risks to the Claimants in terms of the life they
    could have and  why  those  amounted  to  difficulties  in  return  and
    integration in India.

10.  For those reasons he  therefore  applied  his  findings  to  the  wider
    issues of Article 8 ECHR in terms of the impact  on  their  family  and
    private life and took the view, as he was entitled to, that the effects
    of the Secretary of  States'  decisions  were  not  proportionate.   He
    therefore allowed the appeals under Article 8 ECHR.  Whilst I might not
    have reached that same conclusion by any means it did not  seem  to  me
    that my doubts about the decisions when I did not hear the evidence  or
    the opportunity to assess the arguments in the light of  the  evidence,
    it  would  be  wrong  for  me  to  interfere  in  the  decisions.  More
    importantly it did not seem to me that it necessarily followed  in  all
    likelihood that a different Tribunal  hearing  the  same  evidence  and
    receiving  the  same  documentation  would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion come what may.

11.  For those reasons, I conclude that the Secretary of  State's  challenge
    to the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge fails.  The Secretary
    of State's appeal is  dismissed.   The  Original  Tribunal's  decisions
    allowing the appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds stand.

ANONYMITY
No anonymity order was made and none is sought.

Signed                                  Date 4 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Original Tribunal's fee award stands.

Signed                                  Date 4 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


 P.S. The delay in promulgation has been caused by the case file being miss-
    located
