
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13271/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd November 2020               |On 11th November 2020              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between
                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ML
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Sarwar, of Counsel, instructed by D&A
Solicitors

Interpretation:
Mr V Dinganga, Lingala interpreter


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo born in
       1974. He arrived in the UK in February 2001 and  claimed  asylum.  He
       was convicted of a number of criminal offences between 2004 and 2008.
       The index offence was one based on acts which  took  place  12  years
       ago, and led to a conviction  for  having  a  false  instrument  with
       intent and  knowingly  possessing  an  improperly  obtained  identity
       document belonging to another for which the claimant was sentenced to
       1 year and 3 months imprisonment. The  claimant  has  not  reoffended
       since 2008.

    2. On 3rd March 2014 the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  deport
       the claimant, his partner  (N)  and  four  children  (W  (b.2006),  S
       (b.2008), K (b.2010) and G (b.2013) all born in the  UK.  His  appeal
       against this decision was dismissed on asylum grounds by a  Panel  of
       Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy and Mr G Sandall
       (Non-legal member) in a decision promulgated on 13th  April  2015.  A
       deportation order was signed on 9th August 2016 against the claimant.
       The claimant's relationship with his partner, N, broke down, and  she
       was granted limited leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds,  under
       the 10 year route to settlement provided for in Appendix  FM  of  the
       Immigration Rules, from 7th March 2019 to 26th August 2021.  The  two
       youngest children, K and G have the same leave  to  remain  as  their
       mother, N. The two oldest children W and S are now British  citizens.



    3. On 28th January 2018 further representations were refused as a  fresh
       claim. On 3rd July 2018 the claimant made further submissions and  on
       1st November 2018 he made an application for further leave to  remain
       in the UK. On 24th July 2019 the Secretary  of  State  refused  these
       submissions as a fresh human rights' claim with a  right  of  appeal.
       The claimant's appeal against that  decision  was  allowed  on  human
       rights  grounds  by  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Anthony   in   a
       determination promulgated on the 22nd November 2019.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 12th December 2019 and  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Sheridan found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in
       a decision promulgated on 15th September 2020, the  reasons  are  set
       out at Annex A to this decision, and adjourned the  remaking  of  the
       appeal.

    5. The sole issue to be remade is whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
       the claimants' children for him to be deported. Mr  Sarwar  conceded,
       in submissions before me, that if the claimant did not succeed on the
       basis of this exception to deportation, as set out at  paragraph  399
       of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  s.117C(5)   of   the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, it could not  be  found  that  there
       were  very  compelling  circumstances  which  outweighed  the  public
       interest in his deportation. The following key findings are preserved
       from the First-tier Tribunal decision: that  the  claimant  sees  his
       children on a daily basis and has a close  loving  relationship  with
       them; that he plays a significant part in their lives and is "a joint
       primary care giver";  and  that  they  would  be  devastated  by  his
       removal.

    6. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19 and with regard to the overriding object  set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal Procedure Rules to decide matters  fairly  and  justly  this
       remaking hearing took place via a remote Skype for Business  hearing.
       Neither  party  made  any  submissions  objecting  to  this  mode  of
       remaking, and there were no significant  issues  of  connectivity  or
       audibility during the hearing.

  Evidence & Submission - Remaking

    7. The claimant gave his evidence in English, without the assistance  of
       an interpreter. He confirmed his identity and that his  evidence  was
       true and correct. In short summary his key evidence is as follows. He
       sees his children every day, is dedicated to  them,  and  loves  them
       dearly despite having separated from their mother  2015  due  to  the
       strain on the relationship of these deportation proceedings. He takes
       them to and collects them from school  every  day,  attends  parents'
       evenings and helps them with  their  homework,  they  play  and  have
       leisure trips  together,  for  instance  to  the  cinema  or  playing
       football in the park. The claimant believes that  his  children  will
       suffer emotionally, physically and educationally if he is  not  there
       to support them in the UK. His son, W, is  having  problems  sleeping
       due to worry about his not being allowed to remain in the UK; his son
       S is having difficulties with education and has been referred to  the
       SENCO at school which S believes is due to worry about the  claimant,
       his father, leaving the family; and the younger children K and G  are
       very emotional about  the  issue  of  his  pending  deportation.  The
       claimant explained that W is currently awaiting an operation for  his
       nasal problems, there had been a telephone appointment  (due  to  the
       Covid-19 pandemic) since the  last  doctor's  letter  regarding  this
       issue which is included in the bundle, and it had been agreed that  a
       further operation was the only way forward as medical management  had
       not improved the situation.

    8. The claimant describes himself as the frontline parent  to  his  four
       children as their mother is significantly less educated than him  and
       cannot speak, understand or read well in  English.  He  said  it  was
       clear from the fact that the school and doctors' letters address  him
       that he deals with these issues. He gave oral evidence that  his  ex-
       partner had registered the children with the GP, but said  that  this
       had meant she had collected the forms, he had completed them, and she
       had returned them to the  GP.  He  is  the  parent  who  attends  all
       appointments with doctors. He said he and  his  ex-partner  are  both
       primary parents, and ultimately have  joint  responsibility  for  the
       children. He did not  believe  that  his  ex-partner  would  get  any
       assistance with the children from social services, friends or  family
       if he were forced to leave the UK.

    9. The claimant said that if he were allowed to  remain  in  the  UK  he
       would try to obtain full time work in  the  health  and  social  care
       sector as he had a qualification in this field, and his aim would  be
       to support his family. He accepted that this would mean that he would
       spend less time than currently with his children.

   10. Ms N, the claimant's ex-partner and  mother  of  his  four  children,
       confirmed her identity,  address  and  gave  evidence  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal  in  Lingala  through  the   Upper   Tribunal   interpreter,
       confirming her evidence was true and correct. She explained that  her
       written statement was prepared by the claimant's solicitors  and  was
       read back to her in Lingala before she signed it.

   11. Ms N's evidence, in short summary, is that the claimant plays a  very
       important part in their children's lives. He sees them every day.  He
       gets them ready for school, takes them to school and  collects  them.
       He attends parents'  evenings  and  medical  appointments,  which  is
       particularly important as her  English  is  not  good.  Even  if  the
       claimant gets full time work it is her opinion  that  he  would  take
       time off to attend these meetings and appointments as she  could  not
       cope with them. She currently works as a cleaner between 3pm and 6pm,
       and these hours are not ones which can be changed. For her  work  she
       only needs to understand very basic words in  English,  which  is  in
       common with other cleaners she works with. She  has  shared  parental
       responsibility  with  the  appellant,  and  he  is   able   to   have
       unsupervised and unrestricted access to the  children.  She  believes
       that if he were deported the children would suffer horribly  as  they
       would be devastated not having a father  in  their  lives.  She  also
       feels that they listen more to the claimant that to her.

   12. W and S have written their own letters in support of  the  claimant's
       appeal against deportation.  W  confirms  that  his  father  goes  to
       parents'  evenings  and  medical  appointments.  They  say  that  the
       claimant has always been present in their lives and  those  of  their
       siblings. He is a kind, caring and loving person and it  would  be  a
       disaster for them all if he were forced to leave the UK and ceased to
       have a physical presence in their lives.

   13. There are two social  work  reports  submitted  in  support  of  this
       appeal. The first report was written in November 2015 by Ms H  Prince
       and was in support of the application for N and the  children  to  be
       granted leave to remain in the UK. It is clear from this report  that
       the claimant acted as interpreter for his ex-partner for  the  social
       work interview. It  is  also  clear  that  both  parents  have  joint
       parental responsibility,  and  that  the  claimant  attended  parent-
       teacher meetings and provides support, although N was the main day to
       day carer at that time.

   14. The second report is written by Ms A Seymour on 19th October 2020 and
       is to provide information  about  the  social  circumstances  of  the
       claimant and his family, and the bonds, links,  ties  and  dependency
       between the claimant and his four  children.  This  report  was  made
       following a video conference due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

   15. From this report it is clear that the claimant cares for his children
       every afternoon whilst their mother, N, is at work and thus  collects
       them from school and cooks for them and  does  their  home  work  and
       plays and in non-Covid times takes them to after  school  activities.
       They also spend weekends together,  staying  at  his  house,  playing
       football in the park, attending church and eating out. It is recorded
       that the claimant attends parents' evenings, sports days  and  school
       workshops. The children agree that they listen more to  the  claimant
       than their mother, and that he has  more  authority  in  sorting  out
       fights and quarrels. W reported to the social worker that the  threat
       of the claimant's deportation was causing him not to be able to sleep
       at night as the thought of it makes him sad  and  emotional,  and  he
       feels things will  be  tough  without  him,  and  he  felt  this  was
       impacting on his studies at school. The claimant said both  S  and  K
       had become increasingly emotional at school, and S  was  having  some
       one to one support from the SENCO at school. Ms Seymour is  concerned
       that W, S and K all require the claimant as  a  male  role  model  in
       their lives, and that the claimant being absent could lead them to be
       open to exploitation by criminal gangs; she also  expresses  concerns
       about G and her need for a father figure. The claimant expressed  his
       concerns about the children being brought up by N on her own  as  she
       is a cleaner on minimum wage and so would not be able to afford after
       school clubs, and her poor English would mean she could not cope with
       medical appointments or parents' evenings, and in  addition  she  has
       very little authority over the children. Ms  Seymour  concludes  that
       the claimant and his four children have a secure attachment,  and  to
       take this away could lead to an inability for the children  to  trust
       or maintain healthy relationships as adults. She also  believes  that
       he plays a pivotal role in their  upbringing  and  concludes  that  N
       would struggle to cope as a single parent and this  would  negatively
       impact on the children. For these reasons it is found to  be  in  the
       best interest of the four children that the claimant remains  in  the
       UK to be part of their lives.

   16. Ms Isherwood, for the Secretary of State,  relies  upon  the  refusal
       decision, her skeleton argument, and oral submissions. In summary  it
       is argued that it is accepted that there is a genuine and  subsisting
       parental relationship between the appellant  and  his  four  children
       aged 6,10,12 and 13, the oldest two being  British  citizens.  It  is
       accepted that it would be unduly  harsh  for  them  to  go  with  the
       claimant to the DRC as they live with their separated mother.  It  is
       not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in  the
       UK with their mother whilst the claimant is deported to the  DRC.  It
       is found that whilst this will increase the anxiety of his  children,
       they will have support from their mother, the  NHS,  Social  Services
       and friends. It might be that N could change her hours or her job  so
       that she would be able to be available to the children after school.

   17. It is submitted that the unduly harsh test is not met  because  there
       is nothing in  this  appeal  which  raises  issues  which  would  not
       necessarily be involved for any children faced  with  deportation  of
       their parent, which does not suffice applying  KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
       [2018] UKSC 58. As set out in SSHD v PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
       1213 the deportation of a parent who plays an important everyday part
       in his children's lives is insufficient  to  meet  the  unduly  harsh
       test. It is submitted that all of the cases emphasis that this is  an
       elevated threshold, and just being a  good  father  and  loving  your
       children does not suffice,  and  neither  does  the  desirability  of
       children being brought up in a two-parent family.   It  is  submitted
       that the new evidence in  the  social  worker's  report  and  medical
       letters shows that it is in the best  interests  of  the  appellant's
       children for the claimant to remain in the UK, but this does not show
       that his removal would be unduly harsh. It is argued  that  there  is
       not a particularly strong parental relationship,  and  there  are  no
       other factors such as significant health issues which could make  the
       claimant's deportation unduly harsh to the children. It is noted that
       there is no evidence from the schools about the claimed impact on the
       children's education of  the  claimant's  deportation  or  about  the
       claimant being the contact point or regarding the emotional impact of
       the claimant's threatened deportation; and further it was noted  that
       there is no documentary evidence about W being on a waiting list  for
       an operation.

   18. In oral submissions of Mr Sarwar, and as  set  out  in  his  skeleton
       argument, it is argued that the test of unduly harsh is  met  in  the
       scenario that the children remain in  the  UK  and  the  claimant  is
       deported to the DRC. Mr Sarwar  submitted that the guidance from  the
       higher courts, most recently from the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq)  &
       Ors v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 made  it  clear  that  whilst  unduly
       harsh is an elevated test it is also lower  than  that  set  by  very
       compelling circumstances, and further that there is no reason why  it
       might not be commonly found that  deportation  is  unduly  harsh.  Mr
       Sarwar observed that in AA (Nigeria) [2020] EWCA Civ 1296  a  finding
       of unduly harsh on a very similar factual scenario to  that  in  this
       case had been found by the Court of Appeal not to be challengeable on
       grounds of perversity.

   19. It is argued that the claimant is particularly important  because  he
       sees his four children on a  daily  basis  and  has  a  close  loving
       relationship with them, that he plays a  significant  part  in  their
       lives and  is  "a  joint  primary  care  giver"  and  they  would  be
       devastated by his removal. In addition attention is drawn to evidence
       that the mother of the children is not able to communicate as well as
       the claimant in English with the school and that he has a  degree  so
       he takes the lead role with education matters including homework  and
       parents evenings; that the opinion of W is that his school work would
       suffer and he would miss shared activities with  the  claimant;  that
       the claimant has taken a lead in  medical  matters  for  W  with  his
       doctors due to his speaking fluent English; that all of the  children
       consider the claimant to be more authoritative  and  listen  more  to
       him. Further there is evidence that W, S and K have already  suffered
       emotional harm due to the threat of the  claimant's  deportation  and
       disruption of the contact arrangements causes upset to  them.  It  is
       highly doubtful that N would be able to care to the children properly
       on her own and ensure that the children maintain  their  school  work
       and all of their  extra-curricular  activities  as  she  works  as  a
       cleaner and so could not do so in terms of her hours or  her  income.
       It is unlikely that she would be able to negotiate different hours to
       suit her childcare arrangements given the low status of her work.

   20. It is argued that the supporting medical notes show that "dad" is the
       person who brings W to his appointments and is managing  his  medical
       condition, and it is clear from the most recent letter that W has  an
       on-going medical issue which is being managed. There is also evidence
       of S requiring help from the school SENCO in the bundle.    The  2020
       social worker's report provides direct evidence from the children  as
       reported to  her,  as  well  as  her  professional  opinion,  on  the
       dependency and vital bond between the claimant and his children.

   21. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

  Conclusions - Remaking

   22. The approach to the question as to whether the impact of  deportation
       on a child is unduly harsh has been clarified by the Court of  Appeal
       in HA (Iraq) & Ors v SSHD in a judgement which was promulgated  after
       the decision  finding  an  error  of  law  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Sheridan. The guidance is,  in  summary,  as  follows.  Following  KO
       (Nigeria) v SSHD it is clear  that  there  is  no  balancing  of  the
       severity of the parent's offence, and that  this  test  must  not  be
       equated with the high level required by the test of "very  compelling
       circumstances". The degree of harshness was one which was  sufficient
       to outweigh the public interest  in  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
       criminal in this medium category.  As  found  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)
       [2015] UKUT 223 harsh denotes something severe or bleak. In HA (Iraq)
       & Ors v SSHD it was found that it  was  a  wrong  approach  to  undue
       harshness to look for harshness which  is  out  of  the  ordinary  or
       exceptional. It was found that undue harshness might  in  fact  occur
       quite commonly. The degree of harshness might be affected by: whether
       the child lives with the parent; the degree of the child's  emotional
       dependence on the parents; the financial consequences of deportation;
       the  availability  of  emotional  and  financial  support  from   the
       remaining parent and other family members;  by  the  practicality  of
       maintain a relationship with the deported parent; and the  individual
       characteristics of the child. It is of course necessary  to  consider
       the best interests of the children, and this must be  done  from  the
       child's point of view ensuring weight is given to emotional  as  well
       as physical harm, and to the very significant and weighty  factor  of
       the advantages of British citizenship.

   23. I find that the witnesses, the claimant and his  ex-partner  N,  both
       gave credible evidence. Their evidence was careful, for  instance  in
       the precise description of how the children were registered with  the
       GP by the claimant, and they  answered  all  questions  put  to  them
       directly. Their evidence was also entirely consistent with each other
       and the documentary evidence provided. There was no  submission  from
       Ms Isherwood that they should not be treated as credible witnesses. I
       also find that the social work reports should be given weight  in  my
       assessment. Ms Seymour and Ms  Prince  are  appropriate  expert  with
       appropriate academic training and experience; their report shows they
       has had sight of all relevant  documents;  the  reports  explain  the
       process by which they were written; and contains  an  explanation  of
       their understanding of their duties to the Tribunal and statements of
       truth. Again, this was not dispute by Ms Isherwood.

   24. As recorded in the introduction to this decision  the  following  key
       findings are preserved from the First-tier  Tribunal  decision:  that
       the claimant sees his children on a  daily  basis  and  has  a  close
       loving relationship with them; that he plays a  significant  part  in
       their lives and is "a joint primary care giver"; and that they  would
       be devastated by his removal. These findings are clearly correct from
       the evidence before me. In these circumstances I find that it will be
       in the best interests of the children for the claimant to  remain  in
       the UK, but this does not, of course, suffice  to  mean  that  he  is
       entitled to do so without more on the test he must meet of  it  being
       unduly harsh to his children if he is deported.

   25. I find that whilst  the  claimant  lives  separately  from  his  four
       children in his own home he plays as full a role in  their  lives  as
       any live-in parent. He has  unrestricted  access  to  them  in  their
       mother's home and  is  involved  with  their  daily  collection  from
       school, providing  meals,  delivering  to  after  school  activities,
       helping with homework, going on leisure trips and playing football in
       the park, taking them to  church  and  going  with  them  to  medical
       appointments. The children's birthdays and events such as sports  day
       are celebrated as a family with both parents' present.  The  claimant
       also takes the children to his own  home  at  weekends,  where,  they
       informed the social  worker:  "he  has  more  interesting  toys  than
       here...we watch a movie and eat pizza...its more fun at dad's house".



   26. I also find that whilst N, the mother  of  the  claimant's  children,
       undoubtedly plays a vital and equal role in  their  lives,  providing
       their day to day home, that the claimant has skills that she does not
       possess. He is well educated and  speaks,  readings  and  understands
       fluently in English which she cannot. I find  that  he  has  attended
       parents' evenings and doctors' appointments for  his  children  alone
       for this reason. As Mr Sarwar has  argued  the  medical  letters  are
       littered with references to "dad"  and  "father",  and  this  is  the
       evidence of both witnesses which I have found credible. N  also  does
       low status (although very vital) cleaning work which is  unlikely  to
       have the flexibility that the higher status  work  a  man  with  good
       English and qualifications is likely to be able to obtain in  future,
       so I find that whilst schools and doctors might be  able  to  provide
       interpreters that it would be very difficult for N  to  maintain  her
       work and attend these functions in any case. I find that without  the
       claimant that attention to medical matters (and I do find,  based  on
       the letter of 13th March 2020 and the claimant's evidence, that W has
       an on-going issue of nasal obstruction with chronic rhinitis so  this
       is not a theoretical problem but  a  current  issue),  and  schooling
       would be very likely  to  suffer.   In  addition,  matters  like  the
       advantage of assistance with homework for these children  would  also
       go without the physical presence of the claimant as N simply does not
       have the skills for this.

   27. I also find that the children would suffer significantly  emotionally
       without their father, as is preserved from the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       and that this would affect their schooling  as  this  is  the  direct
       evidence of the children in their letters and to the  social  worker,
       that W and S reported sleep issues / found it difficult to  focus  on
       their school work with the threat of the claimant's deportation being
       even now a significant problem their lives. I find that the  children
       have also indicated that the claimant is the parent with authority in
       the family, and has an ability to sort out  fights  and  quarrels  as
       well as provide love and comfort, and the loss of this will also be a
       significant detriment to the children if he is deported.

   28. I conclude that the claimant has shown the highest degree of physical
       involvement in all spheres of his children's lives and that this  has
       been the case for the whole of their lives. I find that he  has  very
       close emotional relationships with all of his children as a result of
       his dedication to their upbringing, and thus as the social worker  Ms
       Seymour has concluded he has indeed a "pivotal role" in the family. I
       find that the deportation of the claimant is likely to  significantly
       impact on the financial situation for the family as he is  likely  to
       be able to obtain reasonably well paid work if  permitted  to  remain
       and without him N will have significantly reduced options to work due
       to lack of childcare outside school times and could not continue with
       her current work as childcare costs would be likely to be  more  than
       she earns from her cleaning job. I accept her evidence that she  does
       not have friends or family to turn to assist her in this  respect.  I
       find that the quality of the parenting that the children receive will
       also be significantly diminished because there are four of  them  and
       this is in any case a large number for a single parent to deal  with,
       and because N lacks the authority, educational  and  language  skills
       which  the  claimant  has  and  which  undoubtedly   advantage   them
       generally, and with their schooling and in accessing help for medical
       matters, which in W's case are currently needed.

   29. In  all  of  these  circumstances  I  conclude  that  the  claimant's
       deportation can properly be described as bleak or severe for his four
       children, and that it is unduly harsh to his children for him  to  be
       deported from the UK as this goes  significantly  beyond  what  would
       necessarily be entailed by the deportation of any parent.  Therefore,
       whilst noting as a neutral matter that the  claimant  speaks  English
       and as a negative one that he  is  not  currently  financially  self-
       sufficient, but has good prospects of being so if  granted  leave  to
       remain in the UK given his qualifications and English skills, I  find
       that the public interest in his deportation  as  a  foreign  criminal
       does not justify his  deportation  as  he  falls  within  the  second
       exception to deportation, as set out at s.117C(5) of the Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as the sentence he received was less
       than 4 years imprisonment  and  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  his
       children for him to be deported.




  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal  was  set
       aside

    3. I remake the appeal by allowing it on human rights grounds.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley    5th November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Annex A: Error of Law Decision



DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. However, for convenience
       I will refer to the parties as they were referred to  in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
       ("DRC"). He has four children, born between 2006  and  2013,  all  of
       whom live with their mother in the UK who is  his  former  wife.  The
       eldest two children are British citizens.

    3. A deportation order has been made  against  the  appellant.  This  is
       because  in  2008  he  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  15  months
       imprisonment for having a false instrument with intent and possession
       of an identity  document  with  intent.  He  has  not  committed  any
       subsequent crimes and has been assessed  as  being  at  low  risk  of
       reoffending.

    4. On 24 July 2019 the appellant's human rights claim  was  rejected  by
       the respondent. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       where his appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Anthony ("the judge"). In a decision promulgated on 22 November  2019
       his appeal was allowed. The respondent is now appealing against  that
       decision.

    5. On 16 April 2020  directions  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  were
       issued, expressing the provisional view that the error of  law  issue
       in this appeal could be determined without  a  hearing.  The  parties
       were given  an  opportunity  to  express  a  view  on  this.  Neither
       expressed any concern with, or objection to, the error of  law  issue
       being determined without  a  hearing.  I  agree  with  Judge  Allen's
       provisional view and therefore, having considered the opinion of  the
       parties in accordance with  rule  34(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, will now proceed without a hearing.

    6. I have considered written submissions from both parties,  which  have
       been submitted in  accordance  with  Judge  Allen's  directions.  The
       respondent's submissions are dated 13 April 2020 and the  appellant's
       submissions are dated 7 May 2020.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    7. The judge found that the appellant sees his children (who  live  with
       their  mother)  every  day  and  that  he  has  a  close  and  loving
       relationship with them. The judge described the appellant as being  a
       very significant part  of  his  children's  lives  and  their  "joint
       primary caregiver". The judge found that the children have never been
       without their father and that they would be devastated by his removal
       from their lives.

    8. At paragraph 42 the judge stated that because the children  would  no
       longer see their father if he is deported it is  highly  likely  that
       the anxiety they would suffer would not be within the  parameters  of
       what anyone would consider normal.

    9. Based on these findings, the judge concluded that it would be in  the
       best interests of the children for the appellant to remain with  them
       in the UK.

   10. The judge then considered  whether  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
       deportation would be unduly harsh on his children.  The  judge  noted
       that the respondent conceded that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
       children to relocate with the appellant to the DRC and that the issue
       in contention was whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain
       in the UK without him. For the reasons summarised above in paragraphs
       7-8, the judge found that this would be unduly harsh.

   11. The judge then considered  whether,  if  he  was  wrong  about  undue
       harshness, there were very compelling circumstances  outweighing  the
       public interest in deportation. The judge's assessment of this is set
       out in paragraphs  51  -  56  of  the  decision,  where  the  factors
       mentioned by the judge include that the offence was not  violent  and
       was at the lower end of the spectrum in  terms  of  seriousness,  the
       appellant is at low risk of reoffending, and the appellant is someone
       who in due course would be financially independent.  The  judge  also
       noted that the effect of deportation would be  unduly  harsh  on  the
       children.

Grounds of Appeal and Respondent's Submissions

   12. The respondent's case, in short, is that  it  was  perverse  for  the
       judge to conclude that deportation would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
       appellant's children as on any legitimate view the high threshold for
       undue harshness under section 117C(5) of the Nationality  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") was not satisfied.

The Appellant's Argument

   13. The appellant argues that there is  a  high  threshold  to  establish
       perversity that in this case has not been met. It is  argued  that  a
       flexible fact sensitive approach is required to assess whether  in  a
       particular case the  degree  of  harshness  goes  beyond  what  would
       necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a
       parent. The appellant notes that the judge found that the  particular
       facts  in  this  case  went  beyond  the  "common  place"  given  the
       substantial role played by the appellant  in  his  children's  lives,
       that his absence would induce a  traumatic  reaction,  and  that  the
       children need a stable home environment.

Analysis

   14. The central question before the First-tier Tribunal was  whether  the
       effect of the appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" on  his
       children under section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.

   15. The term "unduly harsh" in this context  has  been  considered  in  a
       number of  recent  decisions.   Lord  Carnworth  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC  53  explained
       that:

           "One is looking for a degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what
           would necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
           deportation of a parent".

   16. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
       EWCA Civ 1213 the Court of Appeal found that the First-tier  Tribunal
       was wrong to find that the  undue  harshness  threshold  was  met  in
       circumstances where, as in this case, the appellant was very involved
       in the day-to-day lives of his children and played an important  part
       in their lives. Hickinbottom LJ stated at [45]:

           'When a parent is deported, one can only have great sympathy for
           the entirely innocent children involved. Even  in  circumstances
           in which they can remain in the United Kingdom with their  other
           parent, they will inevitably be distressed. However, in section
           117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has  made  clear  its  will
           that, for foreign offenders who are sentenced  to  one  to  four
           years, only where the consequences for the children are  "unduly
           harsh"  will  deportation  be  constrained.  That  is   entirely
           consistent with article 8 of the ECHR . It is  important  that
           decision-makers  and,  when  their  decisions  are   challenged,
           tribunals and courts honour  that  expression  of  Parliamentary
           will. In this case, in agreement with Holroyde  LJ,  I  consider
           the evidence only admitted one conclusion: that, unfortunate  as
           PG's deportation will be for his children, for none of them will
           it result in undue harshness.'

   17. In Imran (Section 117C(5); children, unduly harsh) [2020] UKUT  00083
       (IAC) at [27] the Upper Tribunal stated that:

           PG is authority for the proposition that the 'unduly harsh' test
           will not be satisfied in a case where a child has two parents by
           either or both of the following, without more: (i)  evidence  of
           the particular importance of one parent  in  the  lives  of  the
           children; and (ii) evidence of the emotional dependence  of  the
           children on that parent and (therefore) of  the  emotional  harm
           that would be likely to flow from separation.

   18. In this appeal, the judge did not make any  findings  which  indicate
       that the appellant's children are anything other than  healthy  well-
       adjusted children who benefit from  having  two  loving  parents  who
       share responsibility for their care. The judge did not  identify  any
       disability, medical issue or vulnerability in respect of any  of  the
       appellant's children.

   19. The judge found that the  appellant's  children  would  suffer  great
       trauma and distress as a result of the appellant's deportation.  That
       may indeed be the case. But there was no evidence before the judge to
       support a conclusion that the trauma and  distress  that  they  would
       suffer would be greater than what would necessarily be  involved  for
       any child faced with the deportation of a loving  and  close  parent.
       The judge found (at paragraph 42) that the anxiety the children would
       face "would not  be  within  the  parameters  of  what  anyone  would
       consider normal". However, this  was  not  based  on  any  identified
       vulnerability or issue with any of the four children but rather was a
       general comment, applicable to any child, on the effect of  permanent
       separation from a loving and involved parent.  It  is  not  something
       that "goes beyond" what is a necessary  consequence  of  deportation.
       Based on the findings of fact in this case (as well as  the  evidence
       upon which those findings were based) it was not open to the judge to
       find that the harsh effect  on  the  children  went  beyond  what  is
       necessarily involved for any child  faced  with  deportation  in  the
       sense explained in PG and Imran. It was not therefore consistent with
       KO, PG and Imran for the judge to  conclude  that  the  threshold  of
       undue harshness in section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act was met.

   20. The judge also erred in  his  assessment  whether  there  were  "very
       compelling  circumstances"  over  and  above  undue  harshness  under
       section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act. This is because, although the  judge
       framed his assessment of this question in the alternative (i.e. if he
       was wrong about undue harshness), it is apparent from paragraph 55 of
       the decision that one of the reasons the judge found there were  very
       compelling  circumstances  was  that  he  considered  the  effect  of
       deportation to be unduly harsh on the appellant's children.

Decision

   21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law and is set aside.

   22. The decision will be remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  a  resumed
       hearing before any judge of the Upper Tribunal.

   23. The findings of fact regarding the appellant's relationship with  his
       children, as summarised in paragraph 7 above, are preserved.

Directions

   24. In the light of the present need  to  take  precautions  against  the
       spread of Covid-19, and the overriding  objective  expressed  in  the
       Procedure Rules[1], I have reached  the  provisional  view  that  the
       hearing for the remaking of the  decision  can  and  should  be  held
       remotely, by Skype for Business.

   25. No later than 7 days after these directions are  sent  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal the parties shall file and serve by email any  objection  to
       the hearing being a remote hearing at all/by the proposed  means;  in
       either case giving reasons; and the Tribunal will then  give  further
       directions, which will either be:

        a. to list the date and time of the remote hearing, confirming  the
           join-in details etc; or

        b. to give directions with respect to a face-to-face hearing.

   26. The parties are permitted to rely upon evidence that was  not  before
       the First-tier Tribunal. Any such evidence  must  be  served  on  the
       other party and filed with the  Upper  Tribunal  by  email  at  least
       fourteen days before the resumed hearing.

   27. The parties shall  notify  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  email  at  least
       fourteen days before the resumed hearing of the names of the  witness
       or witnesses (if any) that they intend to call to give oral  evidence
       at the resumed hearing.

   28. Skeleton arguments shall be filed and served by email at least  seven
       days before the resumed hearing.

   29. Documents and submissions filed in response to these  directions  may
       be sent by, or attached to, an email to [email] using the  Tribunal's
       reference number (found at  the  top  of  these  directions)  as  the
       subject line.  Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.   This  address  is
       not generally available for the filing of documents.  Service on  the
       Secretary of State may be to [email] and to the  original  appellant,
       in the absence of any contrary instruction, by  use  of  any  address
       apparent from the service of these directions.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

   30. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
       is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly
       or indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
       direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings.
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 17 August 2020              |

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

