
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13472/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 November 2020 via Skype for Business|On 1 December 2020              |
|                                          |                                |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                OD (Nigeria)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Patyna, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video). A face to  face  hearing
was not held because it  was  not  practicable,  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to included the  appellant's  bundle  from
before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant's
skeleton arguments,  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content that it had  been
conducted fairly in its remote form.

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  M
    Black promulgated on  18  February  2020,  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the  respondent  dated  23  July  2019  to
    refuse her human rights claim.

Factual background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1969. She arrived in this
    country in 2005 with her then partner, Y.  She claimed before the First-
    tier Tribunal that she had been trafficked here by Y, for the  purposes
    of sexual exploitation and domestic servitude at his  hands.  She  made
    that claim against a background of  a  deprived  childhood  in  Nigeria
    following the death of her mother and her upbringing at the hands of an
    abusive aunt. Y purported to love her and said they could move  to  the
    UK together to start a new life. A short while their arrival, the abuse
    began. The appellant was controlled by Y, prevented  from  leaving  the
    house and sexually and physically abused.  Her body  bears  scars  from
    the abuse she  received  from  her  aunt,  and,  later,  from  Y.   The
    appellant eventually did manage to leave Y's home.   She  attempted  to
    regularise her status with an application under the EEA regime based on
    a  marriage  with  a  Portuguese   citizen.    That   application   was
    unsuccessful, and an appeal against the refusal  was  dismissed  on  13
    March 2015.  That appeal considered only Article 8 matters. She  claims
    the relationship with the Portuguese citizen broke down in  2015.   The
    appellant claimed to be highly vulnerable on account of her trafficking
    experiences and provided  medical  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  she
    experienced symptoms of depression and PTSD.

 3. On 17 December 2016, the National Referral Mechanism of  the  Competent
    Authority, established pursuant to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Action  Against  Human
    Trafficking ("ECAT") made a positive "reasonable grounds"  decision  in
    relation to the  appellant.  On  23  July  2019,  it  made  a  negative
    "conclusive grounds" decision.  On the same day, a decision  to  refuse
    her human rights claim was taken, and it was that refusal decision that
    was under consideration before the judge below.

 4. The judge rejected the appellant's claim to have been  trafficked.  She
    found that the relationship with Y was initially genuine, and that  the
    appellant had been a willing participant in the decision to move to the
    United Kingdom. It was only later that it broke down and the  appellant
    became a victim of domestic violence. As such, the judge found that the
    appellant had not been trafficked  here  [43].  The  evidence  did  not
    support a finding that  the  relationship  between  the  two  had  been
    controlling and abusive at the time they took a  decision  to  move  to
    this country [44]. The judge had accepted some of the medical  evidence
    relied upon by the appellant to demonstrate her vulnerability on mental
    health grounds, and, although she  considered  that  it  featured  some
    weaknesses, it did attract some weight [40]. Overall, the  judge  found
    that the appellant would not face "very significant obstacles" upon her
    return to Nigeria.  She would enjoy the support of  a  friend,  F,  who
    financially supported her in this country [51], and  she  was  embedded
    within her church community here, which has branches in  Nigeria  [53],
    found the  judge.   The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  a
    resilient woman, with skills that would enable her to engage  with  the
    labour market upon her return [54].  The judge's global conclusion  was
    that the appellant's removal would be a proportionate interference with
    her Article 8 ECHR rights  [61],  and  her  removal  would  not  engage
    Article 3 [66].

Ground of appeal and submissions

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    all three grounds of appeal.

 6. Ground 1 contends that the judge erred when finding that the  appellant
    had not been a victim of trafficking.  Ms Patyna relies on Article 4 of
    ECAT, replicated by Article  2  of  Directive  2011/36,  which  defines
    trafficking as:

         "The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or reception
         of persons, including the exchange  or  transfer  of  control  over
         those persons, by means of the threat or  use  of  force  or  other
         forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud,  of  deception,  of  the
         abuse of power or of the position of vulnerability or of the giving
         or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of  the
         person having control over  another  person,  for  the  purpose  of
         exploitation."

    The emphasis was supplied by Ms Patyna, who appeared on behalf  of  the
    appellant, as she did below.

 7. Ms Patyna submits that the following finding of the judge at [43] is at
    odds with the definition of trafficking, because  a  trafficked  person
    may well be a willing participant to the trafficking  scenario,  having
    been deceived as to what was taking place. The judge made the following
    findings:

         "I accept that the appellant was subjected to  violence  after  her
         arrival in this country, but I am  unable  to  find  that  she  was
         viewed to the UK under false  pretences  or  that  she  was  not  a
         willing participant in the relationship, at least at  the  time  of
         entry and in the early period after her  arrival  here."  (Emphasis
         added)

    That the appellant may have been a willing participant is immaterial to
    the issue of  whether  she  was  trafficked,  submits  Ms  Patyna.  The
    definition of trafficking encompasses deception situations,  abuses  of
    power or abuses of a position of vulnerability.  The  judge's  findings
    that the appellant was a willing participant were at odds not only with
    the definition of trafficking set out above, but with a number of other
    findings reached by the judge concerning the  appellant's  experiences.
    Those included  the  fact  that  the  appellant  demonstrated  symptoms
    consistent with those exhibited by victims  of  trafficking  [38],  the
    fact the appellant was susceptible as a victim of prior  abuse  at  the
    hands of her aunt during her childhood [44], the fact that she  entered
    the  United  Kingdom  with  an  older  man  who  had  made  all  travel
    arrangements and kept her passport [33], [43], the fact  that  she  was
    subjected to violence after her arrival here [43], [60], the fact  that
    Y became controlling, violent and abusive [43], [44], and the fact  the
    medical evidence demonstrated  that  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    person [7], [51], [54], [60].

 8. By finding that the appellant was not a victim of trafficking,  despite
    having made findings of fact which admitted of the possibility of  only
    a positive finding on the trafficking issue, the judge  approached  the
    issue of the appellant's prospective integration into  Nigeria  on  the
    wrong footing, submits Ms Patyna.  The issue of re-trafficking was  not
    considered, and the judge took an overly favourable view of the ability
    of a victim of trafficking, bearing the appellant's vulnerabilities, to
    reintegrate. In addition, the public  interest  in  the  removal  of  a
    victim of trafficking cannot be said to be commensurate  with  that  of
    the removal of  a  "standard"  over  stayer  who  does  not  share  the
    characteristics, and past, of this appellant.

 9. The second ground of appeal contends that the judge failed properly  to
    engage with the medical report of Dr Hajioff, which had opined that the
    appellant's scars were consistent with her account of  trafficking  and
    domestic  abuse,  and  that  she  experienced  depression   and   PTSD,
    consistent  with  the  narrative  of  abuse  and  trafficking  she  had
    provided. The judge made a factual mistake when referring to the  scope
    of the appellant's medical records that had  been  before  the  expert,
    erroneously  stating  that  the  judge  had  not  had  access  to   the
    appellant's full medical records whereas, in fact, Dr Hajioff specified
    at the outset of the report that the appellant's GP records since  2005
    had been considered. The judge ascribed some weight to the report,  but
    discounted other aspects of it; it was not clear, submitted Ms  Patnya,
    why she had adopted that approach and, as such, had failed  to  provide
    sufficient reasons for her findings. Overall, the judge's  approach  to
    the  medical  evidence  was  inconsistent  with  the  approach  of  the
    authorities to an controverted expert evidence. There is no  reason  to
    conclude, as the judge suggested she was, that the appellant could have
    been feigning her symptoms to Dr Hajioff.

10. Ms Patnya also submits that the  judge  failed  to  ascribe  sufficient
    weight to letters of support from a support group and a charity working
    with victims of trafficking, failing to  give  sufficient  reasons  for
    doing so.

11. The third ground of appeal contends that there was no evidential  basis
    for the judge's findings that the appellant would enjoy the support  of
    her church community in Nigeria. The judge had rejected the evidence of
    a close  friend  of  the  appellant,  F,  who  supports  the  appellant
    presently, but said that she would not be able  to  continue  upon  her
    return to Nigeria, for insufficient reasons. The findings of the  judge
    that there would be no "very significant obstacles" to the  appellant's
    reintegration in Nigeria were accordingly flawed, submits Ms Patnya.

12. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Isherwood submits that the  grounds  of
    appeal are merely an attempt to re-argue the case, and to disagree with
    the legitimate findings of fact which were open to the judge to  reach.
    The judge's findings on the trafficking issue must be read as a  whole,
    she submits; the judge made positive findings that  the  appellant  had
    not been adhered to the UK under false pretences, and that she had been
    in a genuine relationship at the  time,  albeit  a  relationship  which
    subsequently turned sour,  but  not  one  which  was  characterised  by
    deception and exploitation from the outset. Ms Isherwood highlights the
    fact that, at the outset of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
    Ms Patnya sought to advance the trafficking issue as a ground of appeal
    under the 1951 Refugee Convention, for  which  the  respondent  refused
    consent, and in relation to which the First-tier  Tribunal  accordingly
    enjoyed no jurisdiction: see [11].  Ms Patnya's trafficking submissions
    before this tribunal, submits Ms Isherwood, was simply  an  attempt  to
    bypass the jurisdictional barrier  which  existed  to  the  submissions
    being considered as a protection matter before the judge below.

13. In relation to the medical evidence, submits Ms  Isherwood,  the  judge
    reached recent findings which were open to her  on  the  evidence.  The
    fact that the judge may have wrongly concluded that Dr Hajioff did  not
    have available to him  the  appellant's  earlier  medical  records  was
    immaterial; Dr Hajioff accepted from  the  medical  evidence  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable person, and did ascribed some weight to  the
    evidence. The reasons given by the judge for ascribing less  weight  to
    Dr Hajioff's report were open to her, and sufficiently expressed.

14. Finally, in relation to the judge's findings concerning the support the
    appellant would enjoy upon her return  to  Nigeria,  whether  from  her
    church or from F, those were findings which were open to the  judge  on
    the evidence.

Discussion

15. I agree with Ms Patyna that, were  it  the  case  that  the  judge  had
    erroneously failed properly to categorise the appellant as a victim  of
    human trafficking, that would have been a material failure to take  all
    relevant considerations into account, and one which would have impugned
    the judge's Article 8  proportionality  analysis.  However,  I  do  not
    accept Ms Patnya's submission that that is what the judge failed to do.
     Read as a whole, the judge found  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    deceived or otherwise exploited at the point she agreed with Y to  move
    to this country.  By contrast, the judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with Y deteriorated  after  the  couple  arrived  in  this
    country.

16. By way of a preliminary  observation  on  this  point,  the  judge  was
    plainly  aware  of  the  nature  of  the  submissions  being   advanced
    concerning trafficking; see [4] of the decision, whether judge outlines
    the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a  victim  of  trafficking,  and   the
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant that it was for  the  judge
    to reach her own findings on that issue, rather than deferring  to  the
    "conclusive grounds" decision, which had found  the  appellant  not  to
    have been a victim of  trafficking.  There  were  detailed  submissions
    advanced on behalf of the  appellant  which  the  judge  summarised  in
    detail. The judge was plainly seized of  the  nature  of  the  argument
    advanced on behalf of the appellant, and the detail of that argument.

17. Turning to the judge's operative analysis on the trafficking point, the
    judge made findings of fact which preclude a finding of trafficking. At
    [43], the judge said that she did not find that the appellant had  been
    lured to the UK under false pretences.  The  judge  recalled  that  the
    appellant's oral evidence had been that she came to the  UK  to  study.
    The fact that Y had made the arrangements and held her passport was  an
    insufficient basis to infer control, found the judge. Later in the same
    paragraph,  the  judge  again  found   that   "this   was   a   genuine
    relationship", albeit a relationship which turned sour  over  time.  At
    [44], the judge referred  to  the  appellant  as  being  in  a  "loving
    relationship at the time", referring  to  the  pre-UK  phase,  and  the
    initial stages of her relationship here.  That paragraph  concluded  in
    these terms:

         "The appellant refers to  this  being  a  controlling  and  abusive
         relationship and I accept it developed into such a relationship but
         am unable to find it was so at the time  the  appellant  agreed  to
         marry this man and to migrate to the UK with him or  in  the  early
         period after her arrival here. The evidence does not support such a
         finding."

18. Had the judge's only finding been that the appellant had been a willing
    participant to the move to the UK, Ms Patnya's  submission  would  have
    substance. However, as Ms Isherwood submits, it is  necessary  to  view
    the judge's findings in the round. The finding that the appellant was a
    "willing participant" was reached in  the  context  of  wider  findings
    that, at the time, the appellant was in a genuine relationship with  Y,
    which had not, again at that time, been controlling or abusive.

19. Ms Patnya submitted that the judge's findings  concerning  the  genuine
    nature of the pre-UK phase of the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and Y were irrational. Based on the judge's later findings of abuse and
    domestic violence, she submitted, it was irrational for  the  judge  to
    have found that during the early stages of the relationship, there  had
    been no deception of the appellant. I reject that submission.

20. In Henderson v Foxworth Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41;  [2014]  1  WLR
    2600 at [62], the Supreme Court held, with emphasis added:

         "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that  the
         appellate court considers that it would have  reached  a  different
         conclusion. What matters is whether the decision  under  appeal  is
         one that no reasonable judge could have reached."

21. On the issue of the trial  judge's  assessment  of  the  weight  to  be
    attached to individual  pieces  of  evidence,  the  Supreme  Court  has
    summarised  the  jurisprudence  on  the  issue  in  these  terms.   The
    principles, it said:

         "...may be summarised as requiring a conclusion either  that  there
         was no evidence to support a challenged finding of  fact,  or  that
         the trial judge's finding was one that no  reasonable  judge  could
         have reached."

    See Perry v Raleys Solicitors [2019] UKSC 5 at [52].

22. The judge was entitled, on the evidence she heard, to reach  a  finding
    that this was a genuine  relationship  which  later  deteriorated.  The
    judge had the advantage of hearing all the evidence in  the  case.  She
    had a view of  the  facts  which  this  tribunal,  being  an  appellate
    tribunal, does not enjoy. In Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK Ltd  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 5, the Court of Appeal underlined the caution with which  appellate
    tribunals should approach  the  task  of  reviewing  findings  of  fact
    reached by trial judges.   One  of  the  reasons,  said  the  court  at
    [114.iv], was that:

         "In making his decisions the trial judge will have  regard  to  the
         whole of the sea of evidence presented to him, whereas an appellate
         court will only be island hopping."

    In my judgment, taking issue with this finding of the judge would be to
    engage in "island hopping".  Having had regard  to  the  whole  sea  of
    evidence and  having  reached  the  findings  she  did  concerning  the
    relationship with Y, the judge reached findings that were open  to  her
    on that evidence.  In principle, there is nothing  irrational  about  a
    judge finding that a relationship that descended  into  the  depths  of
    domestic violence  had  its  origins  in  a  genuine,  non-abusive  and
    consensual relationship between the parties.

23.  Turning  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  I  reject  Ms  Patnya's
    submissions that the judge impermissibly rejected the  evidence  of  Dr
    Hajioff.

24. While there is some force in the suggestion that the  judge  mistakenly
    concluded that Dr Hajioff had not  had  sight  of  the  appellant's  GP
    records prior to 2018, three observations are necessary.

25. First, the judge expressed concerns at [39.h] that Dr Hajioff  accepted
    the appellant's account  of  having  attempted  suicide  in  the  past,
    despite  there  being  no  references  to  any  such  attempts  in  the
    "significant history" section of the GP records.  The  primary  concern
    of this aspect  of  the  judge's  analysis  was  that  the  substantive
    contents of the report were  at  odds  with  the  contents  of  the  GP
    records, which suggests that they had not been taken into  account,  at
    all or properly.  That Dr Hajioff stated at the outset  of  the  report
    that the notes had been included in the materials provided  to  him  or
    her is of marginal  relevance,  when  one  considers  this  substantive
    deficiency.

26. Dr Hajioff did expressly refer to the appellant's GP recent  notes,  at
    [60], stating "after completing my report, I received [the appellant's]
    most  recent  GP  records  and  medical  correspondence.  It  was   all
    supportive of the account she had  given  me[,]  and  I  have  made  no
    changes to my report."  The concern of the judge  was  that,  while  Dr
    Hajioff may well have considered the more recent GP notes  and  medical
    correspondence, there is nothing to demonstrate  that  Dr  Hajioff  had
    engaged with any of the earlier correspondence which, for  the  reasons
    given by the judge, featured a number of inconsistencies when  compared
    to the account provided by the appellant.

27. Secondly, the judge's concerns from the Hajioff report were not so much
    with the analysis of Dr Hajioff, but with what the judge considered  to
    be inconsistencies between the appellant's  evidence  before  her,  and
    what she had told Dr Hajioff: see [41].

28. Thirdly, it is necessary to consider the judge's analysis of the report
    in the round.

29. For example, at [39.b], the judge said that the appellant  reported  to
    Dr Hajioff that she experienced difficulty sleeping  through  nightmare
    disturbance. By contrast, in oral evidence, the appellant had told  the
    judge that her sleep had been disturbed by the children of  the  family
    slept in the same bedroom, and who played computer games  for  most  of
    the night. The judge observed that the appellant did not appear to have
    told  Dr  Hajioff  about  those  environmental  factors.   Those   were
    legitimate concerns.

30. At [39.d], the judge said that the account given by the appellant to Dr
    Hajioff had been accepted without challenge, or  consideration  of  the
    possibility of fabrication, by Dr Hajioff. Ms Patnya relies on SS  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 945
    as authority for the proposition that that was not  a  valid  approach.
    There, at [23], the Court of Appeal observed that "there is  no  reason
    to think that  the  doctors  believed  that  [the  appellant  in  those
    proceedings] was giving them anything other than a reliable description
    of her symptoms."  Ms Patnya also relies on a judgment  of  Mr  Justice
    Moses, as he then was, in R (oao Minani) v IAT [2004] EWHC 582 (Admin),
    and that of Sedley LJ in Y (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 to similar effect.

31. The authorities relied upon by Ms Patyna are case-specific examples  of
    erroneous  reasoning  given  by  a  judge,  rather   than   authorities
    establishing a general proposition that a judge cannot have concerns of
    the sort expressed by the judge in the present matter.  It is  open  to
    the judge to ascribe significance to the fact an expert may base  their
    analysis wholly on an account provided by an appellant.  In JL (medical
    reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal
    held, at paragraph 4 of the Headnote:

         "Even where medical experts rely heavily on the  account  given  by
         the person concerned, that does not mean their reports lack or lose
         their status as independent evidence, although it may  reduce  very
         considerably the weight that can be attached to them."

32. Plainly, therefore, it is open to a judge to express concerns based  on
    the account provided by an individual to an expert.  In contrast to the
    authorities cited by Ms Patnya, the judge in  the  present  matter  had
    additional, well-reasoned concerns about the Hajioff report.

33. The diagnosis of PTSD reached by Dr Hajioff had not  taken  account  of
    what was described as an "accidental perforation"  of  the  appellant's
    uterus in 2012 and the impact of that incident on her well-being. In  a
    letter dated 11 March 2016 from  the  [  ]  Primary  Care  Centre,  the
    accidental  perforation  is  described  as  having  resulted  in  post-
    traumatic stress disorder and depression. The  judge  notes  that  that
    diagnosis,  and  its  cause,  was  inconsistent   with   Dr   Hajioff's
    conclusions, and had not been addressed  in  the  medical  report.  See
    [39.e].

34. The report of Dr Hajioff records the appellant as having reported to Dr
    Hajioff that she had taken an overdose of tablets in  2008,  whereas  a
    letter dated 19 April 2017 from her primary care centre refers  to  her
    having PTSD and depression, but never having revealed a plan  to  carry
    suicidal ideation into effect.  See [39.h].   Ms  Patnya  submits  that
    such an absence does not reveal an inconsistency between the report and
    the medical notes.  The difficulty with that submission is that  it  is
    simply an alternative analysis of the facts; it  does  not  demonstrate
    that the judge's analysis was irrational.  The fact that there were  no
    records in the GP notes of any suicide attempts further underlined  the
    judge's  concerns  that  Dr  Hajioff  had  uncritically  accepted   the
    appellant's account: see 39.i,  failing  to  engage  with  the  medical
    records before him.

35. Finally, while the judge expressed some reservations with the  internal
    reasoning adopted  by  Dr  Hajioff's  report,  nothing  in  her  global
    conclusions  concerning  the  appellant's  medical   state,   and   her
    vulnerability, were at odds with the overall conclusions  expressed  by
    Dr Hajioff. Dr Hajioff's conclusions are at [61] to [64] of the report;
    they are that the appellant was suffering from depression and PTSD, and
    "has evidence of injury consistent with her account." Dr  Hajioff  said
    that the appellant would benefit from  antidepressant  medication,  and
    some psychological treatment such as counselling.

36. The judge accepted those broad conclusions.  At [40],  the  judge  said
    that she gave the report "some evidential weight".  She  accepted  that
    the appellant had scarring which was consistent with her being a victim
    of domestic violence, both in Nigeria and in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    judge noted, however, that the existence of scarring  is  not,  without
    more, sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  a  person  is  the  victim  of
    trafficking; Ms Patnya has not sought to challenge that discrete aspect
    of  the  judge's  analysis,  rightly  so.  Scarring   can   demonstrate
    consistency with an account of physical mistreatment but cannot  go  to
    the  issues  of  "action",  "means"   and   "purpose"   which   require
    consideration when assessing a trafficking claim.

37. For these reasons, the judge did not fall into material error when  she
    stated that the report of Dr Hajioff had been compiled without detailed
    reference to the earlier GP notes. Dr Hajioff may well have  stated  at
    the outset of the report that those records had  been  made  available,
    but the substantive analysis  of  the  report  failed  to  address  the
    inconsistencies between the account provided by the appellant,  and  Dr
    Hajioff's own conclusions, and the contents of the medical records  and
    correspondence. This ground is without merit.

38. The third ground of appeal contends that  the  judge  reached  findings
    concerning the appellant's likely circumstances upon her return without
    evidential foundation. There is nothing in this ground. The  judge  was
    entitled to reject the evidence of F that she  would  not  continue  to
    support the appellant upon her return. At [52],  the  judge  noted  the
    "considerable" practical, emotional and financial support  that  F  had
    provided, and rejected her evidence that she would not provide her with
    any support in Nigeria, due to fear of the money falling into the wrong
    hands due to corruption. The judge was entitled to form the view that F
    would continue to support the appellant, in view  of  the  considerable
    support she had provided her with in this country, as her close friend.
    The judge went so far as to note that "at the very least"  F  would  be
    able to give the appellant some money to take back to Nigeria upon  her
    return, addressing the concerns that the  money  would  fall  into  the
    wrong hands. There is nothing about this aspect of the judge's analysis
    that was not properly open to her.

39. Similarly, in relation  to  the  appellant's  membership  of  a  church
    community which has several branches in Nigeria, it  was  open  to  the
    judge to provide that the UK community  features  members  of  Nigerian
    heritage, and potential contacts in Nigeria. It was open to  the  judge
    to ascribe significance to this potential support network, and  provide
    the appellant with a degree  of  practical  support  upon  her  return.
    Throughout her narrative, the appellant has claimed to have been  given
    practical assistance by those at church. She was introduced to Y by her
    pastor in Nigeria at the time. There is no suggestion that that was  an
    introduction motivated by malice  of  any  sort  and,  on  the  judge's
    findings of fact which I have upheld, the  relationship  was  initially
    genuine. Accordingly, the appellant had enjoyed support from  a  church
    in the past, claimed to have found  fulfilment  and  community  at  the
    present time in her church, and it was open to the judge to  find  that
    support of that nature would continue in some form, at least initially,
    upon her return.

40. It cannot be said that the findings reached by  the  judge  were  those
    which no reasonable judge could have reached.

41. While another judge may have reached a different conclusion,  there  is
    nothing in the decision of this judge which involved the making  of  an
    error of law such that the decision must  be  set  aside.  I  therefore
    dismiss this appeal.

42. I maintain the anonymity order previously in force.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of Judge Black did not involve the making of an error of law.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 23 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
