
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13455/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     mh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continUed)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alexander (instructed by Rashid & Rashid Law
Firm)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke  promulgated
    on 18th November 2017 following a  hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  23rd
    October 2017, in which he allowed the appeal.   On  that  occasion  the
    judge was not helped by  the  absence  of  a  representative  from  the
    Secretary of State.

 2. However, the circumstances of the appeal were that the Appellant was  a
    national of Pakistan born in January 1972 who had applied for leave  to
    remain on the basis of his family and private life.

 3. That application had been refused on 9th  May  2016,  the  main  reason
    being that he had entered the UK illegally on  28th  January  2016  and
    therefore could not meet the suitability requirements. The Secretary of
    State did not accept that the Appellant had  a  family  life  with  his
    spouse because they had lived together for less than two years.

 4. The judge heard from the Appellant and it was drawn  to  his  attention
    that there had been a previous appeal by this Appellant in relation  to
    deportation.  The Secretary of State had sought to deport him  in  2014
    on the basis of a criminal conviction in Croydon  Crown  Court  in  May
    2012 where he had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment after  an
    offence of violent disorder.

 5. While serving his sentence he elected  to  be  voluntarily  removed  to
    Pakistan and once in Pakistan it appears that  he  tried  to  lodge  an
    appeal against the deportation.  The Secretary of  State  treated  that
    application as an application to revoke the deportation order,  refused
    it,  and  the  Appellant  appealed.   That  appeal  came  before  Judge
    Hembrough and Miss Singer, a non-legal member, at Hatton Cross on  20th
    October 2014.  The findings of that Tribunal were  made  after  hearing
    from three witnesses, the Appellant's wife and two of  their  children.
    The Appellant's wife is a naturalised British citizen  and  their  four
    children are all British citizens also.   The  evidence  was  that  the
    Appellant had taken  a  significant  role  in  the  upbringing  of  his
    children.  The evidence was also that since the Appellant's removal  to
    Pakistan the children's behaviour had continued to deteriorate and  his
    daughters  were  now  facing  behavioural,  social  and   psychological
    problems.  His wife was unable to cope  despite  some  intervention  by
    social services and his brother, who had been living with  the  family,
    had moved out and refused to provide them with any further support.

 6. The wife said, when asked why the Appellant had  agreed  to  return  to
    Pakistan, that he would have been anxious to be  released  from  prison
    because he was being bullied. She was  unwell  and  the  children  were
    going off the rails, and it was hoped that the family could all make  a
    fresh start in Pakistan.  That however had not proved  to  be  possible
    and reference was made  to  the  deteriorating  security  situation  in
    Pakistan and the fact that the family and children all wished to remain
    in the UK, which of course they are entitled to do, being British.

 7. The panel noted at paragraph 49 of the determination that at  the  date
    of the making of the deportation order the Appellant  was  a  Pakistani
    citizen with indefinite leave to remain in the UK and that he had  been
    in the UK for more than 25 years and was employed in a  taxi  business.
    He and his wife had been married since 1995 or 1996.  She was a British
    citizen who had been in the UK for more  than  fifteen  years  and  the
    Tribunal was satisfied that the relationship was  and  is  genuine  and
    subsisting.  They noted the prison records indicated that she  and  the
    children  had  visited  him  regularly  and  there  were  also  regular
    telephone calls.  They found that there  were  and  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life between the Appellant and his wife  continuing
    outside the UK, the obvious reason being  that  they  have  four  minor
    children, all of whom are British and remain  in  full-time  education.
    They clearly needed a family member to care for them.  They  found  the
    Appellant to have a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    his children and that he had provided for their material  needs.   They
    found that prior to  his  imprisonment  the  children  appeared  to  be
    thriving and doing well in school.  The panel found that it  would  not
    be reasonable for them to leave the UK. They were all born  in  the  UK
    and there was no evidence that they  had  lived  in  Pakistan  for  any
    significant period. The youngest child was then only 8  years  old  and
    had never visited Pakistan.  Another child was 17 and had visited  five
    or six years before.  They noted this was not  a  case  involving  very
    young children who have the potential to adapt to changed circumstances
    with relative ease.  This was a  case  involving  three  teenagers  who
    would find it difficult to adapt to life in Pakistan and they  rejected
    the assertion  that  simply  because  they  were  born  of  parents  of
    Pakistani origin they would have little difficulty  in  integrating  to
    life in Pakistan.

 8. The panel also noted at paragraph 55 that although  the  Appellant  had
    been convicted after a trial, correspondence from  the  prison  service
    indicated that he was something of  a  model  prisoner,  being  polite,
    courteous and hardworking. He was not subject to any adjudications, and
    the NOMS Report, included in the bundle, indicated that he had come  to
    his terms with his offending and was assessed as being a  low  risk  of
    harm to the public.   They  also  noted  there  were  somewhat  unusual
    circumstances  about  the  index  offence  and  having  regard  to  his
    antecedents generally they considered the likelihood of reoffending  to
    be low.

 9. They considered the situation of the Appellant's wife and  the  medical
    evidence and the evidence before them, they said, painted a picture  of
    her as isolated, depressed and frankly inadequate as a parent.

10. They went on at paragraph 78 to say that in  light  of  their  findings
    they found the Appellant would have met the requirements  of  paragraph
    399B of the Immigration Rules had he  been  appealing  the  deportation
    decision from within the UK.  They also found that he  would  have  met
    exception 2 as set out at Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act had they been
    in force, namely that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with
    a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  his  deportation  on  the
    partner or child would be unduly harsh.

11. That decision was before the First-tier Tribunal  who  dealt  with  the
    appeal, which I am now dealing with, in October 2017.

12. The judge in 2017 did not specifically consider Section 117B(6).   That
    is an error of law.  However, if one is to look at the requirements  of
    Section 117B(6) they are considerably  less  stringent  than  those  of
    Section 117C relating to deportation.

13. This Appellant had the benefit  of  findings  not,  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to remove the children from the UK, but that it  would  be
    unduly harsh to either remove them or to expect them to remain  without
    him.  The situation in relation to his wife was unchanged.  She remains
    unable to care for  the  children  without  assistance  and  therefore,
    having a finding that it would be unduly harsh, it is difficult to  see
    how it could possibly be  reasonable  to  remove  these  children.  The
    requirement of Section 117B(6) is reasonableness.

14. The Secretary of State's own policy remains that,  absent  criminality,
    it is never reasonable to expect British children to leave the UK.   Of
    course there has been criminality in this case, but the  Appellant  has
    had the benefit of positive findings in relation to that at an  earlier
    hearing when the burden he had to overcome was considerably higher. For
    all those reasons, despite this decision being short and containing  an
    error in not  considering  Section  117B,  I  find  that  error  to  be
    immaterial because there could only have ever been one result  in  this
    case, and for that reason the Secretary of State's appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 19th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

