
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13142/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing pursuant|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 8th September 2020                |
|to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008          |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                 MUKTHAR ALI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     written submissions provided by Ms L E Daniels, the
                    appellant's partner
For the Respondent:    written submissions provided by Ms H Aboni, relying
                    on a rule 24 response authored by Mr D Mills, both Home
                    Office Presenting Officers


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal  on  19  March  2020,  and  paragraphs  4  -  17  of   the
         Presidential Guidance Note no 1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-
         19 Pandemic, 23 March 2020.

      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Khawar (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated  on
         29 March 2019, dismissed his appeal in respect of a decision by the
         respondent dated 21 May 2018  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal L Murry in a decision dated  16  June  2019
         but sent on 20 June 2019. A hearing was listed for 12 July 2019 but
         this was vacated as it was anticipated that  the  appeal  would  be
         linked with another raising the same issue to be  determined  by  a
         Presidential panel.

      4. On 4 May 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor  issued  directions  to
         the parties expressing his provisional view that, in light  of  the
         pandemic, it was appropriate to determine the questions (i) whether
         the judge's decision involved the making of an error of law and, if
         so, (ii) whether the  decision  should  be  set  aside,  without  a
         hearing. On  11  May  2020  the  Upper  Tribunal  received  further
         submissions from the appellant in respect of the two questions.  No
         consideration was given to  whether  the  two  questions  could  be
         determined without a hearing or whether  a  hearing  was  acquired.
         Submissions from the respondent were received by the Upper Tribunal
         on 21 May 2020. The  respondent  did  not  consider  that  an  oral
         hearing was necessary.

      5. Further directions were issued by Upper Tribunal judge Reeds on  14
         July 2020. Judge Reeds extended time to  enable  the  appellant  to
         provide  any  further  legal  submissions  within  7  days  of  her
         directions being issued, and directed  that  the  appellant  should
         confirm in writing whether he sought an oral hearing or  whether  a
         face-to-face hearing was necessary, or in the  alternative  whether
         he was content for the decision to be made  on  the  basis  of  the
         written material provided. In an email  response  received  by  the
         Upper Tribunal on 19 July 2020 Ms Daniels indicated  that  she  and
         the appellant did not wish  to  prolong  matters  any  longer.  She
         contended that there had been  no  justification  for  the  lengthy
         delay and that the appellant had been exploited by the Home Office,
         immigration  solicitors  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal, and sought for the appeal to be concluded  based  on  all
         submissions  made  on  the  appellant's  behalf,  with   particular
         reference to a stamp on  the  appellant's  passport  purporting  to
         grant him Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  in  2001.  The  respondent
         replied to Judge Reeds' direction  by  email  dated  23  July  2020
         stating that the additional documents  were  not  relevant  to  the
         issue of jurisdiction and that they were in any event considered in
         the respondent's decision dated 21 March 2018.

      6. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to the judge's decision (which does not involve the  need
         for further evidence to be considered), and having  regard  to  the
         relatively narrow focus of the  legal  challenge  (relating  to  an
         issue of  jurisdiction)  and  the  written  submissions  from  both
         parties, and having satisfied itself that both  parties  have  been
         given a fair opportunity of fully advancing their cases, the  Upper
         Tribunal  considers  it  appropriate,  in  light  of  the  Covid-19
         pandemic, to determine questions (i) and  (ii)  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008.

Background

      7. The appellant is a male national of Bangladesh who is given date of
         birth is 10 August 1976. He maintains that he arrived in the UK  on
         1 March 1995, although the res has  not  been  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has provided sufficient evidence to support  his  claimed
         length of residence. The appellant claims that he was issued with a
         letter by the Home Office dated 8  November  2001  referring  to  a
         grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain and that a stamp to this effect
         was placed in his passport. The respondent does not accept that the
         appellant was ever granted settlement in the UK. The appellant made
         several applications for a 'no time limit' stamp to  be  placed  in
         his new passport but these were rejected. On 19 February  2015  the
         appellant made a human rights claim based on his family and private
         life. This was refused on 24 April 2015 and the decision  certified
         pursuant to section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 (the 2002 Act). As a consequence of the certification  the
         appellant had a right of appeal against the decision to refuse  his
         human rights claim but he could only exercise that right of  appeal
         once he left the UK. The certification was made on the  basis  that
         the application was 'clearly unfounded'. There does not  appear  to
         have been any challenge to the certification  decision  by  way  of
         judicial review.

      8. the appellant made further representations  pursuant  to  paragraph
         353 of the immigration rules. The respondent declined to treat  the
         further representations as a fresh human rights claim in a decision
         dated 21 March 2018. The appellant made further representations but
         these were refused pursuant to paragraph 353 in a decision dated 21
         May 2018. Although this decision made clear that it was  determined
         under paragraph 353 of  the  immigration  rules,  and  it  did  not
         purport to give the appellant a  right  of  appeal,  the  appellant
         nevertheless lodged an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal. A  Duty
         Judge stated that it was  arguable  that  the  appellant's  further
         sensations constituted a fresh claim  that  attracted  a  right  of
         appeal and that the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  Ms
         Daniels had not been properly considered.  The  matter  was  listed
         before judge Khawar on 8 January 2019.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      9. In a decision promulgated on 29 March  2019  the  judge  noted  the
         preliminary issue raised by the Presenting Officer  in  respect  of
         jurisdiction. At [9] the judge noted  that  decision  refusing  the
         appellant's human rights claim dated 7 May 2015 had been  certified
         pursuant to section 94 of the 2002 Act. At [10]  the  judge  stated
         that  the  respondent  had  incorporated  the  certificate  in  the
         decision under challenge dated 21 May 2018. At [11] the  judge  set
         out an extract from the decision dated 21 May  2018  in  which  the
         respondent  was  not  satisfied  that   the   appellant's   further
         submissions created a realistic  prospect  of  success  before  and
         Immigration Judge. At [12] the judge stated,

             "It is evident from the above that the Section 94  Certificate
             (clearly unfounded)  is  incorporated  into  the  Respondent's
             present decision, the subject matter of this appeal.  As  such
             this Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  to  consider  this  appeal
             unless and until the Section 94 certificate is withdrawn."

     10. At [13] the judge indicated  that,  in  light  of  the  substantial
         evidence provided by the appellant, he attempted  to  persuade  the
         Presenting Officer that the certificate should not be relied  upon.
         After  taking  instructions  the  Presenting   Officer   said   the
         certificate would be  maintained  and  that  the  tribunal  had  no
         jurisdiction to determine  the  appeal.  The  judge  dismissed  the
         appeal due to lack of jurisdiction.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     11. The appellant, with the assistance of his partner,  has  challenged
         the judge's decision on a number of disparate bases  (he  contends,
         amongst others, that there was unfairness in the way the hearing in
         the First-tier Tribunal proceeded, that the judge erred in  law  in
         his approach to the issue of certification under section 94 of  the
         2002 Act, and that the respondent conducted herself in an  unlawful
         and  dishonest  manner).  He  also  asserts  that  he  was  granted
         Indefinite Leave to Remain by way of a stamp on his passport and  a
         letter sent by the Home Office dated 8  November  2001  (assertions
         supported by reference to documents obtained under a Subject Access
         Request). In granting permission to appeal Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal L Murry stated,

             "It is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  concluding
             that there was no jurisdiction to hear the Appellant's  appeal
             failed to have regard to the decision of the  Duty  Judge  (or
             TCW) dated 26 June 2018 stating that it was arguable that this
             was a fresh claim and attracted  a  right  of  appeal  (Sheidu
             (Further submissions; appealable decision) [2016] UKUT  000412
             (IAC)"

     12. The single issue that I have to determine however, in  the  context
         of the Upper Tribunal's duties under section 12 of  the  Tribunals,
         Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, and  in  light  of  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, is whether the  judge's
         decision that he  had  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the  appeal
         involved the making of an error on the point of law  that  required
         the decision to be set aside. That, in turn, depends  upon  whether
         the respondent's decision dated 21 May 2018  was  a  refusal  of  a
         human rights claim as understood in section 82 of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (and by reference to  section  113,
         which defines a 'human rights claim'), or whether it was a decision
         made pursuant to paragraph 353 of the immigration rules,  in  which
         case the appellant's further submissions would not be regarded as a
         fresh human rights claim.

     13. Paragraph 353 of the immigration rules reads, so far as material,

             'When a human rights or protection claim has been  refused  or
             withdrawn or treated as  withdrawn  under  paragraph  333C  of
             these Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no longer
             pending,  the  decision  maker  will  consider   any   further
             submissions and, if rejected, will then determine whether they
             amount to a fresh claim. The  submissions  will  amount  to  a
             fresh claim if  they  are  significantly  different  from  the
             material that has previously been considered. The  submissions
             will only be significantly different if the content:

             (i)  had not already been considered; and

             (ii) taken together with the previously  considered  material,
             created a realistic prospect of success,  notwithstanding  its
             rejection.'

     14. In Sheidu the Upper Tribunal considered the appeal of a person  who
         had an asylum appeal dismissed in  2005,  and  who  had  an  appeal
         against a deportation decision dismissed in 2012. The  person  made
         further representations in May 2013 based on protection and article
         8 grounds. The Secretary of State's decision in  respect  of  these
         representations was headed,

             'UK BORDERS ACT 2007

             CONSIDERATION OF FURTHER SUBMISSIONS

             DECISION TO REFUSE A PROTECTION CLAIM AND HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM'

     15. Under the heading "Consideration of protection claim" the Secretary
         of State considered the appellant's protection claim  in  substance
         and concluded, given the previous adverse credibility  findings  by
         Tribunal judges, that there was no reason to take a different view.
         The letter then passed  to  issues  arising  under  article  8  and
         related immigration rules. Once again, the Secretary of State dealt
         in substance with the various arguments  raised  by  the  appellant
         before concluding, under a heading "Article 8 conclusion", that the
         appellant's deportation would not  breach  the  U.K.'s  obligations
         under the ECHR. A further short  section  dealt  with  "Other  ECHR
         claims". The Secretary of State finally  stated,  under  a  heading
         "Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules",  that  consideration  had
         been given to the appellant's submissions that had  not  previously
         been considered, but taken together with the previously  considered
         material, they did not  create  a  realistic  prospect  of  success
         before immigration judge.

     16. At paragraph 16 the Upper Tribunal observed that the references  to
         paragraph 353 of the immigration rules only appeared at the end  of
         the Secretary of State's decision, and  that  the  heading  of  the
         letter  indicated  that  it  contained  a  decision  to  refuse   a
         protection claim and a  human  rights  claim.  The  Upper  Tribunal
         concluded, in light of the  particular  decision  before  it,  that
         there had indeed been a refusal of a human rights claim  and  that,
         as there was an appealable decision, paragraph 353 had no  part  to
         play. It is apparent from paragraph  17  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
         placed great emphasis on  the  particular  terms  of  the  decision
         letter. The Tribunal noted that the decision  letter  started  with
         what was  described  as  a  human  rights  claim,  which  was  then
         substantively refused, and that the Secretary of State did so using
         wording in the heading and in the refusal itself that  was  clearly
         envisaged as a refusal of human rights claim by s.82  of  the  2002
         Act, and that the  subsequent  consideration  under  paragraph  353
         could not have the effect of removing the right of appeal.

     17. I have considered the decision dated 7 May 2015. It is  clear  that
         the respondent certified the appellants human rights claim pursuant
         to section 94 of the 2002 Act. I do not understand this  to  be  in
         dispute. The appellant made further representations and  these  led
         to the decision dated 21 May 2018. I have considered this  decision
         in  detail.  The  structure  and  content  of  this  decision   are
         materially different from the decision in Sheidu. The  decision  of
         27 May 2018 did not purport to be a decision to refuse a protection
         claim or a human rights claim, unlike the decision  in  Sheidu.  At
         the very outset of the decision of May 2018 the respondent set  out
         the provisions of paragraph 353 and made  it  clear  that  she  was
         considering the application as a repeat claim. She referred  to  ZT
         (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] UKHL 6 and indicated that she had  to  apply
         paragraph 353 in respect of further submissions made after a  claim
         was certified under section 94 of  the  2002  Act.  The  respondent
         referred to points raised by the appellant having previously  being
         considered in earlier decisions, including the  decision  dated  21
         March 2018 and noted  that  the  remaining  points  which  had  not
         previously been considered, when taken together with the previously
         considered material, did not create a realistic prospect of success
         before an  immigration  judge.  The  respondent  stated,  "as  your
         submissions do not create a realistic prospect of success before an
         immigration judge, they do  not  amount  to  a  fresh  claim."  The
         respondent concluded again at the end  of  her  decision  that  the
         further representations did not amount  to  a  fresh  claim.  I  am
         satisfied that the references to paragraph 353 of  the  immigration
         rules were an integral part of  the  May  2018  decision,  and  not
         simply 'tacked on' to the end, unlike the decision in Sheidu.

     18. The continued relevance of paragraph 353 has been reinforced by the
         binding decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Robinson  (formerly  JR
         (Jamaica)) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (Respondent) [2019] UKSC 11. At [64] Lord Lloyd-Jones held,

             "For these reasons I consider that the  Court  of  Appeal  was
             correct to conclude that "a human  rights  claim"  in  section
             82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act as amended means  an  original  human
             rights claim or a fresh human rights claim  within  rule  353.
             More generally, where a person has already  had  a  protection
             claim or a human rights claim refused and there is no  pending
             appeal, further submissions which rely on protection or  human
             rights grounds must first be  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
             State as a fresh claim in accordance  with  rule  353  of  the
             Immigration  Rules  if  a  decision  in  response   to   those
             representations is to attract a right of appeal under  section
             82 of the 2002 Act."

     19. As the respondent did not accept the further representations  as  a
         fresh claim, the appellant did not have a right of  appeal.  As  he
         had no right of appeal, there was no jurisdiction for the judge  to
         entertain the appeal, despite the matter having been listed by  the
         Duty Judge.

     20. The reason the appellant had no right of  appeal  was  because  the
         respondent  did  not  consider  that  his  further  representations
         amounted  to  a  fresh  claim.  It  was  not  because  the  earlier
         certification   was   incorporated   within   the   decision.   The
         certification only related to the 2015 decision.  This  mistake  by
         the judge however does not require the decision  to  be  set  aside
         because the appellant did not, on any rational view, have  a  right
         of appeal. The  appellant  should  have  challenged  the  May  2018
         decision, which was made in accordance with paragraph  353  of  the
         immigration rules, by way of judicial review.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law requiring it to be set aside.

The appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum

Signed                                                Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum                             31 August 2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email




