
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/13738/2015

                                                  HU/13747/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 05 September 2017                   |    On 18 September 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                 HVT and ET
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:        Ms J Norman, of counsel, instructed by Stevens
Machi Solicitors


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                                  DECISION

 1. The underlying judicial decision is that  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") promulgated on 21 November 2016.   By  this  decision  the  FtT
    allowed the Appellants' appeals on human rights grounds.

 2. The decision which was thereby successfully challenged was one  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 02 December 2015 whereby  the  application  of
    HVT for leave  to  remain  invoking  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention was refused.  As the decision of the FtT  makes  clear  this
    refusal decision had direct consequences for other family members.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal.
    In the application for permission the first ground contended  that  the
    FtT had erred in law in its handling of the interplay  between  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act and  its  application  of  the  best  interests
    principle.  In summary the contention advanced was that the approach of
    the FtT failed to consider all relevant factors in the round.

 4. The second ground of appeal specifically refers to paragraphs 35 and 41
    of the decision of the FtT.  The complaint in this ground is  that  the
    Tribunal failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  its  proportionality
    assessment.  The third ground of appeal is  somewhat  opaque,  has  not
    featured in argument and I shall say nothing about it.

 5. The grant of permission to  appeal  deals  mainly  with  the  issue  of
    whether the  permission  application  was  in  time.   As  regards  the
    permission application itself the order  of  the  permission  judge  is
    expressed in the following cryptic terms:

         "The grounds are arguable in light of the decision of the  European
         Court of Justice in the case of Chavez-Wilchez"

    This prompts the immediate observation that no part of  the  permission
    application relied on that decision or developed  any  arguments  based
    upon it.  As a result there is an  obvious  and  unmistakable  mismatch
    between the grant of permission to appeal and the grounds of appeal.

 6. Ms Holmes has correctly acknowledged that the Chavez decision is simply
    not in point and, as a result, the Secretary of State does not seek  to
    develop any argument based upon it  before  this  Tribunal.   Thus  the
    contention raised in the Appellant's Rule 24 response by Ms  Norman  of
    counsel is conceded.  This contention is that the decision  in  Chavez-
    Wilchez is irrelevant as this was a human rights appeal under  domestic
    law and not an EEA appeal.

 7. There are three ways in which the order of a permission judge might  be
    approached.  The first is to treat the order as ineffective,  null  and
    void as it bears no relationship whatsoever, expressed or implied, with
    the application for permission to appeal.  While I observe  that  there
    may be grounds for adopting that  course  I  reserve  this  interesting
    issue of procedural law for some  future  appropriate  case  as  it  is
    unnecessary to decide it in the present case.

 8. Turning to the second  possible  approach,  the  present  case  can  be
    determined on the basis that the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  is
    formulated in clearly qualified terms.  It is properly construed  as  a
    ruling that the grounds of appeal are arguable only on the basis of the
    decision of the European Court of Justice in Chavez-Wilchez.  It is now
    common case that this decision does not sound  on  any  of  the  issues
    raised by the Secretary of State.  Thus the Secretary of State does not
    - and cannot - advance this appeal by  reference  to,  and  within  the
    compass of, the grounds of appeal.

 9. Given this analysis, I consider that the appeal must be dismissed.   To
    permit the Secretary of State to advance the appeal on any basis  other
    than the Chavez-Wilchez decision would be misconceived as permission to
    appeal to  that  effect  has  not  been  granted.   It  would  also  be
    procedurally unfair.

10. The third possible approach to the order of  the  permission  judge  is
    that it was capable of being reconsidered, on application, due  to  its
    lack  of  coherence  and  intelligibility.   While  I   do   not   rule
    definitively that such an application  was  procedurally  possible,  it
    seems likely that it was: see  rule  5(1)  of  the  2008  Rules  which,
    notably, is not modified or emasculated by anything which follows.   No
    such application was made. Or, the purported grant of permission  could
    be treated as a refusal, thereby triggering the  renewal  mechanism  in
    rule 21(2). Full argument on this interesting procedural  issue  in  an
    appropriate future case would be welcome.

11. Finally, I should make clear my view that if the permission  judge  had
    engaged with the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal,  I  consider
    that permission to appeal would (or should)  not  have  resulted.   The
    grounds of appeal were demonstrably frail  and  did  not  overcome  the
    applicable threshold.

12. In these circumstances the Secretary of State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal must be dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  FtT  is  hereby
    affirmed.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 05 September 2017

