
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13634/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd of January 2018                   |On 05th January 2018              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                  MR LI WU
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of China born on  5th  of  March  1987.  He
      appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 13th of April 2016
      which was to refuse his application for  leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom as the fianc� of [SW], a British citizen ("the Sponsor").  His
      appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rayner  sitting
      at Taylor House on 28th of July 2017. The Respondent  appeals  against
      that decision and the matter therefore came before  me  in  the  first
      place as an appeal by the Respondent. For the reasons which I have set
      out in some detail below I have found a material error of law  in  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal and have  set  it  aside.  I  have
      proceeded to remake the decision in this case and  therefore  for  the
      sake of convenience I shall refer to the parties as they were known at
      first instance.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15th of November 2010 with
      leave to enter as a Tier 4 student. This was extended  until  19th  of
      April 2016. In attempting to re-enter the United Kingdom  on  29th  of
      July 2014 the Appellant's leave was curtailed because the  immigration
      officer considered that a false English language test certificate  had
      been submitted with an application made by the Appellant in  2013  for
      leave to remain as a student.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that
      decision but withdrew his appeal. On 4th of March 2015  the  Appellant
      was issued with removal directions to China to take effect on 12th  of
      March 2015.


   3. Three days before those removal directions  were  to  take  place  the
      Appellant made an application on 9th of March 2015 for leave to remain
      on the basis of his Article 8 rights and  his  relationship  with  the
      Sponsor. The Respondent refused the Appellant's claim on 24th of March
      2015 and certified it as  clearly  unfounded.  Seven  days  later  the
      Appellant using a ticket he had bought himself returned  to  China  on
      31st of March 2015. On 23rd of May 2015 the Respondent wrote to inform
      the Appellant that his application  would  be  rejected  if  biometric
      information was not provided even though the Respondent  had  in  fact
      already refused the Appellant's application. On 17th of June 2015  the
      Respondent  wrote  to  the  Appellants  representative  that  as   the
      Appellant had left the United Kingdom his application had been voided.
      On 15th of March 2016 the Appellant made his application for leave  to
      enter as the partner of his Sponsor the refusal of which  on  13th  of
      April 2016 has given rise to these proceedings.

The Explanation for Refusal

   4. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to  enter
      primarily on the basis that the Appellant  had  fraudulently  obtained
      the English-language certificate submitted  with  the  application  in
      2013. His application was refused on discretionary grounds pursuant to
      paragraph 320 (11) of the Immigration Rules. This subsection  provides
      that leave to enter the United  Kingdom  should  normally  be  refused
      where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant  way  to
      frustrate the  intentions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  A  number  of
      possible ways that this might have occurred are then set out  but  for
      the purposes of this appeal the relevant subparagraph  is  (iv).  This
      provides that not only should there be deception in an application for
      leave to remain but there should  also  be  aggravating  circumstances
      such as making frivolous applications. A number of other possibilities
      are mentioned but they are not relevant to this case.  The  burden  of
      proof of establishing that the Appellant has frustrated the intentions
      of the Immigration Rules rests upon the Respondent and the standard of
      proof is the civil standard of balance of probabilities  although  the
      more serious the allegation the more cogent the evidence  must  be  to
      establish it.


   5.  In addition to the allegation that  the  Appellant  had  fraudulently
      obtained his English-language certificate  the  Respondent  considered
      that  the  Appellant  had  submitted  a  vexatious  application  in  a
      significant way to frustrate the intention of the rules. This  related
      to the application made by the Appellant on 9th of  March  2015  which
      was refused by the Respondent and certified as clearly unfounded.

The Decision at First Instance

   6. At [18] onwards the Judge set out his findings  and  reasons.  It  was
      accepted that the relationship between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
      was genuine and subsisting and that the Sponsor who is employed  by  a
      firm of solicitors could meet the financial requirements  of  Appendix
      FM. The Appellant had  subsequently  shown  that  he  could  meet  the
      English language test requirement. The issues to be decided were:  (i)
      whether the Appellant had fraudulently obtained  an  English  language
      test certificate for  the  purposes  of  the  2013  application;  (ii)
      whether he had made his application on 9th of March  2015  frivolously
      and thus brought himself within paragraph 320 (11) and  (iii)  whether
      in any event the appeal should  be  allowed  outside  the  Immigration
      Rules under Article 8.


   7. The Judge decided at [26] that the Respondent had demonstrated to  the
      required standard that the Appellant had provided a false test  result
      with his 2013 application. The  Judge  had  carefully  considered  the
      matter before arriving at this decision, see [19]  to  [26]  and  that
      part of the decision has not been challenged by the Appellant. At [31]
      the Judge held that the application made on  9th  of  March  2015  was
      unlikely to succeed but did that did not make it frivolous within  the
      meaning of the paragraph. As the relationship  between  the  Appellant
      and Sponsor was genuine it was open to the Appellant to  make  an  in-
      country application to  have  that  relationship  recognised.  It  was
      unlikely to succeed as the Appellant did not qualify under the  rules.
      Further the Respondent's decision  that  the  Appellant  should  leave
      United Kingdom and make a proper application for entry clearance  from
      outside  was  correct.  The  Respondent's  decision  to   refuse   the
      application and certify it was the Judge  considered  plainly  correct
      but that did not make the application frivolous.


   8. As a result, the Appellant's application did not fall  to  be  refused
      under paragraph 320  (11).  The  fraud  in  relation  to  the  English
      language test examination was not aggravated for the purposes  of  the
      paragraph. The Judge cited the Upper Tribunal authority of  PS  [2010]
      UKUT 440. The decision-maker must have regard to the  public  interest
      in encouraging those unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  to  leave  and
      seek to regularise their status by an application for entry clearance.
      This in the Judge's view the Appellant had done by acting  responsibly
      and leaving the United Kingdom to make an out of  country  application
      at the appropriate  time.  The  basis  of  the  appeal  was  that  the
      Appellant's human rights had been infringed by the refusal of leave to
      enter and the Judge proceeded to consider human  rights  at  [34]  and
      [35]. Since the Appellant could in the Judge's view meet the rules and
      there were no countermanding  features  the  decision  to  refuse  the
      application was a disproportionate interference  with  the  Article  8
      rights of both the Appellant and the Sponsor. He allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   9. The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing with the Judge's
      decision that the application made  on  9th  of  March  2015  was  not
      frivolous despite the fact that it was unlikely to succeed because the
      Appellant was unable to qualify. The Judge it was said had gone on  to
      use Article 8 as a general dispensing power. The Appellant and Sponsor
      had seen each other only once since 2015  and  the  decision  did  not
      amount to  an  interference  with  family  life.  The  Judge  had  not
      considered whether family life  could  continue  in  China.  That  the
      Appellant and Sponsor might prefer to conduct their family life in the
      United Kingdom was not without  more  sufficient  and  the  Judge  had
      failed to identify anything amounting to compelling circumstances.


  10. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 20th of October 2017. In  granting
      permission to appeal on both the issue of the  Immigration  Rules  and
      the human rights application outside the Rules he wrote: "although the
      Appellant had left the United Kingdom at his own expense  on  31st  of
      March 2015 the Appellant had made an application for leave  to  remain
      on 9th of March  2015  which  the  Judge  concluded  was  unlikely  to
      succeed. Arguably the Judge erred and was bound to find that this  was
      a frivolous application that could not succeed under  the  Immigration
      Rules. Thus, arguably, he ought to have concluded that  paragraph  320
      (11) did apply to the Appellant notwithstanding his departure from the
      United Kingdom at his own expense.... This was only  ever  a  "private
      life" appeal, based upon a relationship with an individual  who  could
      at any time have visited the Appellant in  China  in  safety  but  has
      chosen not to do so. He could move to China to live with the Appellant
      there. The couple are not married and had taken no steps  to  form  an
      engagement prior to the Appellant's departure from the United Kingdom.
      None of this appears to be rehearsed in the decision and thus arguably
      the Judge fails to consider adequately  the  public  interest  in  the
      refusal of  entry  clearance  within  the  true  factual  context  (in
      particular the frivolous application; PS)."


  11. The Appellant responded to the  grant  of  permission  under  rule  24
      arguing  that  the  Judge  had  given  proper  consideration  to   the
      applicability of paragraph  320  (11)  and  had  adopted  the  correct
      approach to determining whether the Appellant fell for  refusal  under
      that paragraph. The Judge had given proper reasons for the  conclusion
      that the 9th of March 2015 application was not  frivolous.  There  had
      been no 2nd application made on 23rd of March 2015 the  Appellant  had
      only made one application bearing in mind that the  paragraph  of  the
      Immigration Rules refers to frivolous applications in the plural.  The
      Judge had correctly had regard to relevant case law. Further the Judge
      had dealt with the human rights appeal appropriately. To refuse  entry
      clearance to an Appellant who met the  rules  was  a  disproportionate
      interference with the Appellant's family life. This was not a  private
      life appeal as Judge Holmes asserted in the grant  of  permission,  it
      was a family life appeal based on the  Appellant's  relationship  with
      the Sponsor.

The Hearing Before Me

  12. For the Respondent, the Presenting Officer indicated there was  little
      further to add to the Respondent's grounds of appeal, the  core  issue
      in the case was the interpretation of paragraph 320 (11).  There  were
      no compelling circumstances in this case for the appeal to be  allowed
      outside the Immigration Rules  under  Article  8  and  the  Respondent
      relied upon the Supreme Court decision in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.


  13. For the Appellant, counsel accepted that the essence of the  case  lay
      within paragraph  320  (11).  The  Judge's  conclusion  was  that  the
      application made on 9th  of  March  2015  was  not  a  frivolous  one.
      Frivolous was not the same as an application unlikely to succeed.  The
      Respondent initially asserted that there  had  been  two  applications
      made by the Appellant one on 9th of March and the  other  on  23rd  of
      March but the Judge concluded that there was only one the 9th of March
      application. The paragraph referred to frivolous applications  in  the
      plural although that was not a point  taken  by  the  Judge  at  first
      instance. Even if there was an element of frivolity in the application
      it was not  sufficiently  aggravating  such  as  to  engage  the  sub-
      paragraph  and  result  in  the  refusal  of  the   application.   The
      circumstances in this case were similar to those of PS India. This was
      a case in which the Appellant had left the United Kingdom in order  to
      make an application from outside the country in  compliance  with  the
      Respondent's Immigration Rules.


  14. In conclusion, the Presenting Officer reiterated the Respondent's view
      that the Judge had used Article 8 as a dispensing power. The error  of
      law was at [31] of the determination where the Judge  had  incorrectly
      considered  what  was  frivolous  distinguishing  that  wrongly   from
      unlikely to succeed.

Findings

  15. The issue in this case is a relatively narrow one. Did  the  Appellant
      make a frivolous application on 9th of March 2015 or was it merely  an
      application which was unlikely to succeed even though as the Judge  at
      first instance found the Respondent was quite entitled to  certify  as
      being without merit. The Judge's reasoning is set out at [31]  of  the
      determination. He found that just because an application was  unlikely
      to succeed that did not make it frivolous. There does appear  to  have
      been something of a muddle on the part of the  Respondent  as  pointed
      out by the Judge at [2] of the determination. Although the  Respondent
      certified the application made on 9th of March as  early  as  24th  of
      March, the Respondent still wrote to the Appellant  two  months  later
      asking for biometric information and a month after that wrote  to  the
      Appellant's representatives  that  the  application  had  been  voided
      because the Appellant had left the United Kingdom not because  it  had
      already been refused and certified. Some  of  this  confusion  on  the
      Respondent's part might have been caused by the  view  the  Respondent
      took that there were in fact two applications as asserted by the Entry
      Clearance Officer's letter. However, no evidence was ever provided  to
      substantiate the 2nd application and the Judge dismissed the  prospect
      that there had been one.


  16. The questions remain whether the application made on 9th of March  was
      indeed frivolous and whether a single application can be sufficient to
      engage the paragraph. The Judge's rejection of the idea that  the  9th
      of March application was  frivolous  is  somewhat  undermined  by  the
      Judge's finding at [31] that it was never a strong application and the
      Respondent's decision to refuse and certify it was "plainly  correct".
      The certification was that the application was clearly  unfounded.  To
      apply a certificate to an application which is  clearly  unfounded  is
      stronger than saying that  an  application  is  unlikely  to  succeed.
      Unlikely to succeed means that there might still be a chance  that  it
      could succeed whereas to say an application is clearly unfounded means
      that there is no possibility that it could succeed.


  17. An  application  made  in  the  circumstances  of  the  9th  of  March
      application namely three days before the Appellant  was  about  to  be
      removed to China has a very strong suggestion  that  it  was  made  in
      order to frustrate removal. Similarly,  the  Appellant's  decision  to
      voluntarily return to China could also be interpreted as meaning  that
      he had done so in  order  to  avoid  fresh  removal  directions  being
      issued, a course which was quite likely given that the Respondent  had
      since certified the application that caused the Respondent to withdraw
      the removal directions in the first place. The Appellant's application
      was not going to succeed because the Appellant had no  leave  to  make
      such an application.


  18. It is correct that the Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship  with  the  Sponsor  who   could   meet   the   financial
      requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  That  was  a  factor  which
      influenced the Judge at [31]  who  found  that  it  was  open  to  the
      Appellant to make an in-country application to have  his  relationship
      with the Sponsor recognised. That is tantamount  to  saying  that  the
      Appellant had a right to make a frivolous application even  though  it
      could not succeed because he was in a relationship. That  was  clearly
      insufficient.


  19. Although there is no specific authority, certainly none quoted to  me,
      on what is the meaning of frivolous, the word  has  to  be  given  its
      ordinary English meaning.  Frivolous  means  something  which  has  no
      serious purpose or value. The purpose of the  application  of  9th  of
      March 2015 appears to have been to delay removal since it  came  three
      days before the removal directions were due to be  carried  out.  That
      would be an abuse of the immigration system and could not properly  be
      regarded as  either  a  serious  application  or  one  of  value.  The
      application of 9th of March 2015 clearly met the definition  of  being
      frivolous. The Judge was wrong in law to find  that  it  was  not  and
      wrong in law to find that the Appellant could meet the requirements of
      the Immigration Rules.


  20. The application by the  Appellant  did  contain  aggravating  features
      because he had both sought to deceive the Respondent by using a  false
      English language test certificate and had aggravated that by making  a
      frivolous application three days before he was due to be removed.  The
      Judge's view was that it was open to the  Appellant  to  make  an  in-
      country application to have his  relationship  recognised  but  it  is
      difficult to see on what basis the Judge  could  make  that  statement
      since there was no way that the  Appellant  could  make  a  valid  in-
      country application to have his relationship recognised.


  21. Although the case of PS was  relied  upon  by  both  parties  in  this
      appeal, I do not consider that it is of direct relevance. The facts of
      that case were that the Appellant was in the  United  Kingdom  without
      leave  had  married  and  had  then  returned  to  India  to  make  an
      application for leave to enter. The difficulty was that  the  decision
      maker and the Judge's decision  (that  was  overturned  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal) had not correctly considered whether there were  aggravating
      features to engage paragraph 320 (11). That is not the case here since
      the  Respondent  was  well  aware  when   refusing   the   Appellant's
      application that for the paragraph in  the  Immigration  Rules  to  be
      engaged aggravating circumstances had to be shown.  The  argument  was
      whether the application of 9th of March 2015 was frivolous and thus an
      aggravating feature.


  22. PS reminds decision makers that they must have regard  to  the  public
      interest in encouraging those unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
      leave and seek to regularise their status by an application for  entry
      clearance. That is balanced by the fact  that  if  an  action  by  the
      Appellant has an  aggravating  feature  it  may  outweigh  the  public
      interest in encouraging persons without leave to return to apply.


  23. A further argument made in the  rule  24  response  to  the  grant  of
      permission was that the paragraph appeared to  acknowledge  that  more
      than one frivolous application  would  have  to  be  made  before  the
      paragraph could be engaged. It is correct that the paragraph refers to
      making frivolous applications in the plural but it  cannot  have  been
      the intention of the drafter of the rules that every applicant  should
      be  entitled  to  make  one  frivolous  application  without   adverse
      consequences. That would plainly be an absurd result. To give efficacy
      to the rules it must be intended that the paragraph should be read  as
      making "one or more" frivolous applications.


  24. As a consequence of the finding that the Judge was wrong in law to say
      this was not a frivolous application the Judge also erred  in  law  in
      his assessment of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. The Judge's
      assessment of Article 8 was predicated  on  the  assumption  that  the
      Appellant could otherwise meet the rules. If the  Appellant  fell  for
      refusal under the discretionary ground in the paragraph then he  could
      not meet the Rules and there was consequently  significant  weight  on
      the Respondent's side of the scales in the  proportionality  exercise.
      In granting permission to appeal Judge Holmes alluded to this with his
      comments regarding the possibility that the Sponsor  could  travel  to
      China to be with the Appellant and that the couple did  not  have  the
      right to choose where to enjoy their relationship. I accept the  point
      that this was not a private life application but a family life one but
      the points made by Judge Holmes are relevant to the  consideration  of
      an Article 8 family life claim.


  25. For the Appellant to  succeed  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under
      Article 8 very compelling circumstances would need to be shown why the
      refusal of entry clearance  breached  this  country's  obligations  to
      promote  family  life.  It  is  difficult  to  see  where  those  very
      compelling circumstances are in this case for  the  reasons  given  by
      Judge Holmes. It is fair to say at this stage that the argument before
      me concentrated on whether the application in March 2015  was  or  was
      not frivolous. To a large  extent  the  facts  of  the  case  are  not
      otherwise in dispute and nor is the application of Article 8 depending
      on the interpretation of paragraph 320  (11).  The  Judge  found  that
      meeting the Immigration Rules was a very compelling reason for finding
      that Article 8 had been breached in this case. Since I am of the  view
      that the Appellant could  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  for  the
      reasons I have set out at some length above, that point  made  by  the
      Judge falls away. There are no very compelling circumstances  in  this
      case outside the Immigration Rules which are such that  the  Appellant
      should be granted entry  clearance.  The  Appellant  cannot  therefore
      succeed under Article 8 and I find that the Judge materially erred  in
      law to say that he could.


  26. I therefore set aside the decision at first instance  and  remake  the
      decision in this case by dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the
      Respondent's decision to refuse to grant leave to enter. I  find  that
      paragraph  320  (11)  applies  because  the  Appellant  had  committed
      deception by producing a false English language test  certificate  and
      there were aggravating circumstances because he had made  a  frivolous
      application in March 2015. He could  not  succeed  outside  the  rules
      because there were no very  compelling  circumstances  as  to  why  he
      should. I therefore dismiss the appeal. I make no anonymity  order  as
      there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set  it  aside.  I  remake  the  decision  in  this  case  by
dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
refuse to grant leave to enter.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

Signed this 3rd of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge made a fee award in this case on the  basis  that  the  respondent
had not demonstrated the appellant  had  made  any  frivolous  applications.
Since I find that the appellant has done that, I revoke the fee  award  made
in this case such that no fee is payable.

Signed this 3rd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
