
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: HU/13957/2015

                                                      hu/13960/2015

                                                      HU/13965/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th March 2018                           |On 3rd April 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between
                             Mizanur Rahmen + 2
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, instructed by Thamina solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                             Notice of Decision


 1. Rule 40(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2698 as amended) applies to this decision.

 2. The Appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier  2  migrant.   The
    application was refused  by  the  Respondent  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had  previously  used  deception  in  obtaining  his  English
    language certificate. The judge concluded that he had not. The  factual
    findings are unchallenged. It is  common  ground  before  me  that  the
    judge's positive findings entitle  the  appellant  to  an  exercise  of
    discretion under the respondent's policy concerning a grant of leave of
    60 days to those whose sponsors lost their licence between  application
    and  decision.  Further  both  parties  were  agreed  that  the   judge
    erroneously self-directed that he had no jurisdiction to decide that  a
    failure to apply policy rendered the decision not  in  accordance  with
    the law. As this application had been made  before  March  2015  and  a
    decision not made until  December  2015,  the  appeal  was  covered  by
    transitional provisions and the judge had such jurisdiction.

 3. By consent the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed as follows:

      a) the First-tier Tribunal's decision is affected by error of  law  as
         set out above.

      b) the First-tier tribunal decision is set  aside,  with  all  factual
         findings preserved.

      c) I remake the decision as follows: the respondent's decision is  not
         in accordance with the law and the appeal is allowed to the limited
         extent  that  the  application  remains  outstanding   before   the
         Secretary of State for a decision on  the  exercise  of  discretion
         under the relevant policy.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
