
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13725/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 December 2017                         |On 26 January 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     EA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Chris Alexander
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin to allow the appeal of the  respondent
    child on Article 8 human rights grounds.

2.   For ease of reference the respondent will hereinafter  be  referred  to
    as the applicant.

3.   The applicant is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth is [ ]  2008.
     His mother came to the United Kingdom in 2005 as  a  visitor  and  has
    remained in the UK since.  The applicant was born in  the  UK  on  [  ]
    2008.  His father, [OA] and his mother did  not  marry.   His  father's
    name is not on the birth certificate.  It was claimed that he  did  not
    agree with her having children.  His whereabouts are unknown  according
    to the applicant's mother.

4.   The applicant and his mother live with his father's  sister,  [Fa]  and
    her family.  His mother has lived with [Fa] since she was pregnant with
    the applicant and that is the only home the applicant has lived in from
    his birth.

5.   At the hearing the judge heard evidence from  the  applicant's  mother,
    [FEA] and [Fa].  [Fa] is a British national and the  applicant's  aunt.
    The judge found both witnesses credible.

6.   The judge's findings of fact are set out at paragraphs 16 to  18.   The
    appellant's grounds do not challenge any of  the  facts  found  by  the
    judge.  The judge found at paragraph 16  that  the  applicant's  mother
    came to the United Kingdom in 2005 at the age of 30 on a visitor's visa
    and has stayed ever since.  She said she made an application in 2010 to
    regularise her status which was refused and this may be the case as the
    Secretary of State has referred to an application being  made  for  the
    applicant as a dependent child at around this time in 2009/2010.  After
    making  further  enquiries  during  the  course  of  the  hearing,  the
    respondent's representative, Ms Burrell reported that  it  was  on  the
    Home Office computer that she made a human  rights  application  on  23
    August 2013 which was refused on 9 September 2015.   The  judge  stated
    that this would have been around the same time  that  this  application
    was made solely in the applicant's name.  The judge accepted that [FEA]
    has her parents and at least one sister with whom she is in contact  in
    Nigeria.

7.   At paragraph 17 the judge  considered  the  applicant's  circumstances.
    She found that the applicant was now aged 8 years and 9 months.  He was
    born in the UK and has lived here continuously since  then.   Like  his
    mother, he is a Nigerian national but has never visited the country and
    does not speak any Nigerian language.  He is in full-time education  at
    primary school.  He has a younger brother who was born in  2013.   They
    have always lived with his aunt who is a sister of  his  father,  [OA],
    and being supported by this aunt and her  family.   Whilst  there  were
    inconsistencies in the evidence as to  the  presence  of  [OA]  in  the
    household between 2007 and 2015, the judge was satisfied that  this  is
    likely to have  arisen  from  the  fact  that  he  was  clearly  not  a
    particularly reliable presence either as the partner of [FEA] or as the
    father of the two children.  The judge said that  [Fa]  the  aunt  said
    that [OA] did not really have a relationship with the children  whereas
    the  children  and  their  mother  were  part  of  the  "whole   family
    arrangement" with  her  family  which  included  her  husband  and  two
    children aged 18 and 17.

8.   The judge stated at paragraph 18 that it was the evidence of  the  aunt
    which needed to be given particular consideration in  this  case.   She
    found her to be  a  reliable  and  sensible  witness  who  had  a  good
    understanding of the upbringing of the applicant and  his  needs.   She
    said that because he had lived in her family house since he  was  born,
    he was viewed as a younger brother by her children.  She also described
    him as being "like her son" because of the responsibility that she  has
    always felt towards him and the very close bond that they enjoyed.  The
    judge said she was in no doubt that because of this evidence  that  the
    applicant was very strongly attached to this aunt  and  considered  her
    and her family to be part of the family life that he has always had  in
    this country.

9.   The judge then considered whether it would be reasonable to expect  the
    applicant to  leave  the  UK  under  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  as  he  has
    continuously lived in  the  UK  for  at  least  seven  years.   In  her
    assessment as to the test of reasonableness, she had to take account of
    what was in the best interests of this child apart, from remaining with
    his mother and brother.

10.  The judge had regard to the case of  EV  (Philippines)  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 and the recent case of MA (Pakistan) & Others [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705 where it was emphasised once again that the fact that  a  child
    has been in the UK for seven years must  be  given  significant  weight
    when  carrying  out  the  proportionality  exercise.   The  judge  also
    considered the Upper  Tribunal  case  of  BD  &  Others  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 in which a similar
    ruling was given.  The judge also had regard to the  Home  Office  IDI:
    family migration - family life (as a partner  or  parent)  and  private
    life 10-year route, (August 2015) which states at 11.2.4 that:

         "The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more  the  balance
         will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the
         child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order
         to refuse a case with  continuous  UK  residence  of  more  than  7
         years."


11.  The judge found as follows at paragraphs 24 and 25:

         "24. However, there is the countervailing factor in  this  case  of
             the immigration history of the mother who has been an unlawful
             over-stayer after her visitor's visa expired in 2005.  It  has
             frequently been stated that a child's  best  interests  should
             not be compromised on account of the misdemeanours of  his  or
             her parents and this is recognised in the UN Convention on the
             Rights of the Child at Article 2.2.  However, I accept that at
             paragraph 45 of MA (Pakistan) it was accepted  that  the  view
             taken in MM (Uganda) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450  that  the
             behaviour of the parents can be weighted  in  the  balance  is
             currently to be followed.


         25.  In making my assessment I have taken into account,  as  stated
             above, the unusual dimension in this case which  is  that  the
             appellant has established a significantly strong bond with his
             aunt and her family with whom he has lived all his  life.   It
             is this aunt and her family that has fully supported  him  and
             his mother and brother in  every  way  and  although  she  was
             candid in her evidence when she said that she  could  continue
             financially  supporting  them  in  Nigeria,   I   accept   the
             submission that this is only part of  the  story:  it  is  the
             daily emotional support that has clearly been so important  to
             the appellant in his upbringing and is likely to  continue  to
             be as he enters the most formative  years  of  his  childhood.
             And whilst the immigration conduct of the  appellant's  mother
             is not to be condoned I find that it  is  not  of  the  'worst
             sort' of immigration  misbehaviour  that  can  arise  in  such
             cases.  Taking  that  into  account  and  the  fact  that  the
             respondent has  not  put  forward  'strong  reasons'  why  the
             appellant should be refused on the grounds of  reasonableness,
             I have reached the conclusion that it is  not  reasonable  for
             the appellant to leave the UK in all the circumstances."

12.  The grounds upon which the  appellant  was  granted  permission  argued
    firstly that the judge failed to apply binding case  law  without  good
    reason.  This ground relied on EV (Philippines) and Zoumbas [2015] UKSC
    74 where the Supreme Court considered future rights to  healthcare  and
    education within the UK of  children  who  were  not  British  citizens
    stating that they had no right to future education  and  healthcare  in
    this country, that the children were part of a close-knit  family  with
    highly educated parents and were of an age when their  emotional  needs
    could only be met within the immediate family unit.

13.  The second ground argued that in allowing  the  applicant's  appeal  on
    the basis that the SSHD had failed  to  give  strong  reasons  why  the
    applicant's return with his  mother  would  be  reasonable,  the  judge
    failed to give adequate weight to the fact that it is always considered
    in a child's best interests to remain with  his  parents  if  possible.
    The grounds referred to the mother's  immigration  history  and  argued
    that the judge failed to consider the evidence in the round as  it  was
    asserted that there are clear ties to  Nigeria  in  that  he  has  been
    raised in a  household  where  that  culture  is  predominant  and  has
    remaining  ties  to  that  country  both  maternally  and   potentially
    paternally.  The ground relied on E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests  of
    child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315.

14.  In granting  permission  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  said  at
    paragraph 4:

         "Examination of the judger's decision reveals reasoning in the form
         of  marked  emphasis  on  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
         paternal aunt and cousins, with whom he and his mother  had  always
         lived.  However the absence of similar consideration of, or  weight
         attached to, the primary bond with his mother does, in the  context
         of the case law and best interest, render the ground arguable.  The
         judge has not addressed the prospect of the child  being  separated
         from his mother by prospective removal to Nigeria."


15.  Ms Isherwood took me through the judge's decision.  She submitted  that
    the judge did not address the applicant going back to Nigeria with  his
    mother who, as far as we know, is his primary  carer.   She  relied  on
    paragraph 21 of MA where the Court of Appeal held that in  constituting
    Section 117B(6), the only relevance of the seven year  period  is  that
    once a child has been in the UK for that length of time, it is a factor
    which should be given particular weight when assessing whether it would
    be reasonable for the child to leave the UK.   Ms  Isherwood  submitted
    that the judge did not take into account the conduct of the applicant's
    mother.  The judge  merely  relied  on  the  strong  bond  between  the
    applicant and his aunt's family and had failed  to  address  all  other
    factors, such as the conduct of the applicant's mother.

16.  Mr Karim submitted that this was a classic case of a disagreement  with
    the reasoning of the judge.  He submitted  that  the  judge  took  into
    account all relevant matters on both sides.  Whilst Ms  Isherwood  took
    issue with the shortness of the witness statements by  the  applicant's
    mother and his aunt, Mr Karim said that the decision was not predicated
    on the witness statement but also on the evidence-in-chief  and  cross-
    examination. He submitted that in the context  of  the  child,  he  has
    grown up with his aunt throughout the entirety of his life. He asked me
    to take into account that in  six  months'  time,  the  applicant  will
    become a British citizen and cannot be removed from  the  UK.   I  find
    this submission irrelevant for the purposes of this case as at the date
    of this hearing, the applicant had not reached the age of ten  and  was
    still a Nigerian national.

17.  Having considered the submissions made by both parties,  I  agree  with
    Mr Karim that the judge's decision does not disclose an error  of  law.
    I find that the judge considered all the evidence that was before  her,
    including the concerns raised by  the  Secretary  of  State  which  she
    identified in bullet points at paragraph 12 of the decision.

18.  I note that the credibility findings made by the judge  have  not  been
    challenged.  At paragraph 19 the judge identified what the  issues  she
    had to consider were in terms of paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.   The  judge  identified  the  relevant  case  law,  namely   MA
    (Pakistan) and MM (Uganda).  She applied the case law to her  findings.
    She also had regard to the respondent's policy guidance in respect of a
    child with continuous UK residence of more than 7 years.

19.  The judge considered the applicant's mother's immigration history as  a
    countervailing factor at paragraph 24. At paragraph  25  which  is  the
    crucial finding made by the judge, she identified the particular issues
    which she took into account in reaching her conclusion.

20.  I find that the Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal  disclose  no
    arguable error of law in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

21.  The judge's decision allowing the applicant's appeal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
