
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13465/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th September 2020                |On 27th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               CHRISTOPHER [S]
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell, Counsel instructed by Maya & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Remote Hearing


   1. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference
      hearing held during the Covid-19 pandemic. Neither party objected to a
      remote hearing. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the
      hearing room and building were open to the public. The hearing was
      publicly listed, and I was addressed by the representatives in exactly
      the same way as I would have been, if the parties had attended the
      hearing together.  The appellant did not join the hearing remotely,
      and Mr Ell was not aware of whether the appellant had intended to do
      so, but was content to proceed in the appellant's absence.  I was
      satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
      open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
      prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
      right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
      was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in
      accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote
      hearing because of the present need to take precautions against the
      spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote
      hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a
      way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


Introduction


   2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 18th July
      2019 refusing the appellant leave to remain in the UK on Article 8
      grounds, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Evans for reasons
      set out in a decision promulgated on 4th March 2020.


   3. The appellant's grounds for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      run to some twenty paragraphs over five pages.  They fail to separate
      several paragraphs of argument into numbered grounds of appeal so that
      one can identify the precise grounds of appeal relied upon in a
      recognisable and comprehensible fashion.  Broadly stated, it appears
      the appellant advances two grounds of appeal. First he claims that in
      reaching his decision, Judge Evans has not given sufficient or proper
      consideration to the question whether it would be unduly harsh for the
      appellant's partner to live in Jamaica and whether there are
      insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's family life with his
      partner continuing outside the UK. Second, the appellant claims that
      in considering the Article 3 claim, Judge Evans failed to address the
      Rule 35 report relied upon by the appellant as capable of supporting
      his claim that the appellant's circumstances are exceptional and that
      he suffers mentally because of the violence that he suffered as a
      child. It is said the judge fails to accord sufficient weight to the
      mental health of the appellant and the difficulties he would encounter
      on return, or the impact that any deterioration in the mental health
      of the appellant would have upon the appellant and his partner in
      Jamaica.


   4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on
      11th June 2020.


   5. Before me, Mr Ell submits the first ground of appeal is a rationality
      challenge.  Mr Ell submits Judge Evans referred to the background
      material in paragraph [50] of his decision, and noted that Jamaica is
      listed by Forbes Magazine as the third most dangerous place for women
      travellers in 2017. It is ranked 10th among 20 of the most dangerous
      places in the world.  Mr Ell submits that Judge Evans found, at
      paragraph [64], that the appellant's mental health may deteriorate;
      [64.3], that the appellant's family may have left Jamaica; [64.4] and
      Jamaica is clearly a far more violent society than the UK; [64.5].  He
      submits there is no evidential basis for the finding, at [64.4], that
      even if the appellant's family have all left Jamaica, they will retain
      friends and contacts there, and it is likely therefore, that they will
      be able to put the appellant in touch with people in Jamaica who will
      provide him with some assistance on return.  At paragraph [65], Judge
      Evans concluded that overall, the appellant and Mrs [S] would
      encounter significant difficulties in Jamaica. He noted the appellant
      has been absent for many years and Mrs [S] is unfamiliar with Jamaica.




   6. Mr Ell submits that in considering whether there are insurmountable
      obstacles to the appellant and his partner continuing their family
      life in Jamaica, as set out in paragraphs [8] and [9] of the grounds
      of appeal, Judge Evans ought to have considered factors such as the
      family the appellant's partner would be leaving behind in the UK (six
      siblings and her parents), her lack of education, her dyslexia and
      depression,  the fact that she would be a 'white woman in Jamaica',
      and the fact that she would be leaving behind her work and dog
      breeding business. Furthermore, it is said that Judge Evans did not
      analyse how harsh it would realistically be for the appellant's
      partner to integrate in Jamaica. Mr Ell submits that at paragraph
      [77.3] Judge Evans refers to the appellant's partner's "difficult
      personal history", but that is a factor that is not referred to at
      paragraph [64], when Judge Evans was considering whether there are
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Jamaica. I
      invited Mr Ell to direct my attention to the evidence concerning the
      "difficult personal history". He referred me to the witness statement
      of Mrs Tori [S] dated 19th February 2020, in which she states that she
      has a close relationship with her six sisters and wishes to remain in
      close contact with her parents.  Her evidence was that they would be
      destitute and without support in Jamaica.  She also confirmed in her
      statement that she suffered a miscarriage because of all the stress
      when the appellant was detained in 2017.  Mr Ell submits Judge Evans
      should have considered how easy it would be for the appellant's
      partner to adapt and live in Jamaica.  He submits that if her personal
      history was a relevant factor to be considered in the balance when
      looking at proportionality, it was equally relevant when the judge was
      considering whether the appellant and his wife could live together in
      Jamaica.


   7. As to the second ground of appeal Mr Ell submits the deterioration in
      the mental health of the appellant is also a factor that should have
      featured as part of the assessment of whether there are insurmountable
      obstacles to family life continuing in Jamaica.  The deterioration in
      the appellant's mental health will, he submits, undoubtedly impact
      upon the appellant's well-being and the appellant was not required to
      establish that his mental health will deteriorate to such an extent
      that he will be unable to function in Jamaica, as Judge Evans appears
      to suggest at paragraph [58] of his decision.


   8. Mr Ell referred to paragraphs [17] to [19] of the grounds of appeal
      and submits that at paragraph [57] of his decision, Judge Evans
      accepted that the appellant was subjected to significant violence in
      Jamaica before travelling to the UK in 2001.  He submits Judge Evans
      failed to accord sufficient weight to the mental health of the
      appellant and the deterioration in his mental health that he is likely
      to suffer on return to Jamaica. He submits Judge Evans accepted that
      the appellant's mental health may deteriorate, but failed to consider
      the impact of any such deterioration in Jamaica upon the appellant and
      his partner.  He submits the appellant and his wife would be dependent
      upon NGO support, in a country that is violent and in circumstances
      where the mental health of the appellant would deteriorate.  It was,
      taking all relevant factors into account, irrational to say that there
      are no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Jamaica.


   9. On behalf of the respondent Mrs Aboni submits Judge Evans considered
      all the relevant factors and reached conclusions that were open to
      him.  At paragraph [65], Judge Evans accepted that the appellant and
      his partner would on return to Jamaica, encounter significant
      difficulties, but that was not sufficient to meet the test.  She
      submits Judge Evans gave adequate reasons at paragraph [64] for the
      conclusion that he reached.  The Judge was entitled to note that the
      family are likely to retain friends and contacts in Jamaica.  In any
      event, Judge Evans noted, at [64.6], that there are a variety of NGO's
      that would be able to provide some assistance on return.  Mrs Aboni
      properly accepts there is no reference in the decision to the
      miscarriage that is referred to by the appellant's partner in her
      statement, but, she submits, there was no evidence that that would
      cause very significant difficulties for the appellant and his partner
      in continuing their family life together in Jamaica and which could
      not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
      appellant and his wife as required by EX.2


  10. Mrs Aboni submits it was open to Judge Evans to find that the
      difficulties this couple would face, are the difficulties that others
      face in such circumstances.   The judge considered all relevant
      factors and reached a decision that was open to him on the evidence.
      The Judge considered the background material, but there was no
      evidence that the appellant and his partner would be targeted, or to
      establish that a white woman of the profile of the appellant's
      partner, would be at specific risk.  Mrs Aboni acknowledges there is a
      level of violence in Jamaica, but she submits, that does not create
      very serious hardship.  Finally, she submits there was no evidence
      before the FtT that there would be any significant deterioration in
      the mental health of the appellant as set out in paragraph [58] of the
      decision, and it was therefore open to the Tribunal to conclude that
      there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life between the
      appellant and his partner continuing in Jamaica.


Discussion


  11. In my judgment, there is no error of law  in  the  decision  of  Judge
      Evans and I reject the claim  that  Judge  Evans  failed  to  properly
      address the claim made by the appellant.  I  reject  both  grounds  of
      appeal relied upon and I deal with both together, given the  over-lap.
      The claims made by the appellant  that  Judge  Evans  failed  to  have
      proper regard to the evidence is simply not borne  out  by  a  careful
      reading of the Judge's decision.  It is now well established that  the
      obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons in  sufficient  detail  to
      show the principles on which the Tribunal has acted  and  the  reasons
      that have led to the decision. Such reasons need not be elaborate, and
      do not need to address every argument or every factor which weighed in
      the decision.


  12. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
      his family life with his partner.  Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM of
      the immigration rules sets out the requirements for limited leave to
      remain as a partner. The respondent considered that in light of the
      appellant's criminal convictions, the appellant's continued presence
      in the UK is not conducive to the public good.  The respondent
      concluded that the application for leave to remain therefore falls for
      refusal under suitability grounds, in particular, S-LTR.1.6. The
      appellant could not therefore meet the requirements set out in Section
      R-LTRP.1.1(c) or (d) of Appendix FM. Nevertheless, the respondent went
      on to consider whether there are insurmountable obstacles to family
      life between the appellant and his partner continuing outside the UK.


  13. Judge Evans noted at paragraph [6.1.3] of his decision that the
      appellant did not accept that his criminal convictions are such that
      the application fell for refusal on suitability grounds.  To that end,
      at paragraph [13] of his decision, he set out the offences for which
      the appellant has been convicted.  At paragraph [26] he noted that the
      appellant confirmed that his criminal record, appeared to be correct.
      Judge Evans concluded, at paragraph [62], that the application fell
      for refusal under Section S-LTR: suitability leave to remain.  That
      conclusion is not challenged by the appellant and it was undoubtedly,
      properly open to the Judge.  It follows that the appellant could not,
      on any view, meet the requirements set out in Section R-LTRP.1.1(c) or
      (d) of Appendix FM.


  14. Nevertheless, just as the respondent had, Judge Evans went on to
      consider whether there are insurmountable obstacles to the family life
      between the appellant and his partner continuing outside the UK.


  15. I pause to note that EX. 2 of Appendix FM states:


         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) 'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be  overcome  all  would  entail
         very serious hardship the applicant or their partner."


  16. In R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11, Lord Reed  confirmed  the  words
      'insurmountable obstacles' mean  not  only  obstacles  which  make  it
      literally impossible for  a  family  to  live  together  in  the  non-
      national's country of origin, but were to be understood in a practical
      and realistic sense, as a stringent test.


  17. Contrary to what is said in the grounds of appeal and the  submissions
      of Mr Ell before me, it is clear that Judge  Evans  had  in  mind  the
      relevant factors such as the appellant's partner's connections to  the
      United Kingdom, including her family ties to the  UK,  her  education,
      her work, and her health  He also considered her characteristics as  a
      'white woman in Jamaica'.


  18.  Judge Evans had the opportunity of hearing from the appellant and his
      partner.  The evidence of the appellant and his partner is set out  at
      paragraphs [26] to [29], and [46] to [47] of the  decision.  The  oral
      evidence of the appellant's partner is set out in  paragraph  [29]  of
      the decision.  The judge noted her evidence that she is dyslexic,  has
      trouble reading and writing and has no qualifications.  He noted  that
      she had not made any enquiries about the possibility of employment  in
      Jamaica. He noted that she is in good health "... except she was a bit
      depressed about having to attend the Tribunal  and  about  the  stress
      which her husband was suffering as a result of the  Tribunal  process.
      She was not taking any medication for her feelings of depression.".


  19.  Judge Evans  accepted  by  a  fine  margin  that  the  appellant  was
      subjected to significant violence in Jamaica before travelling to  the
      UK in 2001.  However, he went on to find that the  appellant  has  not
      established that his account of how that violence came about, is true,
      or that he will be at risk upon return from those who  previously  did
      him harm.


  20. At paragraph [64] of his decision, Judge Evans refers to the  relevant
      test.  At paragraph [64.1] Judge Evans noted that if the appellant and
      his partner go to live in Jamaica, it is inevitable that Mrs. [S] will
      have to leave her job behind and will be  separated  on  a  day-to-day
      basis from her family.  He noted that "... Whilst Mrs [S] will not  be
      able to continue with her dog breeding in the UK, she has not provided
      any explanation  for  why  she  could  not  pursue  that  activity  in
      Jamaica.".  At paragraph [64.2], the Judge found  that  the  appellant
      has not established on the balance of  probabilities,  that  the  fact
      that Mrs. [S] would be a white woman living in a  predominantly  black
      community, would give rise to very significant difficulties. He  noted
      that no country background evidence to that effect was adduced. Mr Ell
      accepted before me that there was no evidence before the Tribunal that
      established that a woman with the profile of the  appellant's  partner
      would be at risk, permanently living in Jamaica. Judge Evans found  at
      [64.3], that the appellant's mental health may deteriorate,  but  that
      was qualified.  He went on to say "... not to such an extent  that  he
      will be unable to function in Jamaica to the extent necessary for  him
      to deal with the day-to-day realities of life there".


  21. Judge Evans noted at paragraph  [64.4]  that  the  appellant's  family
      comes from Jamaica. He found that even if  it  is  the  case  that  in
      recent years they have all left, they will retain friends and contacts
      there and it is likely therefore that they will be  able  to  put  the
      appellant in touch with people in Jamaica who will  provide  him  with
      some assistance on return.  The  appellant's  family  had  undoubtedly
      spent many years in Jamaica, and it stands to  reason  that  they  are
      likely to retain friends and  contacts  there.   The  judge  found  it
      likely that the friends and contacts  in  Jamaica  would  be  able  to
      provide the appellant with some assistance on return.  On the evidence
      before the Tribunal, that was neither unreasonable nor irrational.  In
      any event, I accept as Mrs. Aboni submits, at paragraph [64.6],  Judge
      Evans found there are a variety of NGOs that are likely to be able  to
      provide the appellant and Mrs. [S] with some assistance on return.


  22. I reject the claim made in the grounds of  appeal  that  at  paragraph
      [65], Judge Evans "overstretched the burden of proof by extending  the
      test to require proof from the appellant that he  could  not  overcome
      the difficulties.".  It is  for  an  appellant  to  place  before  the
      respondent and the Tribunal, all material  upon  which  the  appellant
      relied to suggest that the consequences  of  removal  would  interfere
      with the Article 8 rights of the family; R. (Kotecha)  v  SSHD  [2011]
      EWHC 2070 (Admin)


  23. I reject the claim that Judge Evans failed to give  sufficient  weight
      to  the  mental  health  of  the  appellant  and  the  possibility  of
      deterioration on return. At paragraphs [51] to [56] of  his  decision,
      Judge Evans outlines the medical evidence that was before the Tribunal
      in the form of a psychiatric report from Dr Chandiramani,  a  rule  35
      report and a report signed by the appellant's GP, Dr  Sarah  Fletcher.
      The evidence relating  to  the  mental  health  of  the  appellant  is
      addressed at paragraph [58] of the decision and it was in my judgement
      open to the  Judge  to  find  that  the  appellant  is  not  currently
      suffering from any significant mental ill-health, and to find that the
      likely effect of being  returned  to  Jamaica,  is  that  it  will  be
      "stressful" for the appellant.  It was equally open to  the  Judge  to
      conclude on the evidence that "... The medical evidence does not  show
      on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  his  mental  health   would
      deteriorate to such an extent that he will be unable  to  function  in
      Jamaica to the extent necessary for him to deal with the realities  of
      day-to-day life  there.".   It  is  plain  in  my  judgement  that  in
      addressing the medical evidence, Judge Evans had in mind whether there
      are insurmountable obstacles to the family life of the  appellant  and
      his partner continuing in Jamaica.


  24. The decision must be read as a whole.   The assessment of an Article 8
      claim and the consideration of whether removal  is  proportionate,  is
      always a highly fact sensitive task. The appellant's  claim  that  the
      judge's approach to the analysis of the evidence and  the  claim  that
      the judge may have failed to have sufficient regard to various factors
      is in my judgment, mere disagreement with the reasoning of the  judge.
      The implication in the grounds of appeal and the submissions of Mr Ell
      before me, is that the evidence was considered by the judge,  but  not
      to the extent or in the way desired by the appellant.  In my judgment,
      the appellant simply disagrees with findings and conclusions that were
      open to the Judge.  The findings  and  conclusions  reached  by  Judge
      Evans were in my judgment, neither  irrational  nor  unreasonable  in
      the Wednesbury sense, or findings and conclusions that  were  wholly
      unsupported by the evidence.


  25. However disguised, as the Court of Appeal said at para [18] of Herrera
      v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  412, it is  necessary  to  guard  against  the
      temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in truth no  more
      than disagreements about the weight to be given to different  factors,
      particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the advantage  of
      hearing oral evidence.


  26. It follows that in my judgment, there is no material error of  law  in
      the decision of Judge Evans and I dismiss the appeal.


Decision


  27. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Evans promulgated on 4th March 2020 shall stand.




Signed   V. Mandalia
Date:     18th October 2020

         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



