
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13386/2015
                                                               HU/13391/2015
                                                               HU/13396/2015
                                                               HU/13398/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 July 2018                               |On 13 December 2018           |
|Prepared 26 July 2018                         |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       Mirsidik [M] (First Appellant)
                       Nargiza [M] (Second Appellant)
                           [M M] (Third Appellant)
                          [D M] (Fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Sher for the counsel, instructed by Blakewells

For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellants,  nationals  of  Uzbekistan   appealed   against   the
    Respondent's decision dated 27 November 2015 to refuse applications for
    leave to remain made under the Immigration Rules and Article 8, ECHR.

2.   The First Appellant a national of Uzbekistan, date of  birth  24  March
    1974 and the Second Appellant, the  wife  of  the  First  Appellant,  a
    national of Uzbekistan, date of birth 8 October 1979 entered the United
    Kingdom respectively as a student  and  as  his  dependant.   When  the
    Second Appellant entered the UK she did so with her  son,  [MM]  on  14
    January 2008.  The Second Appellant once she was in the United  Kingdom
    gave birth to the Fourth Appellant on 11 November 2008.  An application
    was made for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  but  that  leave  was
    curtailed until 12 October  2012.   On  13  September  2012  the  First
    Appellant applied to the Secretary of State  for  leave  to  remain  on
    family and private life basis which was refused on 1 October 2013.  The
    First Appellant made a further  application  for  leave  to  remain  in
    August 2015 and the relevant decision was the subject of this appeal.

3.   At an earlier stage, the appeals of  all  the  Appellants  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Malone (the Judge)  who  was  addressing  the
    appeals against the decisions of October 2013  to  refuse  applications
    for leave to remain and to make removal directions under Section 47  of
    the 2006 Act.  The Judge in looking at the matter was essentially being
    addressed by reference to the life that the whole family  had  garnered
    together in the United Kingdom.

4.   At that stage neither the third and Fourth Appellants was a  qualifying
    child for the purposes of the NIAA 2002 and as a fact  neither  had  at
    that stage acquired any period of time in excess of seven years in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Judge rejected the claims that the family had lost
    its cultural and social ties with Uzbekistan and  took  the  view  that
    they would be able to pick up where they had left off their lives, that
    is the first, second and Third Appellants, on a  return  to  Uzbekistan
    with "relative ease".

5.   The  Judge  did  not  have  evidence  before  him  that  suggested  the
    treatment they would receive in Uzbekistan was in any  way  inadequate.
    It was argued that for the Third Appellant it would take him some  time
    to readjust and for the Fourth Appellant to  familiarise  himself  with
    life in Uzbekistan.  As the Judge noted "[DM] (the Fourth Appellant) is
    very young.  He has always spoken Uzbek at home  in  this  country.   I
    find he would be able to adjust  to  life  in  Uzbekistan  quickly  and
    easily."  The Judge concluded that the Respondent's  decision  was  not
    disproportionate having regard to the then  case  law  which  is  still
    applicable in many respects and to that end dismissed the appeal.

6.   On 4 June 2018 I found that First-tier Tribunal Judge N  M  K  Lawrence
    had made a material error of law and  his  decision  could  not  stand.
    Accordingly I decided  the  appeals  should  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  To a degree the legal position has moved on in the light  of
    KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.

7.   Essentially  before  me  it  is  really  said  that  there  is  nothing
    particular about the first and Second Appellants which  warrants  their
    presence in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  no  doubt  that  their
    immigration history was poor and deliberate.  Following the refusal  of
    their appeal in 2014 they chose to remain in  the  UK  and  essentially
    even today do no more than argue that their two children are doing well
    in the United Kingdom enjoying the benefits  of  education  and  health
    provision here and are successful or making their way.  So far  as  the
    Third Appellant is concerned he has got to  the  stage  of  going  into
    higher education and  undertaking  a  BTEC  in  sciences.   The  Fourth
    Appellant was  doing  reasonably  well  at  school  and  was  making  a
    considerable success of his skills as a karate man; He  would  wish  to
    compete in more international competitions were he able  to  leave  and
    return to the UK.

8.   In respect of the Third Appellant and to a degree the Fourth  Appellant
    the position is that  an  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  might
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in that they are under the age of
    18, have lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK.

9.    In  short  the  arguments  advanced  have  not  proceeded,  under  the
    Immigration Rules, but on the similar  basis  that  with  reference  to
    Section  117A  and  117B  that  considerations  lie  in  their  favour,
    particularly with reference to Section 11B(6).  There was no suggestion
    that the Frist and Second Appellants' presence in the UK  was  anything
    less than precariousness for many years.  They have earning skills  and
    English language skills to avoid being a burden on the taxpayer.

10.  My starting  point  is  children's  best  interests  having  regard  to
    Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.

11.  Mr Clarke sensibly conceded that their best interests lie in  remaining
    in the United Kingdom.  For my own part having considered the  evidence
    that I agree with that concession.  I conclude that that  is  a  factor
    which is of importance, not paramount, in the assessment of the overall
    issue of the return and the reasonableness of return of  the  children.
    However the issue of the reasonableness of the return is a wider  issue
    and to that extent I apply the case law of MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA  Civ
    705 as now understood by the case of KO (Nigeria) 2018 UKSC 53.

12.  I am entitled and indeed should take  into  account  in  assessing  the
    public interest question and the assessment of  the  reasonableness  of
    requiring children to return to Uzbekistan set in the context  of  that
    the parents' poor immigration history the  reason  for  their  removal.
    The First and Second Appellants have been in the United Kingdom for  at
    least ten years.  I understand why they wish it but their determination
    to remain has shut their eyes to making any inquiries as  to  how  they
    might have to cope with return to Uzbekistan.

13.  Whilst the immigration history of the first and  Second  Appellants  is
    poor it does not seem to me that it is so poor  that  it  would  be  an
    affront to the public interest for them to remain in the  UK.   If  the
    children should not be removed because it is not reasonable  to  do  so
    then some form of leave will be given to the parents who are  going  to
    remain as a family unit.

14.  I concluded that it was  not  reasonable  particularly  for  the  Third
    Appellant and to a slightly lesser degree the Fourth  Appellant  to  be
    required to leave to accompany their parents to  Uzbekistan.   I  agree
    with Mr Clarke that there was some measure of equivocation and  a  lack
    of true clarity about the extent to which in the past the children were
    more fluent in Uzbek.  It seemed to  me  that  their  life  in  the  UK
    encouraged by their parents has essentially led them to shed  Uzbek  in
    the sense that they may understand and use one or two words  of  Uzbek.
    They would not be at a level where they could  undertake  education  or
    training in Uzbek.  Rather it seemed to me they do not read or write in
    Uzbek, they have no mathematical skills in Uzbek and they have been out
    of the Uzbek education system for a very substantial  period  of  time.
    That is not to say they  could  not  over  time  integrate  into  Uzbek
    schooling, but  the  impacts  on  particularly  the  Third  and  Fourth
    Appellants are I find simply unreasonable.  How the  First  and  Second
    Appellants came to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  no  steps  being
    taken to remove them  notwithstanding  their  appeals  against  removal
    directions had failed was not explained.  To some extent the  sad  fact
    is that the public interest which might have lain in removal  has  been
    diminished  by  the  passage  of  time  albeit  not   helped   by   the
    determination of the first and Second Appellants to remain.

15.  I conclude  that  it  is  not  reasonable  for  the  Third  and  Fourth
    Appellants to leave the UK and it follows from that it is not for  them
    to remain without their parents.  The unity of the  family  is  in  the
    public interest.  Accordingly, I conclude on the evidence that  removal
    is disproportionate.

DECISION

16.  The appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds are allowed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

15.  No anonymity order was sought nor did it seem one was necessary.

16.  No anonymity direction is made

Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has succeeded on the strength of after arising  material  and  in
the circumstances it did not seem to me that a fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


P.S. It is a matter of regret that  the  case  file  and  typing  was  miss-
    located causing delay in promulgation.
