
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13218/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 20 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms L Longhurst-Woods, counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal issued on 16 October 2018 allowing an appeal by the
    applicant on article 8 grounds against the respondent's decision  of  8
    June 2018 refusing her further leave to remain.  In  this  decision,  I
    will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    the applicant as the appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born on 6 February  1987.   She
    first arrived in the UK on 13 June 2010 as a Tier 4 student with  leave
    until 30 June 2011.  Her leave to remain in this capacity was  extended
    to 23 April 2012 and she then obtained leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) migrant valid until 17 August 2014.   She  was  later
    granted further leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  migrant
    valid until 4 December 2017.  On 30 November  2016  she  made  a  human
    rights claim on the basis of her private and family life with her  son,
    born on 4 August 2016, and the fact  that  she  was  receiving  medical
    treatment in the UK.

3.     The  respondent  found  that  the  appellant  could  not   meet   the
    requirements of Appendix FM nor the requirements of EX.1 in respect  of
    her relationship with her son.  The appellant also failed to  meet  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1) of the Rules as there would be  no  very
    significant obstacles to her reintegrating into Cameroon where she  had
    lived for the  majority  of  her  life.   In  respect  of  her  medical
    condition, treatment was available in Cameroon. She could not meet  the
    requirements of article 3 nor could she succeed under article 8.

4.    The appellant appealed against  this  decision  relying  primarily  on
    article 8 and, in particular, on the best interests of her son and  the
    fact that she was receiving ongoing treatment  for  cancer  in  the  UK
    which could not be obtained in Cameroon.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.     At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the   appellant
    confirmed that her husband had left the UK in February 2015,  returning
    voluntarily to avoid a one-year ban if he remained in  the  UK  without
    leave.  She had met her husband in the UK where he was  also  studying.
    She produced evidence relating to the treatment for cancer she has been
    receiving in the UK and letters from  doctors  in  Cameroon  about  the
    availability of treatment there.  She has set up  her  own  accountancy
    business but now has to work from home due to  her  medical  condition.
    She accepted that she could not meet the requirements for further leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.

6.    The judge accepted the appellant's evidence about her business in  the
    UK and that she had made the present application because she could  not
    meet the requirements of the Rules for further leave  in  view  of  her
    medical condition.  He summarised her medical condition in [18] of  his
    decision. The appellant had undergone surgery  for  cysts  in  February
    2015 and had later been diagnosed with breast cancer.  She had  surgery
    in February 2017 and was undergoing  continuing  tests  and  treatment.
    She also suffered from a cardiac condition and had a number of  medical
    appointments booked for 2018 and into 2019.

7.    Her husband had obtained a number of medical reports  confirming  that
    her specific treatment was not  available  in  Cameroon  and  that  she
    should be allowed to be treated in the UK throughout the whole  of  her
    treatment programme [19].  The judge  referred  to  objective  evidence
    that medical facilities in Cameroon were poor and for  serious  medical
    treatment, medical evacuation to  the  UK  or  South  Africa  would  be
    necessary.  There was also evidence that the treatment of breast cancer
    was generally unsuccessful in Cameroon due  to  the  unavailability  of
    drugs [20].

8.    The judge accepted the  respondent's  submission  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the high threshold under article 3 but said that he  was
    wholly persuaded for a number of reasons that her claim should  succeed
    under article 8 in respect of her family and private  life  because  it
    would be wholly disproportionate for her to return  to  Cameroon  [21].
    These reasons set out in [22] are the uncontested desirability for  her
    to remain for treatment in the UK for her cancer  condition;  the  fact
    that she had  set  up  a  business  in  the  UK  which  was  previously
    sufficient to grant her Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  status  and  the  only
    reason for that status not  being  extended  was  due  to  her  limited
    ability to work as result of her medical condition and  the  fact  that
    she had been in the UK for eight years with valid leave.

9.    The judge accepted that in theory she and  her  son  could  return  to
    Cameroon and join her husband there, but it was his intention to make a
    further application to join his family in the  UK  [22].   He  did  not
    accept that there were very significant obstacles to her  returning  to
    Cameroon but did accept that it would be a breach of article  8  rights
    if she was required to return [23].

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.

10.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his  conclusion  that  removal  would  lead  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's  article  8  rights;
    there could be no interference with her  family  life  given  that  she
    would be removed with a child to her country of nationality  where  her
    husband was residing; he had failed to note or apply the  leading  case
    law on medical issues within article 8 and in particular Akhulu (health
    claim: ECHR article 8) [2013] UKUT  00400  (IAC);   he  had  failed  to
    consider whether this was one  of  the  "very  few  rare  cases"  where
    article 8 might be engaged in a health case; he had failed  to  explain
    why her husband's intention to return  to  the  UK  made  any  material
    difference to the appellant's intended removal; whilst the judge  might
    have had sympathy for the appellant's difficulties in  maintaining  her
    business at  the  desired  level  due  to  a  medical  condition,  many
    individuals through no fault of their own likewise  failed  to  achieve
    their desired income and the judge did not expressly deal with  any  of
    the factors set out in s.117B of the 2002 Act when there  was  a  query
    whether those set out in subsections (1)-(5) would  positively  enhance
    the appellant's case.  Finally, the respondent submitted that the judge
    had failed to deal adequately with the countervailing  public  interest
    factors in the proportionality assessment.

11.   Ms Isherwood adopted the grounds, pointing  out  that  the  judge  had
    made a specific finding that there would be no significant obstacles to
    the appellant returning to Cameroon and that she was  unable  to  reach
    the high threshold under article 3.  This was not a  case  where  there
    was no treatment available in Cameroon and could not be categorised  as
    one of those very rare cases where an appeal which failed under article
    3 could succeed under article 8.  She argued that  there  had  been  no
    adequate, if any, consideration of the public interest  when  assessing
    proportionality.

12.   Ms Longhurst-Woods adopted her amended reply dated 6 March 2019.   She
    submitted that this was not a case about  disparity  of  treatment  but
    rather a lack of the specific treatment the appellant was receiving  in
    the UK.  She had been lawfully in the UK when she  was  diagnosed  with
    her illness.  There was no reason to believe that  the  judge  had  not
    taken into account the factors listed in s. 117B.  She  submitted  this
    was a case where  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  which  would
    justify a grant of leave under article 8 and that the judge  taken  all
    relevant matters into account and reached a decision properly  open  to
    him.

Assessment of the Issues.

13.    I must assess is whether  the  judge  erred  in  law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside. I am satisfied that the judge has for the
    following reasons.  It is common ground that the  appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Rules for further leave  to  remain.   The
    proper approach when assessing article 8  in  these  circumstances  was
    considered by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 where  the
    Court accepted that a failure to meet the requirements of the Rules did
    not exclude the possibility of succeeding under article 8 but held that
    the policies adopted by the Respondent and given effect  in  the  Rules
    were relevant and important considerations when determining appeals  on
    Convention grounds because they reflected the general  public  interest
    made by the responsible minister and endorsed by Parliament.

14.    The  approach  involved  a  consideration  of  whether   there   were
    exceptional circumstances requiring further consideration  outside  the
    Rules, an approach now endorsed by the amendment to the  Rules  in  GEN
    3.2  setting  out  the  criteria  of  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances which would render a refusal of leave unjustifiably harsh
    for an applicant, their partner or a child.

15.   I am not  satisfied  that  the  judge  approached  the  assessment  of
    article  8  on  this  basis.   His  assessment  was  in   substance   a
    freestanding assessment outside the context of  the  statutory  scheme:
    see the Senior President at [62] of Secretary of State v  SC  (Jamaica)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2112.

16.   Further, whilst the  judge  set  out  the  reasons  for  reaching  his
    conclusions in [22], he has nowhere referred specifically to the public
    interest considerations either generally or as set out in s.117B  which
    must be taken into account into account.  Therefore, the  judge  failed
    to approach the assessment of article 8 in accordance with the guidance
    in the Rules  and  in  the  judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court  and  in
    consequence he failed  adequately  to  take  into  account  the  public
    interest factors to be  set  against  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    interference with the appellant's family and private life.

17.   I am also not satisfied that the judge  has  taken  into  account  the
    jurisprudence relating  to  the  assessment  of  medical  issues  under
    article 8.  He has not considered in accordance with Akhulu whether the
    appellant's particular circumstances could be categorised as one of the
    very few rare cases which could lead to a grant of leave under  article
    8 nor, perhaps more to the point, did he take account of  the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in GS (India) the Secretary of State [2015] EWCA
    Civ 40 which made it clear that if  article  3  could  not  be  met  on
    medical grounds, article 8 would not  succeed  unless  there  was  some
    separate or additional factual element bringing the case within article
    8: see Underhill LJ at para 111 of that judgment.

18.   For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge has erred in law  such
    that the decision should be set aside.  Ms Longhurst-Wood  argued  that
    in these circumstances the proper course would be for the appeal to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  re-hearing  when  fresh
    evidence could be adduced on the issues of the medical treatment  being
    received by the appellant and on the treatment available  in  Cameroon.
    Ms Isherwood did not seek to make any further submissions on the  issue
    of whether the appeal should be  remitted  or  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

19.   I am satisfied that  the  proper  course  is  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted for a full rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is
    nothing in the present evidence to  suggest  that  an  appeal  has  any
    prospect of success under article 3 or under para 276ADE but  there  is
    an arguable case under article 8 which needs to  be  properly  explored
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the appellant also seeks to  produce
    further evidence including medical evidence. It will be for the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  to  decide  what,  if  any,  further   directions   are
    appropriate.

Decision.

20.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that  the  decision  is  set
    aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing before a different judge.

21.    In  the  light  of  the  issues  raised  in  this  appeal  about  the
    appellant's health, I was asked to  make  an  anonymity  order.   I  am
    satisfied that this is a proper case for an order to be made under rule
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I  make
    an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
    to lead to the appellant being identified.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 14 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
