

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13988/2015
                                                               HU/14109/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 30 October 2018                   |On 11 January 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 KHALID [J]
                                    [J J]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Semega-Janneh instructed by Beachwood
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


      1. The appellants appeal with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Caskey promulgated on 27  July  2017  in  which  the
         Judge dismissed the appeals on human rights grounds.



Background


      2. The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan born on 14 May 1999 and
         10 March 2001 respectively. They are brothers. Each applied for
         entry clearance in order to join their older brother who lives in
         the United Kingdom. The appellants claim they are being cared for
         by a family friend in Pakistan. The applications for entry
         clearance were refused and the decision upheld on review by an
         Entry Clearance Manager.
      3. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) noted the appellant's case but
         found in the refusal:

             "I have also considered whether the particular circumstances
             set out in your application constitute exceptional
             circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect for
             family life contained in Article 8 the European Convention on
             Human Rights, might warrant consideration by the Secretary of
             State of a grant of entry clearance to come to the United
             Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
             However I am satisfied that you do not meet the requirements
             of paragraph 352 D and you have not provided any evidence of
             any exceptional circumstances regarding your application. I am
             also satisfied that you have not exhausted all the avenues of
             application within the Immigration Rules that lead to
             consideration of your application outside the rules. I accept
             that this decision may result in limited interference with the
             Right to Family Life as described in Article 8. However, I
             remind myself that this is a qualified right, and I am
             satisfied that the decision is justified and proportionate in
             the interests of maintaining an effective immigration
             control."

      4. The decision maker noted the UK-based sponsor stated he has a wife
         in Afghanistan but that it was not clear how she is currently
         residing in that country when the appellants claim they are unable
         to do so, and that given the lack of any documentary evidence of
         their circumstances the decision-maker was not satisfied the
         appellants were part of the family unit which included their
         sponsor when he left Afghanistan - see paragraph 352D(iv) of the
         Immigration Rules.
      5. The Judge found the sponsor to be a credible and articular witness
         and sets out findings from [11] of the decision under challenge.
         The Judge analysed the merits of the appeal outside the Immigration
         Rules by reference to Razgar before concluding at [17 - 20]:

             "17.     The maintenance of an effective system of immigration
                  control is in the public interest. Factors such as that
                  and having a clear system that provides consistent and
                  predictable outcomes is a factor in favour of the
                  Appellants not being granted permission to enter the
                  United Kingdom. The younger the Appellants remains a
                  child, and his best interests require to be a primary
                  consideration. However, even taking that into account, I
                  note that the child has never been to the United Kingdom
                  and does not speak English. I do not consider that the
                  radical alteration in his life would necessarily be in his
                  best interests.


             18.  I indicated earlier that I was satisfied in the present
                  case that family life exists between the Appellants and
                  their sponsor. However, as I also made clear, the level of
                  contact and interrelationship between the Appellants and
                  their Sponsor is limited to, in reality, two recent visits
                  of approximately one month each, and regular communication
                  by Skype and Viber, etc, as well as financial support and
                  being involved in arranging for the care of the Appellants
                  in Pakistan because of the familial link. In addition,
                  that there was life together when the appellants were very
                  young.


             19.  I do not seek to diminish in any way the relationship
                  between the Appellants and the Sponsor, but I require to
                  weigh the interests of maintaining that relationship, and
                  more particularly allowing it to develop against the
                  interests of immigration control, and the fact that the
                  clear and consistent view of Parliament is that support
                  for the wider family of refugees is to spouses and
                  dependent children of those recognised as refugees.


             20.  In all the circumstances, I do not consider the decision
                  to be disproportionate."

      6. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by
         another judge the First-Tier Tribunal, the operative part of the
         grant being in the following terms:

             "3.  The grounds are not well particularised and unhelpfully
                  state that "a more detailed argument on each of the points
                  will be provided in the appellant's statement and bundle"
                  but the matters raised are arguable. I grant permission
                  despite the clear and detailed decision of the Judge. In
                  my judgement, although the issue of immigration control
                  had to be given very high prominence, the facts of this
                  case appear to raise issues which the Upper Tribunal
                  should consider further. The Appellant's solicitors are
                  directed to file and serve the skeleton argument not less
                  than 14 days before the hearing."

      7. No such skeleton argument was provided in accordance with the
         specific direction set out in the grant of permission.



Error of law


      8. The Immigration Rules provide for Refugee Family Reunion for family
         members. Family members are: a partner (husband, wife, civil
         partner or the person the person with refugee status has been in a
         genuine relationship with for 2 years before applying to settle)
         and/or their child or children under 18. The provisions of the
         Immigration Rules do not therefore apply force to a situation such
         as this where the application is made by the sponsors brothers.
      9. That does not mean however that the appellant's have no effective
         remedy to challenge the decision of the ECO. The claim they cannot
         succeed under the Rules must be that they are entitled to succeed
         outside the Rules by reference to article 8 ECHR on the basis of
         family life with the refugee in the United Kingdom. This is the
         basis on which the application was properly considered by the
         Judge.
     10. The approach to be taken is the structured approach set out by the
         House of Lords in Razgar which the Judge followed. The fifth and
         final question to be considered if it is found a protected right
         exists and responses to the other questions lead to the fifth
         question is whether the decision under challenge, in this case
         refusal of entry clearance, is proportionate to any interference
         with the protected right.
     11. As recognised in the grant of permission to appeal this is a well
         written determination in which the Judge makes findings in relation
         to all relevant issues before concluding, as noted above, that it
         had been established by balancing the rights of the appellants
         against the respondent's rights and right of the United Kingdom
         government to have effective immigration control, that the refusal
         of entry clearance is a proportionate response.
     12. Disagreement with such a finding or desire for a more favourable
         outcome does not establish arguable legal error.
     13. The appellants fail to establish the Judge's conclusions are
         outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the
         evidence sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering in
         this matter. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter
         for the Judge.


Decision

     14. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.


     15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
         2005.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 December 2018












