
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13732/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August and 15th August 2019   |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                CHUANGQING YU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W P Tan, Caveat solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, a Chinese national date of birth 17th May  2000  was
         granted permission to appeal the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Lucas who dismissed his appeal against  the  refusal  of  his
         human rights claim that he be granted entry clearance to  join  his
         father, Xue Biao Yu in the UK. At a hearing before me on 5th August
         2019, Ms Jones acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
         erred in law such that the decision  should  be  set  aside  to  be
         remade.

      2. I set aside the decision but was unable to proceed  to  remake  the
         decision because there was no Mandarin interpreter and  Mr  Yu  was
         required to give oral evidence. The resumed hearing was listed  for
         15th August 2019.

         Remaking the decision

      3. Mr Yu gave oral evidence through a Mandarin interpreter.

      4. It was agreed that the only issue to be determined was whether  the
         sponsor, Mr Yu, had sole responsibility for  the  appellant;  other
         than  that  issue,  it  was  agreed  that  the  appellant  met  the
         requirements of the Rules such as to enable entry clearance  to  be
         granted.

      5. The following matters are not disputed. Mr Yu came  to  the  UK  in
         2001; the appellant was a year old at that time. His first wife, Ms
         Xue, and their two children were living with his parents. Mr Yu  is
         currently on a 5-year route to settlement following his marriage to
         Ms Wu in 2016. Mr Yu and Ms Xue were divorced in 2011. They had two
         children, a son and daughter. One of the outcomes  of  the  divorce
         was that Mr Yu retained 'fostering' of his daughter and Ms Xue  had
         the 'fostering' of the appellant. I heard no formal expert evidence
         as to the meaning of the term 'fostering' as it was translated from
         the divorce documents, but it was accepted that the term appears to
         equate with responsibility and care both financial  and  emotional.
         His daughter is, for all material purposes, an adult, non-dependant
         and living in China with her partner. In 2016 Ms Xue applied to the
         court to have the fostering  arrangement  regarding  the  appellant
         transferred from her to Mr Yu; that order was  made,  according  to
         the court document, after the appellant had been  consulted  as  to
         his views because of his age. There was financial evidence that  Mr
         Yu had been sending money  to  the  appellant  since  2016  but  no
         evidence of transfer of funds before that.

      6. The areas of dispute centre around, in essence,  the  contact  that
         the appellant has with his mother, if any, and the extent to  which
         Mr Yu does in fact have, and had, sole responsibility.

      7. The respondent, in the decision the subject of this appeal  and  in
         submissions, took the view that the evidence was inconsistent as to
         whether Ms Xue was involved  with  the  appellant's  life  and  the
         extent to which she exercised responsibility for him in  accordance
         with the  divorce  documents  and  that  the  change  in  fostering
         arrangements  in  2016  was  not  reflective  of  Ms  Xue's  actual
         involvement.

      8. Mr Yu's evidence was that Ms  Xue  had  remained  living  with  the
         appellant at his parents' home until the appellant was 5 years old.
         She had then left and neither he nor the appellant had any  contact
         with her since then. In 2011, when the appellant was 11 years  old,
         he went to live with Mr  Yu's  brother,  his  wife  and  their  two
         daughters. He remained living there until the brother, his wife and
         the two daughters went to Australia in 2017. Mr  Yu's  brother  did
         not include the appellant on the application to move to  Australia.
         Between 2011 and  2017,  the  appellant  visited  his  grandparents
         occasionally (about a 2-hour bus journey away) but they had no real
         involvement in his life because they were old and frail. Mr Yu  did
         not say that they suffered any specific health problems other  than
         those associated with age. Mr Yu was insistent that decisions about
         the appellant were made  by  him;  his  brother  facilitated  those
         decisions but did not have responsibility for them.

      9. The evidence on the appellant's change of  school  at  age  11  was
         unclear in as much it was not clear whether the appellant had moved
         to Mr Yu's brother to attend a particular school  or  whether  that
         was the state school  which  the  government  had  transferred  the
         appellant to when he reached secondary school age and  it  was  for
         that reason he went to live with Mr  Yu's  brother.  What  was  not
         disputed was that  Mr  Yu  had  investigated,  discussed  with  the
         appellant  his  vocational  education  after  completing  secondary
         school and taken the decision  and  paid  for  that  enrolment  and
         education - since September 2016. Nor was it disputed that Mr  Yu's
         brother and his family went  to  Australia  in  2017.  The  dispute
         centred around the responsibility taken by the brother for the care
         of the appellant.

     10. There was a slight conflict in the evidence given by Mr Yu and  the
         responses to questions asked of the appellant by the ECO. Mr Yu did
         not think that his parents had  attended  school/parents'  meetings
         with the appellant whereas the appellant  said  they  had  attended
         once or twice but then ceased.  I  do  not  find  that  discrepancy
         significant. The whole tenor of the evidence given by the appellant
         and Mr Yu was that whatever care they had given  to  the  appellant
         ceased after he moved to the appellant's brother's home and  became
         nothing more than occasional visits.

     11. The respondent relied upon the court order changing  the  fostering
         arrangements to support the submission that the appellant  remained
         in contact with his mother  and  thus  Mr  Yu  did  not  have  sole
         responsibility  at  the  date  of  application  and  decision.  The
         proceedings were, according to Mr Yu, served at his  parents'  home
         and until they were served neither he nor his parents had any  idea
         that such an application was  being  proposed.  He  said  that  his
         parents had not spoken to his ex-wife about the proceedings and did
         not know where she was. He himself did not know the purpose  behind
         the proceedings but speculated, as he had been told by a  friend  ,
         that his  ex-wife  might  wish  to  remarry  and,  because  of  the
         consequences to inheritance if she  remained  responsible  for  the
         appellant, she wished to be relinquished of all  legal  obligations
         even  though  she  had  never  fulfilled   her   obligations.   The
         appellant's evidence was that he had had no contact with his mother
         since he was five years old.  There  was  no  submission  that  the
         appellant was untruthful.

     12. The appellant in his responses to the ECO's  questions,  said  that
         since his uncle moved to Australia in February 2017  (when  he  was
         aged 16) , he has lived alone in a flat paid for by Mr Yu. Mr  Yu's
         evidence was that he, Mr Yu paid and continues to pay for  a  carer
         to look after the appellant. This evidence was  not  challenged  by
         the respondent. Mr Yu's (unchallenged evidence) was that  once  the
         appellant started at vocational school he boarded and went  to  the
         uncle's home at weekends but as it  became  clear  that  the  uncle
         would be going to Australia, Mr Yu arranged for  the  appellant  to
         live in flat near the school with a nanny/carer.  This  arrangement
         took place from the end of September 2016.

     13. Mr Yu, in his witness statement confirmed that he  was  responsible
         for the appellant financially and emotionally; he confirmed he made
         all the significant decisions in the appellant's life and that  his
         parents initially and then his brother took day  to  day  decisions
         but the overall care, responsibility and  decisions  regarding  the
         appellant and his sister were made by him. Although the  respondent
         in the  decision  disputes  the  appellant  lives  alone,  Mr  Yu's
         evidence was not disputed by way of cross examination.

     14. The respondent in the decision, casts doubt  upon  the  appellant's
         address because a different address was given for his  TB  test  to
         the one where he said he  was  living.  Mr  Yu  explained  that  by
         reference  to  Hukou  registration.  That   explanation   was   not
         challenged by Ms Jones.

     15. The respondent  concludes  that  the  evidence  is  such  that  the
         appellant's mother is involved in his life and that he is  provided
         with support and guidance by his grandparents. I do not agree.  The
         evidence  does  not  support  such  a  conclusion  but  rather  the
         opposite. I am satisfied the appellant has had no contact with  his
         mother whether financial or emotional since he was aged about 5.  I
         am satisfied that there is no support provided by the  grandparents
         save that the appellant sees them occasionally. I am satisfied that
         they do not provide financial, emotional or other care or  guidance
         to the appellant.

     16. I am satisfied that Mr Yu provides, and provided  at  the  relevant
         date, financial, emotional and full support for  the  appellant.  I
         accept the evidence that they speak frequently and regularly on the
         telephone; that he travels to China to be with his  son  when  work
         allows and that his present wife  has  become  a  support  for  the
         appellant. I accept the evidence  that  Mr  Yu  has  provided  full
         financial support since he left China when the appellant was a year
         old and that the only person to whom the appellant can turn to  for
         guidance, proper care and support  is  his  father.  I  accept  the
         evidence that this was also the case during the appellant's teenage
         years when he was living with his uncle.  I  also  accept  Mr  Yu's
         (unchallenged evidence) that the appellant's emotional  needs  have
         increased during the last few years because the fact of  the  uncle
         and his family leaving China has resulted in the  appellant  losing
         what he perceived to be friends and thus being alone.

     17. For these reasons I am satisfied that the  appellant's  father,  Mr
         Yu, has and had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant  at  all
         material times. The  appellant  thus  meets  the  criteria  in  the
         Immigration Rules. It follows, and  was  not  submitted  otherwise,
         that the decision to  refuse  the  appellant  entry  clearance  was
         disproportionate.

     18. I allow the appeal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


     Date 19th August 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
