
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13003/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE RT. HON. LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Kumi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 28 May 2019 the Upper Tribunal  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and directed  that  the  appeal
    would be reheard in the Upper Tribunal.

   2. The Upper Tribunal has already made an anonymity  direction.  We  have
      continued it in order to protect  the  interests  of  the  appellant's
      minor child.

 3. The appellant in this appeal is a citizen of Tanzania. He  has  resided
    in the United Kingdom since January 2008, when he entered with leave in
    order to study. He extended his leave in the same  category  until  May
    2012. During this time he met a Lithuanian citizen with whom he  formed
    a relationship. He  applied  for  and  was  granted  a  residence  card
    recognising his right of residence.  However,  his  application  for  a
    permanent residence card was refused and  his  appeal  against  refusal
    dismissed. He became appeal rights exhausted on 9 January 2018.  On  17
    January 2018 he applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of
    ten years' continuous lawful residence.

 4. The application was refused in a decision made on 30 May 2018, which is
    the decision now under appeal. In short, the main reason the  appellant
    could not qualify under paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    that time spent in the United Kingdom as the family member  of  an  EEA
    national did not count. Additionally, he had no leave when he made  his
    application and he had not shown good reasons for failing to submit his
    application in time.

 5. The application was  deemed  to  be  a  human  rights  application  and
    consideration was given to the appellant's right to private and  family
    life under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. The appellant  was
    not considered to be able to show he met any  of  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  rules  on  private  life   grounds.   In
    particular, he had not shown there were very significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration in Tanzania.

 6. The letter went on to explain that it was not considered the  appellant
    had shown there were exceptional circumstances in his case to warrant a
    grant of leave  outside  the  rules.   It  was  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant may have established a subsisting parental relationship  with
    his daughter, V, who was born in the United Kingdom on 2 October  2011.
    However, the appellant had not shown that V was still residing  in  the
    United Kingdom and he had provided a letter  from  his  former  partner
    stating their relationship had broken down. That letter was typed,  had
    a photocopied signature attached and could not therefore  be  verified.
    The appellant had not submitted current  documentary  evidence  showing
    that he played an  active  role  in  V's  upbringing  or  that  he  was
    assisting her financially.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal. It found  the
    appellant did not qualify under the long  residence  rule,  principally
    because he relied on time spent in the United Kingdom as the partner of
    an EEA national, which did not count (see TB (EEA  national:  leave  to
    remain?) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00020). The  appellant's  ex-partner  did
    not give evidence and the tribunal found the appellant to be untruthful
    and evasive in parts of his evidence. The tribunal found the  appellant
    had two older children in Tanzania in addition to V. It was in V's best
    interests to continue her relationship with the appellant. He  saw  her
    once a month and had regular telephone contact with her.

 8. The  tribunal  recognised  that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration controls does not require a  person's  removal  where  they
    have a subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom[1]. The tribunal found V was a 'qualifying child'. However, the
    evidence of the appellant's ex-partner's income suggested she might not
    be classified as exercising Treaty rights and could be asked to  return
    to Lithuania. As such, the tribunal did not find it was unreasonable to
    expect V to leave the United Kingdom and "return" to Lithuania with her
    mother.

 9. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was based  on  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's approach to section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act.  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Monson found the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contained a material error  of  law  in  that,  when  applying  section
    117B(6)(b), the tribunal had asked itself the wrong  question.  It  was
    now clear from decisions such as SSHD v AB (Jamaica) and  AO  (Nigeria)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 661 that the reasonableness question had to be answered
    even in the circumstances that there was no prospect  of  both  parents
    leaving the United Kingdom. Judge Monson accepted the submission of  Mr
    Kumi that the appellant's ex-partner was not  liable  to  expulsion  to
    Lithuania.  Additionally,  Judge  Monson  considered   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's finding in the appellant's favour that he had a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with V was "problematic" such that  this  issue
    also required to be reconsidered.

10. The First-tier Tribunal's decision was set aside to be  remade  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. Directions were issued  with  Judge  Monson's  decision
    permitting the parties to file and serve further evidence  relevant  to
    the issues under section 117B(6). The appellant provided a short bundle
    of additional documents  and  some  copies  of  his  ex-partner's  bank
    statements. Mr Melvin provided a skeleton argument.

11. We heard oral evidence from the appellant in  English.  His  ex-partner
    was not present and did not give evidence. The appellant told us he has
    a good relationship with  V  and  he  continues  to  provide  financial
    support for her upkeep by using his savings and borrowing from friends.
    He is not working because he is not permitted to work. He produced some
    recent photographs taken during his visits  to  V.  The  appellant  was
    cross-examined by Mr Melvin about V's school, V's contact with her half-
    siblings in Tanzania and her musical tastes and sporting interests. The
    appellant said he sees V twice or more each month.  He  speaks  to  her
    every day by telephone. He told us that sometimes he  collects  V  from
    school.

12. Mr Melvin relied on his skeleton argument, which cites AB (Jamaica) and
    also paragraph 41 of the Presidential decision of this tribunal  in  JG
    (s117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC). In
    paragraph 10 of his skeleton argument, Mr Melvin says,

         "The Home Office has yet to formally amend its policy in  light  of
         the recent caselaw which appears to favour a grant of leave in this
         appellant's appeal, providing evidence is provided  that  there  is
         currently a subsisting parental relationship."

13. He maintained this stance in his closing submissions  but  he  did  not
    concede the other point about the subsisting parental relationship.  He
    said he had concerns about the non-attendance of the child's mother and
    the fact the photographs which the appellant relied on were undated.

14. Mr Kumi relied on AB  (Jamaica)  and  PG  and  asked  us  to  find  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with V. He
    did not pursue the appellant's case on the basis that he can  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. In particular, he did not  argue
    there were very significant obstacles to the appellant's  reintegration
    in Tanzania.

15. We reserved out decision.


16. We have directed ourselves as follows. There is no threshold  test  for
    Article 8 to be engaged outside the rules. In R (on the application  of
    Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11, the Supreme Court  explained  that  the
    ultimate question in Article 8 cases is whether a fair balance has been
    struck between the competing public and individual interests  involved,
    applying a proportionality test. The rules and IDIs do not depart  from
    that position and are compatible with Article 8. Appendix FM is said to
    reflect how the balance will be struck under Article 8 so  that  if  an
    applicant fails to meet the rules,  it  should  only  be  in  genuinely
    exceptional circumstances that there would be a breach  of  article  8.
    In this context, 'exceptional' means  circumstances  in  which  refusal
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  so
    would not be proportionate.

17. The rules set out the Secretary of State's policy and, as such, must be
    given considerable weight (Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 at [46]).

18. The best interests of a child  are  a  primary  consideration  for  the
    tribunal but not necessarily a  'trump  card'  (ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4). In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  74  the  Supreme  Court
    reviewed the applicable principles and confirmed that it was  right  to
    take into account the fact a child is  not  British  in  assessing  the
    weight to be given to best interests (see  [24]).  In  particular,  the
    child's  best  interests  do  not  have  the  status  of  a   paramount
    consideration and, although the best interests  of  the  child  can  be
    outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations,  no  other
    consideration can be treated as inherently more significant.

19. This case  turns  on  the  outcome  of  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise and, in particular, the  impact  of  section  117B(6)  on  the
    public interest.

20. The appellant speaks  English  and  is  capable  of  being  financially
    independent if permitted to work. However, his private life can only be
    given little weight because his residence in  the  United  Kingdom  has
    always been precarious and, latterly, has been unlawful.

21.  The  maintenance  of  immigration   controls   would   usually   carry
    preponderant weight in the balancing exercise but that must  depend  on
    the application of section 117B(6). In AB (Jamaica),  Singh  lJ  agreed
    that, applying  the  subsection,  the  public  interest  has  a  narrow
    interpretation and, if the requirements of the subsection are  met,  no
    further examination of the public interest is necessary  (see  [18]  to
    [22]).

22. In the light of the way the case was put to us in submissions, the  key
    factual issue to be  determined  is  whether  the  appellant  currently
    enjoys a genuine and subsisting relationship with V. We  did  not  find
    the appellant's evidence to be undermined by cross-examination. On  the
    contrary, it  showed  us  that  the  appellant  has  knowledge  of  V's
    schooling and tastes consistent with his  holding  a  genuine  parental
    interest in her. The photographs we were shown depict V in the  company
    of the appellant on a number of separate occasions. The photographs are
    not imprinted with dates but they plainly show a child of V's age. They
    do not appear to us to have been artificially posed or  contrived  but,
    rather, show natural scenes of a young child enjoying  the  company  of
    her father.

23. As far as the appellant's ex-partner's non-attendance is concerned,  we
    note she has provided a further letter updating the letter provided  in
    January confirming the role which the appellant plays in V's  life.  We
    were told the reason she did not attend was that she was "busy". Whilst
    this explanation was very vague and, when pressed by us, the  appellant
    was unable to shed any further light on it, we do not see any reason to
    draw an adverse inference from her failure to attend given the fact the
    relationship between the appellant and V's mother has broken down.

24. On the evidence before us we find it is more probable than not that,

       . The appellant is V's biological father;

       . V resides lawfully in the United Kingdom with her mother;

       .  V's  mother  permits  the  appellant  to  have  contact   with   V
         notwithstanding the breakdown of their relationship which,  as  far
         as we can tell, occurred around 2017;

       . V is now 7 years and 8 months' old and attends primary school;

       . V's mother  is  supportive  of  the  appellant's  contact  with  V,
         allowing  face-to-face  contact  about  twice  a  month  and  daily
         telephone contact;

       .  Occasionally,  the  appellant  collects   V   from   school   and,
         occasionally, he is invited to his  ex-partner's  home  for  social
         gatherings;

       . The  appellant  sometimes  has  unsupervised  contact  with  V  and
         sometimes V's mother or maternal aunt is present at the meetings;

       . The appellant attends parents' evenings;

       . The appellant provides some financial support for V when he is able
         to but this is more difficult now that he is not permitted to work;

       . It is in V's best interests that she  should  continue  to  have  a
         relationship  with  her  father,  which  could  not  be  maintained
         effectively by means of telephone or Skype calls.

25. Guidance was provided in AB (Jamaica) on the meaning of a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship. Singh LJ  approved  the  analysis  of
    Judge Grubb in  R  (on  the  application  of  RK)  v  SSHD  (s.117B(6);
    "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC):

         "42.     Whether a person is in a "parental  relationship"  with  a
         child must, necessarily, depend on  the  individual  circumstances.
         Those circumstances will include what role they  actually  play  in
         caring for and making decisions in relation to the child.  That  is
         likely to be a most significant  factor.   However,  it  will  also
         include whether that relationship arises  because  of  their  legal
         obligations as a parent or in lieu of a parent under a court  order
         or other legal obligation.  I accept that it is not  necessary  for
         an individual to have "parental responsibility" in law for there to
         exist a "parental relationship," although whether or  not  that  is
         the case will be a relevant factor.  What is important is that  the
         individual can establish that they have taken on the  role  that  a
         "parent" usually plays in the life of their child."

26. Singh LJ also approved  the  following  passage  from  Judge  Plimmer's
    decision in SR (subsisting parental relationship -  s117B(6))  Pakistan
    [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC). She said,

         "39.     There are likely to be many cases in  which  both  parents
         play an important role in their child's  life  and  therefore  both
         have subsisting parental relationships with the child, even  though
         the child resides with one parent and not the  other.    There  are
         also cases where the nature and extent of contact and any break  in
         contact is such  that  although  there  is  contact,  a  subsisting
         parental relationship cannot be said to  have  been  formed.   Each
         case turns on its own facts."

27. Singh LJ went on to reject the interpretation applied by Judge Plimmer,
    concluding that the words of the section must  simply  be  given  their
    ordinary meaning and no further  gloss  should  be  put  on  them.  The
    exercise is highly fact-sensitive.

28. King LJ agreed and, significantly for the purposes of this appeal, gave
    the following guidance:

         "109.    In order to demonstrate a genuine and substantial parental
         relationship, it is common ground that it is not necessary for  the
         absent parent to have parental responsibility and, in my judgement,
         it is hard to see how it can be said otherwise than that  a  parent
         has the necessary "genuine and substantial  parental  relationship"
         where that parent is seeing his or her  child  in  an  unsupervised
         setting on  a  regular  basis,  whether  or  not  he  has  parental
         responsibility and whether or not  by  virtue  of  a  court  order.
         Equally, the existence of a court order permitting  direct  contact
         in favour of the absent parent is not conclusive  evidence  of  the
         necessary parental relationship. It  may  be  that  a  court  would
         conclude  that  there  is  no  "genuine  and  substantial  parental
         relationship" where, for example, a parent has  the  benefit  of  a
         court order but does not,  or  only  unreliably  and  infrequently,
         takes up his or her contact."

29. On the basis of the findings of fact which we have  made,  we  have  no
    difficulty in concluding that the appellant has, giving the words their
    ordinary meaning, a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    V. He has been a constant presence in  her  life  and  lived  with  her
    mother  during  her  early  years.  Despite  the  breakdown   in   that
    relationship, he continues to visit V regularly and he  speaks  to  her
    daily. He takes an interest in her welfare and  education,  albeit  the
    main decision-maker is likely to be her mother. From V's point of view,
    she would be aware that the appellant is her  father  and  would  value
    that relationship. All things being equal, the relationship  is  likely
    to deepen as she matures.

30. It is uncontroversial that V is a  qualifying  child  because  she  has
    resided in the United Kingdom  for  more  than  seven  years.  We  find
    section 117B(6)(a) applies.

31.  Turning  to  the  reasonableness  test,  provided  for  in  subsection
    117B(6)(b), we rely on Mr Melvin's concession that the respondent  does
    not seek to argue that it is reasonable to expect a qualifying child to
    leave the United Kingdom.

32. We would add that we are  entirely  comfortable  with  that  concession
    being made on the facts  of  this  case.  The  appellant's  immigration
    history has to be left out the equation and the sole focus  is  on  the
    child (see KO (Nigeria) & Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC  53).  V  has  only
    known life in the United Kingdom. She is, we understand,  a  Lithuanian
    citizen, and enjoys a right of residence in the  United  Kingdom  while
    her mother chooses to exercise her right of free movement as a  citizen
    of the EU. V is young but  she  is  old  enough  to  be  aware  of  her
    surroundings and to have become used to her life and routines. She will
    have made friends and will have begun to pursue her interests, such  as
    the music and sport we were told about. She is of mixed race and has an
    important interest in learning about and maintaining contact  with  her
    father's cultural roots, as well as those of  her  mother.  Whilst  she
    might have some understanding of the Lithuanian language and might have
    the ability to adapt to life in another country, we do not regard it as
    reasonable to uproot her at this stage of her life.

  33. For all these reasons,  we  find  that  section  117B(6)  answers  the
      proportionality question.  The  decision  under  appeal  represents  a
      disproportionate breach of the appellant's right to enjoy his  private
      and family life in the United Kingdom and his appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  following
decision is substituted:

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).



Anonymity


Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 11 July 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom




Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the decision.

In the light of our decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, we have considered whether to make a  fee  award.  However,  we
have decided not to make any fee award in view of the fact  the  appeal  was
allowed in large measure due to the oral evidence provide by  the  appellant
and the decision-maker was entitled to reach the decision  s/he  reached  on
the limited information provided with the application.


We make no fee award.

Signed                                             Date 3 July 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom






                           -----------------------
[1] Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  reads
as follows:
    "...
    (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-
        (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
        with a qualifying child, and
        (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
        United Kingdom."

