
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13141/2018
     HU/13145/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2019                             |On 2nd May 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                      ms ameerah [a] (first appellant)
                       Mr imran [b] (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born  on  15th  September
    1981 and the second Appellant a citizen of Uganda born  on  23rd  March
    1983.  They made application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis
    of their private life.   That  was  refused  on  30th  May  2018.   The
    Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Sweet sitting at Hatton Cross on  23rd  January  2019.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on the same day the Appellant's appeal
    was allowed.

 2. On 22nd February 2019 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended firstly that there  had
    been a failure to provide reasons or any adequate reasons for  findings
    on material matters  and  secondly  that  there  had  been  a  material
    misdirection of law on a material matter.

 3. On 27th February 2019 Judge Boyes granted permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds asserted that the judge had erred by failing to give sufficient
    reasons and had wrongly reached the conclusion  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles and that it was arguable  the  judge's  reasoning
    was deficient in terms of why matters had been accepted.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there are material errors of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State but for the sake of continuity throughout the appeal
    process Ms [A] and Mr [B] are referred to herein as the Appellants  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.   The  Appellants  appear  by
    their instructed Counsel, Ms Sharma.  Ms Sharma is familiar  with  this
    matter having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms Holmes.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Ms Holmes relies on the Grounds of Appeal submitting that the judge has
    failed to give adequate reasons.  For example, she indicates  that  the
    judge accepts the evidence that the first Appellant would  be  able  to
    find employment in Mauritius but that her earnings there  would  be  so
    low that it would not be sufficient to  support  her  family  and  also
    accepted the evidence that whilst she could return to Mauritius on  her
    own she would have to work for four years before she  could  apply  for
    the second Appellant and her two young children to join her there.   It
    is Ms Holmes' contention on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  the
    judge has not given reasons as to why she  accepts  the  evidence.   Ms
    Holmes seeks to challenge the lack of  documentary  evidence  and  that
    there is in her submission no evidence provided to show on  what  basis
    the judge made his decision.  Ms Sharma advises that  she  was  Counsel
    before the First-tier Tribunal and that there was reference therein  to
    country guidance, a societal discussion and evidence on the Appellant's
    own pay scale in Mauritius.  I did point out at this stage  to  Counsel
    that whether or not that was the case it was not for  Counsel  to  give
    evidence and if she is to be called as a witness she should do  so  and
    alternative Counsel should have been instructed.

 6. In acknowledging this criticism Ms Sharma went on to state that it  was
    clear that the judge had taken account of  all  relevant  matters  that
    were before her and reminded me that the first Appellant is Ugandan  by
    birth but that he has not lived in Uganda for nineteen years  and  that
    it is not possible for him to return there.  She further  submits  that
    the second Appellant who is Mauritian has never been  to  Uganda.   She
    contends that there was evidence available in  the  public  domain  and
    that the judge took this into account in particular with regard to  the
    discrimination that her  children  would  suffer  due  to  their  mixed
    heritage.  She refers me to the judge's decision and  to  the  evidence
    given at the first hearing with regard to the  position  in  which  the
    children would find themselves.

 7. It is her submission that the judge was entitled in such  circumstances
    to find that there were insurmountable obstacles to return and that the
    submissions made by the Secretary of State amount to little  more  than
    disagreement.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. The thrust of the Grounds  of  Appeal  are  that  the  judge  has  made
    findings without reasoning and that the judge has merely  accepted  the
    first Appellant's evidence that her family would face widespread racial
    discrimination on return to Mauritius  that  would  prevent  them  from
    integrating.

11. This is a decision which sets out the  facts  and  the  evidence  quite
    clearly.  The Appellant gave evidence with regard  to  her  ability  to
    relocate to Mauritius and what her earnings would  be  including  child
    care costs.  She gave evidence as to family members in Mauritius but of
    their failure to talk to her and evidence that she could  not  relocate
    to Uganda as her husband had  no-one  there  and  that  she  had  never
    visited there.

12. The Appellant was cross-examined and that evidence is set out  in  some
    detail at paragraphs 11 to 16.  The second Appellant also gave evidence
    and his evidence is set out including cross-examination  at  paragraphs
    17 to 19.  It is based on  this  evidence  and  subsequent  submissions
    which are recited at paragraphs 22 to 26 that the judge  made  detailed
    findings of fact at paragraphs 29 through to 31.  Those  were  findings
    which based on the evidence and submissions made that  I  am  satisfied
    the judge was entitled to make.  Albeit that contentions  are  made  to
    the contrary she has given reasons for her findings.  The Appellant had
    given evidence as to what her earnings would be in Mauritius and it  is
    open to the judge to accept that oral  testimony.   Whilst  it  may  be
    preferable so far as possible for oral testimony to  be  backed  up  by
    written evidence that is not always practical.  It does not mean that a
    judge must reject that testimony.  Similarly, so far  as  the  findings
    made by the judge as to how long the Appellant would have  to  work  in
    Mauritius before she could apply for the second Appellant and two young
    children to join her is also a finding that the judge was  entitled  to
    make.

13. In such circumstances I am satisfied that  the  findings  made  by  the
    judge were ones that were open to her and that her findings are  reason
    based.  In those circumstances the challenges made by the Secretary  of
    State amount to no more than disagreement.  I therefore  conclude  that
    the judge was entitled to reach the decision that she did and  she  has
    given  reasoned  findings  in  doing  so.   The  decision  consequently
    discloses no material error of law and the Secretary of State's  appeal
    is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 29th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
