
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13516/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th January 2018                   |On 02 May 2018                      |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                         JOHN ELIGIUS LILOKA MAHUNDI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahundi, in person
For the Respondent:    Mrs. N Wilcocks Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Tanzania who appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT")  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  2nd
    December 2015 refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK on
    long residence and Article 8 grounds.  His appeal was dismissed for the
    reasons set out in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  Judge
    Hodgkinson promulgated on 23rd March 2017.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 5th October 2017  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chapman.   The  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether the decision of the FtT contains a material error of  law,  and
    if so, to remake the decision.  At the end of the hearing before me,  I
    informed the appellant that  I  dismiss  the  appeal.   I  provided  my
    reasons in brief, and I  informed  the  parties  that  a  full  written
    decision would follow.  This I now do.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 3. The background to the appellant's appeal and his immigration history is
    set out at paragraphs [1] to [8] of the Judge's decision.  At paragraph
    [9] of the decision, the FtT Judge sets out the basis  upon  which  the
    claim was refused by the respondent.  The Judge records, at  paragraphs
    [11] to [20] of the decision, the appellant's  case  and  the  evidence
    received by the Tribunal.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are  to
    be found at paragraphs [23] to [38] of the decision.


 4. The appellant's case is that having returned to the United  Kingdom  on
    3rd February 1980, he has never left the  United  Kingdom.   The  Judge
    records at paragraph [23] that it appears to be common ground that  the
    appellant returned to the United Kingdom as a student on  3rd  February
    1980.  The issue in the appeal was whether the appellant  has  remained
    in the United Kingdom continuously, since then.  The respondent's case,
    as summarised in paragraph [23], is that  the  appellant  has  produced
    inadequate evidence  to  establish  his  claim  that  he  has  remained
    continuously in the United Kingdom, since February 1980. The respondent
    did not therefore accept that the appellant has  established  14  years
    continuous  residence  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    immigration rules, or 20 years continuous residence for the purposes of
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules. The Judge records at paragraph  [24]  of
    the decision that the appellant acknowledged:


         ".. that he did not have any documentary evidence of  relevance  to
         his places of residence such as, for example,  evidence  of  rental
         payments paid or tenancy agreements. He added that  he  had  worked
         "on and off" but had essentially lived "hand-to-mouth and  that  he
         had no National Insurance number. He acknowledged that he also  had
         no documentary evidence relating to any employments  undertaken  by
         him at any stage."


 5. At paragraphs  [26]  to  [31],  the  Judge  addressed  the  documentary
    evidence relied upon by the appellant in  support  of  the  appeal.  At
    paragraph [32], the Judge states:


         "Thus, the available documentary  evidence  is  extremely  limited.
         None of the writers of the various letters referred to attended the
         hearing, in order to provide oral evidence,  and,  consequently,  I
         have given their written evidence no material weight. The appellant
         claims to have friends in the United Kingdom  who  are  willing  to
         support him both emotionally and financially but, bearing  in  mind
         that claim, I find it surprising, and damaging to his  credibility,
         that not one of those friends has  attended  to  provide  any  oral
         evidence; neither have any of the  priests  or  organisers  of  the
         organisations at which the  appellant  claims  to  have  undertaken
         charitable activities over the years."


 6. The Judge accepted, at paragraph [35] that the  appellant  was  in  the
    United Kingdom in October 2010, but at paragraph  [36]  concluded  that
    the appellant has failed to establish  that  he  has  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom continuously since 1980. The Judge states:


         "... he has failed to establish precisely when he has been  in  the
         United Kingdom during the intervening period. Consequently, I  find
         that he cannot satisfy the requirements for long residence set  out
         in  paragraph  276B  and  276ADE  of  the  Rules,  as  he  has  not
         established, 14 years' continuous residence in the United  Kingdom,
         or 20 years continuous residence respectively. He does not claim to
         have established  10  years  lawful  residence  with  reference  to
         paragraph 276B. In the presenting  circumstances,  and  bearing  in
         mind my findings of fact, I conclude that the appellant also cannot
         establish   that   he   meets   the   requirements   of   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi)."


 7. As to an Article 8 claim outside of the  rules,  the  Judge  states  at
    paragraph [38]:


         "Based upon  my  findings  of  fact,  and  even  allowing  for  the
         respondent's delay in making a decision following  the  appellant's
         2010 application, I am satisfied that there  are  no  circumstances
         which could conceivably warrant my concluding that the respondent's
         decision is other than an entirely proportionate one with reference
         to Article 8, there being no current challenge to the lawfulness of
         that decision. For the sake of  completeness,  I  would  add  that,
         bearing in mind my findings of fact, the appellant  has  failed  to
         establish that his private life in the United  Kingdom  is  of  the
         duration or quality claimed by him. He does not claim  to  enjoy  a
         family life in the United Kingdom in the context of Article 8  and,
         even if he did, there is no evidence to support such in any event."


The appeal before me


 8. At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  before  me,  as  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented, I explained the procedure that I would adopt, to him.  I
    informed the appellant that the appeal before me, is not  a  re-hearing
    of the appeal in the same way as the appeal he had previously attended,
    before the FtT.  I explained  to  the  appellant  that  I  would  first
    determine whether the decision of the FtT contains a material error  of
    law, and if so, I would hear further submissions to  assist  me  remake
    the decision.  Before hearing submissions I ensured that the  appellant
    had a copy of the decision of the FtT Judge, a copy of his  grounds  of
    appeal, and a copy of the order granting permission to appeal.


 9. The appellant claims that the judge misdirected himself  at  paragraphs
    [10(3)] and [10(4)] of the decision.  The appellant submits that he has
    lived in the United Kingdom for over 37 years and has devoted his  life
    to charity work.  He  submits  that  it  is  his  choice  not  to  have
    established a family life and on any view, when an individual has lived
    in a country for over 37 years, he  is  bound  to  have  established  a
    private life, even though he was unable to provide sufficient evidence.
    The appellant claims that the Judge fell into error when  he  noted  at
    paragraph [33] of his decision, that there is  no  correspondence  from
    the Tanzanian authorities to confirm that the appellant  has  not  been
    issued with another Tanzanian passport. The appellant  claims  that  he
    should have been given the opportunity to  provide  the  Tribunal  with
    confirmation from the Tanzanian  authorities,  that  he  has  not  been
    issued with any other passport, and in any event, as he is  subject  to
    immigration control, the respondent must have had records of his  entry
    into, and exit from the United Kingdom.


10. Before me, the appellant maintained that he  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1980, and that he had presented evidence before  the  FtT
    Judge in support of his appeal. He maintained that he has not left  the
    United Kingdom since 1980. He confirmed that, as set out  at  paragraph
    [33] of the decision, there was no evidence before the FtT  Judge  from
    the Tanzanian authorities that the appellant had not been  issued  with
    another passport.


11. It is now well established that what is required in a decision is  that
    the reasons provided must give sufficient detail to  show  the  parties
    and the  appellate  Tribunal,  the  principles  upon  which  the  lower
    Tribunal has acted, and the reasons that led it  to  its  decision,  so
    that they are able to understand why it reached its decision.


12. At paragraphs [10(3)] and [10(4)] of the decision, the FtT Judge is not
    reaching any conclusion upon the appeal,  but  the  Judge  sets  out  a
    summary of the respondent's decision dated 2nd December 2015. The Judge
    has not  misdirected  himself  as  to  the  claim  being  made  by  the
    appellant.


13. In my judgment, a careful reading of the  decision  of  the  FtT  Judge
    demonstrates that  the  FtT  Judge  carefully  considered  all  of  the
    evidence relied upon by the appellant to support his  claimed  presence
    in the UK since February 1980.  The evidence was, as the Judge recorded
    at paragraph [32], extremely limited, and none of the  authors  of  the
    various letters that the appellant relied upon, attended the hearing to
    provide oral evidence.  There was a dearth of  evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's residence, employment, or presence in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 1980 and 2010.  Having carefully considered the decision of the
    FtT Judge, I am entirely satisfied that it was open  to  the  Judge  to
    accept that the appellant was in the United Kingdom  in  October  2010,
    and that there was evidence placing the appellant in  the  UK,  in  the
    latter part of 2013.  The immigration rules however require 'continuous
    residence' in the United Kingdom, and it was in my  judgement  open  to
    the Judge to conclude that the requirements of  the  immigration  rules
    cannot be met.  The appellant has maintained  throughout  that  he  has
    remained in the United Kingdom since  February  1980.  That  claim  was
    carefully considered, and the  Judge  rejected  that  account  for  the
    reasons given in the decision. The matters relied upon by the appellant
    amount to nothing more than a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    Judge, that were properly open to him on the evidence.


14. As to the Article 8 claim outside the rules, the Judge properly records
    at paragraph [38] of his decision that the appellant does not claim  to
    enjoy a family life in the United Kingdom.  The respondent noted in the
    decision dated 2nd December 2015 that the  appellant  had  developed  a
    private life in the UK without any form  of  valid  leave.   The  Judge
    proceeds upon the basis that the appellant has  established  a  private
    life in the United Kingdom but concluded that the appellant has  failed
    to establish that his private life in the  United  Kingdom  is  of  the
    duration or quality claimed by him.  Although not referred  to  by  the
    Judge, the Tribunal must "have regard" to the considerations set out in
    section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (section 117A). Section 117B(4)(a) provides that little  weight  should
    be given to a private life that is established by a person  at  a  time
    when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. In my judgement it
    was open to the judge to conclude that there are no circumstances which
    could conceivably warrant a conclusion that the respondent decision  is
    other than an entirely proportionate one, with reference to Article 8.


15. I am satisfied that there is no material error in the decision  of  the
    FtT Judge and I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date          12th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          12th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

