
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13387/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 4th May 2017                               |On 23rd May 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mrs Shukria Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Trevelyan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 11th October 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 19th August 2016.   In  the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on  9th  November
    1982, and is a female.   She  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, dated 1st December  2015,  refusing  her
    application for leave to remain as the spouse of a person  present  and
    settled in the UK, because it is said that  she  has  fraudulently  put
    forward an ETS examination test result  which  was  not  undertaken  by
    herself but by a proxy.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she entered the UK in 2005  to  join  her
    husband who was in the UK on a student visa.   They  lived  in  London.
    She gave birth to a second child, Zeenat, whilst in London.  Two months
    later she returned to Pakistan with her children.  In  2007,  she  gave
    birth to a third child, Noman, in Pakistan.   Whilst  in  Pakistan,  in
    2009, she witnessed death and destruction following a  suicide  bombing
    attack in the main city of Peshawar, where  she  saw  many  casualties,
    which traumatised her.  In February 2012, she returned to the  UK  with
    her children to rejoin her husband.  On 3rd  July  2013,  she  attended
    Biettec College in Birmingham to take the English  language  test.   On
    the day that she attended the speaking element of  the  language  test,
    she travelled there with her husband and baby on  a  bus  to  the  main
    route.  She walked to the college,  a  two  storey  building,  and  she
    walked into the reception, and reported there.  She was directed to the
    waiting hall on the ground floor, where there  were  other  candidates,
    and then a moderator came down with a list of names, and they  all  had
    to sign off their names and were escorted  upstairs  where  there  were
    computers set up in the room.  Her husband and child were asked to wait
    outside in the canteen.  She was directed to a seat in the  examination
    room.  The examiner  was  male.   After  the  preliminaries,  the  test
    commenced.  IJ Phull records, however, that "she does  not  recall  the
    nature of the questions that were put to her" (paragraph 8).   However,
    she does recall that she sat  a  six  part  test,  which  was  over  45
    minutes, and she  spoke  loudly  into  the  microphone,  and  the  test
    required her to describe a picture, and provide a short narrative,  and
    there was a problem solving exercise which  she  also  undertook.   She
    took her speaking test on one day and listening and reading on  another
    day.  (See paragraph 8).

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before the judge, the Appellant did  not  give  evidence
    because of her traumatised condition.  I noted at the hearing before me
    today also, that although she was in the courtroom at the start of  the
    hearing, her Counsel asked for her to be released so that she could  go
    and sit outside,  because  she  found  the  proceedings  traumatic  and
    difficult to countenance because she had been  suffering  from  anxiety
    and depression, as a result of  having  seen  the  suicide  bombing  in
    Peshawar. I also noted in this context that, the judge at  the  hearing
    below stated that, "having considered the Appellant's evidence I accept
    on balance that she was unable to answer questions at  her  immigration
    interview because she found herself in a stressful situation and the GP
    letter supports her symptoms" (paragraph 37).

 5. The judge then went on to say that she  had  considered  the  ETS  test
    scoring for the speaking test (see page 39 of the Appellant's  bundle),
    and that this

         "reveals that the Appellant's test results  were  not  particularly
         good.  There is criticism of her intonation and stress, and remarks
         upon errors in  pronunciation,  grammar  and  a  limited  range  of
         vocabulary.  The overall score for speaking is 140  over  200  with
         the proficiency level of 6.  However  she  satisfied  the  speaking
         test" (see paragraph 38).

    The judge then held that having considered the evidence  in  the  round
    and on  balance,  she  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  language
    certificate had not been obtained by fraudulent  means  (see  paragraph
    39).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    conclusions which were not in  accordance  with  the  case  of  Shehzad
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  Moreover, the judge's assessment under Article  8
    was flawed.

 8. On 11th January 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 4th May 2017, Mrs Aboni,  relied  upon  the
    grounds of application.  First, she submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had concerns about the English language test.  However, she would
    have to accept that the evidence presented in support of the allegation
    of fraud was generic, and not specifically such that it referred to the
    Appellant herself.  However, there was a specific report in relation to
    the Biettec Test Centre itself.  Second, the Appellant could not recall
    the questions asked, and this suggested that she  could  not  discharge
    the burden of proof when it shifted to  her,  to  provide  an  innocent
    explanation that she did sit the test.  Third,  it  is  said  that  she
    remembered that the test was of six parts, that  she  was  required  to
    describe a picture, and that it was 45 minutes, but this is information
    that could just as easily have been  provided  prior  to  the  students
    coming to sit the  test,  by  the  test  centre  itself.   Fourth,  the
    determination shows that the Appellant was called for an interview  and
    she was unable to participate in the  Home  Office  interview  in  June
    2015, so that the first interview was aborted,  and  when  it  was  set
    again, she was stressed, and although she attended she felt dizzy  with
    the onset of a severe headache "and could not bring her mind to  answer
    the questions" (see paragraph 9 of the determination).  Fifth, although
    her husband accompanied her to the test centre, all he could say at the
    hearing was that he had accompanied her and had been taken to  a  room,
    and then was required to go to the canteen  with  their  children,  but
    there is no evidence that she herself went into the test room  and  sat
    the test herself.  Finally, Article 8 could only be used to  allow  the
    appeal in "exceptional circumstances" and these did not exist here.

10. For his part, Mr  Trevelyan  directed  my  attention  to  his  skeleton
    argument and submitted that  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Tribunal  was
    supervisory only, and if the judge had made findings  below  that  were
    sustainable on the evidence before  her,  the  decision  could  not  be
    upset.  On that basis, this was nothing more than a  quibble  with  the
    findings of the  judge  below.   First,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented at the hearing before, and the HOPO did  not  cross-examine
    the husband on what he had said.  Second,  her  medical  condition  was
    well documented (see paragraph 37), and if she  could  not  attend  the
    interview in July 2015, and  was  subsequently  suffering  from  severe
    headache, sweating, and breathlessness, this  was  a  matter  that  the
    judge properly  heeded,  and  recognised  as  being  her  true  medical
    condition (see paragraph 9).  Third, the judge  did  consider  the  ETS
    test score and concluded that these scores were fairly average (whereas
    people who employ proxies generally tend to score much  higher  marks),
    so that she only just passed (see paragraph 38).  Finally, there was  a
    reliance upon a spreadsheet of a general nature but as the case  of  SM
    and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 made clear, this is nothing more than  a
    "flimsy spreadsheet" which cannot suffice by  way  of  making  good  an
    allegation of fraud against an applicant.  The fact was that there  was
    the absence of specific evidence in relation to the  Appellant  herself
    here.  As far as Article 8 was concerned, the Appellant  satisfied  the
    partner Rule (see paragraph 57), and it was simply  not  true,  as  was
    being  suggested,  that  the   judge   had   waded   into   Article   8
    considerations, because the judge had identified  what  the  background
    facts  were.   The  judge  had  also  identified  the  public  interest
    considerations (see paragraphs 47 to 52) and specifically  referred  to
    Section 117B(vi).  The circumstances here were  "exceptional"  in  that
    there were four British citizen children here, who could  not  relocate
    back to Pakistan with the Appellant for however short a period.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

12. First, whereas at first blush, the fact that the Appellant did not give
    evidence, did not attend the Home Office interview, and even  asked  to
    be excused from the hearing today before the Upper Tribunal  where  she
    had no evidence  to  give  at  all,  may  be  suspicious,  her  medical
    condition is not in dispute.  Nor, is the fact that there was a suicide
    bombing in Peshawar in 2009 which she witnessed, in dispute.

13. Second, whereas it is also the case that the Appellant could not recall
    the nature of the questions that were put to her (given that they arose
    some three years ago), she  was  able  to  provide  evidence  that  she
    attended with her husband, travelling on bus with their  baby,  walking
    to the college, a two storey building, being received at the reception,
    being required to report, and then waiting in  a  waiting  hall  before
    being called in.  She also described the nature of the test,  including
    the reference to a specific picture, and a  short  narrative,  together
    with problem solving exercises.

14. Third, the judge accepted that she was unable to  answer  questions  at
    the immigration interview because she  found  herself  in  a  stressful
    situation and the GP's letter confirmed this (paragraph 37).

15. Finally, the Appellant's test was one that resulted in  average  scores
    (see paragraph 38) and the judge gave proper consideration to this  and
    found on balance that she satisfies the speaking  test.   What  remains
    significant in this case, is that the Respondent only furnished generic
    evidence against the Appellant, the Appellant did provide  an  innocent
    explanation which was to "the minimum level of plausibility", and there
    was no further evidence at a legal  standard  which  established  on  a
    balance of probabilities that the Appellant had cheated as claimed, but
    for the general spreadsheet.  The judge did have proper regard  to  the
    compelling circumstances in relation to Article 8,  and  did  highlight
    the exceptional circumstances in this case, without overlooking Section
    117B(vi), so that on the whole, the  decision  cannot  be  regarded  as
    being unsustainable and falling  into  error  of  law.   I  accordingly
    reject the appeal.

Notice of Decision

16. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd May 2017
