
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2017                         |On 10th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                Sonia Jaspal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Syeds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of India born on 6th March 1992.  She
    first arrived in the United Kingdom on 16th April  2012  when  she  was
    given leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student  until  25th  August
    2014.  After two unsuccessful applications for leave to remain, on  4th
    August 2015 the Appellant again applied for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds on the basis of her marriage to a British citizen namely
    Satpal Singh Hanspal.  That application was  refused  for  the  reasons
    given in the Respondent's refusal letter dated 2nd December 2015.   The
    Appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Austin (the Judge) sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 19th  December
    2016.  He decided to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and
    on human rights grounds for the reasons given  in  his  Decision  dated
    16th January 2017.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that  decision
    and on 20th September 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because according to what  he  wrote  at
    paragraph 28 of the Decision it was conceded by the Appellant that  she
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge also
    found that the Appellant did not satisfy the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM of HC 395 because in the past she had overstayed  by  more  than  28
    days, which was not disputed by the Appellant, and therefore she failed
    to satisfy paragraph E-LTRP.2.2 of Appendix FM.  Further, the Appellant
    had not provided the appropriate financial information as  required  by
    Appendix FM-SE.  Although the Judge accepted that there was  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship between the Appellant and her husband,  the
    Judge did not accept that the Appellant provided full-time care for her
    parents-in-law.  Therefore there were no  significant  difficulties  to
    the Appellant and her husband continuing their family life outside  the
    UK and the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM.  The Judge  then  found  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances allowing  him  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights outside of the Immigration Rules.   However,  the
    Judge went on to find that the  decision  of  the  Respondent  did  not
    amount to a disproportionate interference with the private  and  family
    life of the Appellant in the UK.  In this connection the Judge  decided
    having  considered  the  factors  contained  in  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that the  public  interest
    in enforcing immigration control outweighed any personal  circumstances
    relating to the Appellant.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Ahmed argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in coming to these  conclusions.   It  had  been  disputed  at  the
    hearing that the Appellant had overstayed in the past,  and  the  Judge
    had made a wrong factual decision in  this  respect.   That  being  the
    case, paragraph E-LTRP.2.2  of  Appendix  FM  did  not  apply  and  the
    Appellant met the requirements of the five year route.   The  Appellant
    also met the requirements of  the  ten  year  route  as  the  financial
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE did not apply to  such  an  application.
    In any event, the Appellant satisfied  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The Judge had failed to consider properly whether
    there were any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband  returning  together  to  India.   The  Judge  had  failed   to
    appreciate that the family of the Appellant's husband  originated  from
    Kenya.  The Appellant's husband had never lived in  India  and  had  no
    ties to that country.

 5. As regards Article  8  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  Mr  Ahmed
    submitted that the Judge had failed to carry out the balancing exercise
    necessary for any proper assessment of proportionality.  The Judge  had
    not taken account of the principles set out in Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]
    UKHL 40.

 6. In response, Mr McVeety argued that there had been no  such  errors  of
    law.  It was clearly recorded in the Decision that at the  hearing  the
    Appellant conceded that she did not qualify for leave to  remain  under
    Appendix FM of HC 395.  In any event, the Appellant presented little or
    no evidence that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  her  and  her
    husband continuing their family life in India.  The Judge  had  made  a
    finding in this respect which he had  been  entitled  to  make  on  the
    evidence before him.  In particular, he rejected  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant provided full-time care for her parents-in-law on  the  basis
    that they did not require such care.   The  Judge  had  carried  out  a
    proper assessment of proportionality.  There were factors contained  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act which the Appellant satisfied, but it  had
    now been decided that such could only be  viewed  as  neutral  factors.
    They could not operate in favour of the Appellant.  The fact  that  the
    Judge found family life possible in India  was  conclusive  as  to  the
    issue of proportionality.

 7. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge.   It  is
    clearly recorded in the Decision that at the hearing the Appellant  did
    not dispute that she had overstayed in the past.  It cannot be an error
    of law for the Judge to act upon such a concession  made  freely  by  a
    properly represented Appellant at the hearing.  Therefore it is not  an
    error of law for the Judge to dismiss the appeal under Appendix  FM  on
    the basis of his finding that paragraph E-LTRP.2.2 of Appendix  FM  was
    not met, in which event any error of law by the  Judge  in  respect  of
    Appendix FM-SE is not material.

 8. Otherwise, the arguments of the Appellant amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with  the  decision  of  the  Judge.   The  Judge  reached
    conclusions open to him on the evidence before him and which  he  fully
    explained.   He  made  such  a  conclusion  as  to  any  insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant and her husband settling  in  India.   There
    was no evidence before the Judge that the  family  of  the  Appellant's
    husband originated  from  Kenya.   Having  found  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances in the case, the Judge  was  not  obliged  to
    consider  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights  outside  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  However, he did so and carried out that  assessment
    properly.  He  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  public  interest  of
    immigration  control  outweighed  any  circumstances  relating  to  the
    Appellant.  It is not now  argued  that  the  Appellant  has  any  care
    responsibilities in respect of her in-laws.  The Judge dealt  with  the
    Section 117B factors correctly and it  was  inevitable  that  he  would
    attach most weight to the public interest in the balancing exercise  as
    he had earlier found that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the
    Appellant and her husband living together in India.

 9. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 4th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

