
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13230/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Newport                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th October 2018            |                                |
|                                |On 20th November 2018           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Mr T O S

                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    In person



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of South Africa born on  24th  April  1977.
    The Secretary of State was  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson, promulgated on
    27th February 2018, allowing the appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 12th October 2018.  That  decision  identified
    that the appellant's human rights claim against his  deportation  order
    was  refused.  On  15th  Mary  2015  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    possession/control of identify documents with intent and for  which  he
    was sentenced to 1 year's imprisonment.

 3. The judge recorded that:

         (i)      the appellant claimed he arrived in the  UK  in  2004  but
         there was no record of legal entry

         (ii)     he was granted a work permit for a hotel job in July 2006

         (iii)    on 25th April 2007 he was granted limited leave to  remain
         until 25th April 2012

         (iv)     on 1st December 2008  youths  convicted  driving  with  no
         insurance certificate and not in accordance with  his  licence  and
         fined

         (v)      on 20th May 2011 he was convicted of shoplifting and given
         a conditional discharge

         (vi)     on 24th June 2014 he made a voluntary departure  to  South
         Africa

         (vii)    he attempted to re-enter the UK on 23 April 2015

         (viii)   he was convicted at Liverpool Crown Court and given a one-
         year custodial sentence (see above)

         (ix)     on 15th June he was served with  a  stage  I  decision  to
         deport letter

         (x)      he was released from prison on 23rd October 2015 and  then
         released on immigration bail

 4. It was noted in the First-tier Tribunal  decision  that  the  appellant
    gave evidence that he and his partner, the mother of his daughter  (T),
    were back together again, and they wanted to  make  their  relationship
    work for their child.  He and his daughter had always been  close,  and
    she had become very  unwell  when  he  left  and  developed  an  eating
    disorder with which they were still battling.

 5. The judge applied paragraph  399  (a)  of  the  immigration  rules  and
    appreciated that this was automatic deportation under section 32 (5) of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 6. The child was a British citizen born on 24 October  2005  and  she  had
    been living continuously  in  the  UK  for  12  �  years.   She  was  a
    qualifying child.

 7. The judge noted the respondent accepted as  recorded  in  the  decision
    letter that it would be unduly harsh for her to live  in  South  Africa
    and with that the judge agreed.  The judge appreciated that  the  final
    issue to consider was whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to
    remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant and that  the  judge
    needed to assess the nature of the relationship that the appellant  had
    with his daughter. The judge found that the appellant took his daughter
    to school, attended all her school events and was heavily involved with
    her medical care as she was under a  hospital  for  weight  issues.  He
    would take her to the gym. The judge noted that the appellant was

         "... an open individual who has made  some  mistakes  in  the  past
         which he has admitted and paid for. It was clear that  he  is  very
         close to his daughter and has only her best interests at heart  and
         I accepted his oral evidence as honest'. [36]

 8. The decision referred to the texts and emails from the  school  showing
    the appellant was on the school list as a parent to  be  contacted  and
    that he was the joint parent of T.

 9. The judge referred to the letter from  the  appellant's  partner  which
    confirmed they had a close relationship, even when he  was  not  living
    with them, and that when he went back to South Africa and reasoned

         "... the child began to have serious emotional issues.  She  became
         unsettled, misbehaved at school and began to eat excessively.   The
         overeating became so bad that the child  was  referred  to  Bristol
         Children's Hospital who arranged for various forms of physical  and
         emotional support for the child. Even when  the  appellant  was  in
         custody they kept in touch with the child's interest". [38]

10. The mother's evidence was accepted that the  appellant  plays  a  large
    part in the treatment plan for their daughter and  the  judge  accepted
    that from the evidence of the daughter the  appellant  and  she  had  a
    close and positive relationship. [40]

11. The judge also found

         "I had before me the  letter  from  the  Children's  Hospital,  the
         child's diet sheet, photographs of  her  at  the  various  sporting
         activities she does with her father stop the photographs themselves
         show a little girl is very happy and at ease with her father.

         I do not seek to minimise the convictions of the appellant.  It  is
         clear that  those  who  breach  our  criminal  laws  must  pay  the
         consequences... He committed the  offence  out  of  desperation  to
         return to the UK to be with  his  child.  He  was  given  a  prison
         sentence which he served and has not committed any  other  offences
         since that time. Whatever his past it was clear to me that he is  a
         devoted and committed father.

         Looking at all the evidence in the round it is  clear  to  me  that
         this is a  father  and  daughter  who  have  a  real,  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship. They lived together and the child has been
         having long-term and serious issues which the experts say  have  an
         emotional root cause and which her mother confirms began  when  she
         was separated from her father with whom  she  clearly  has  a  deep
         bond. I find that it would be totally detrimental for  her  to  not
         have the on  hindered  access  that  she  currently  has  with  the
         appellant and I find it would be unduly harsh for her  to  have  to
         live without her father here in the UK. The immigration rules under
         399(a) are met".

    And further:

12. "I do not  find  that  in  this  case  the  child  could  maintain  her
    relationship with her father in the way that is  in  her  interest  via
    phone or other modern means of communication. I find that  there  would
    be serious health consequences both physical and emotional if the child
    were to be separated from her father and this would be totally contrary
    to her best interests". [48]

13. "I find on the totality of the evidence before  me,  that  he  plays  a
    highly significant role in his daughter's life and that this is  not  a
    role he can play if he is not in the UK".

Application for Permission to Appeal

14. The application for permission contended that the judge had  failed  to
    identify anything exceptional about the  family  situation  that  would
    outweigh the compelling public interest in the appellant's deportation.
     The judge had failed to identify any compelling features of  the  case
    which might elevate it to the level of unduly  harsh  or  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.  The Secretary of State  relied  on  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) [2016] ECA 1012 with reference to

         'The  desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is  a
         commonplace of family life.   That is not  usually  a  sufficiently
         compelling circumstance to outweigh the  high  public  interest  in
         deporting foreign Criminals '

15. It was asserted that 'while the judge noted  the  appellant's  daughter
    has an eating disorder there is  no  medical  evidence  concerning  her
    prognosis or any additional dependence on the appellant  specifically'.
    It  was  therefore  submitted  that  without  noting  any   exceptional
    circumstances the appellant was simply not able  to  benefit  from  the
    exception to deportation in 399 (a).

16. The judge was going against the  relevant  jurisprudence  which  states
    that the children's best interests cannot always take precedence

17. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Blundell on the basis that it
    was arguable that the critical finding was reached  without  cognisance
    of the force of the public interest. The judge  was  not  and  had  not
    referred to MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 617.

The Hearing

18. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni accepted that the application for  permission
    might have been better phrased, but she advanced that the judge had not
    reasoned the 'unduly harsh' test within the jurisprudence. The decision
    was not adequately reasoned.

19. Mr S, his partner and daughter attended the hearing,  but  he  was  not
    represented.

Conclusions

20. The legislative framework  is  set  out  at  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as follows:

         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

         (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in  the
         UK, and

             (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii)      the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for  at
             least the 7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the
             immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported;

         or

         (b)      the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or  settled  in
         the UK, and

             (i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
             the country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

21. 117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
    criminals

         (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted.

22. The lead judgment with regard  to  'unduly  harsh'  and  Section  117C,
    which, for children, mirrors paragraph 399(a) is  now  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53.   The
    question addressed was whether

         "the specific rules allow any further room  for  balancing  of  the
         relative seriousness of the offence, beyond the difference  between
         the two categories"

23. Exception 1 in Section 117C is considered to be self-contained and  the
    approach in  MM  (Uganda),  (and  to  which  the  grant  of  permission
    referred), such  that  the  seriousness  of  the  offending  should  be
    introduced into the balancing exercise, was disapproved.   The  Supreme
    Court decided there should be a degree of harshness going  beyond  what
    would necessarily be involved for any child faced with deportation of a
    parent [23].  However,

         "Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  932,
         [2017] 1  WLR  240,  paras  55,  64)  can  it  be  equated  with  a
         requirement to show "very compelling reasons".  That  would  be  in
         effect to replicate the additional test applied by section  117C(6)
         with respect to sentences of four years or more".

24. The introduction of exceptional or compelling reasons is  not  part  of
    the test to be applied.  The elevation of the  test  in  this  way  was
    disapproved by the Supreme Court in KO at [43].

25. The reference in  the  grounds  for  permission  refer  to  'compelling
    features of the case' and  anything  'exceptional  about  the  family's
    situation'.  As seen, that is not the test specific to  children.    KO
    approved the test as adopted in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) which emphasised the need
    for an evaluative assessment of the consequences upon the  children  by
    the Tribunal:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.
         'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It  is
         the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.  Furthermore,   the
         addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated standard
         still higher".

26. At [33] KO (Nigeria) concluded that the consequences would  be  'unduly
    harsh'

         "... if they are 'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking  into
         account all of the circumstances of the individual" [33]

27. In this case, the  judge  made  the  relevant  findings  which  I  have
    outlined above.  From a careful reading of the decision, the judge  did
    not treat 'unduly harsh' as 'merely undesirable' as  ruled  against  at
    [35] of KO (Nigeria).  The child has an emotional/eating disorder which
    can clearly be discerned from  the  documentation  provided.   Although
    there was no  medical  evidence  concerning  her  prognosis  there  was
    medical evidence to confirm  her  referral  to  the  weight  management
    service and the judge was entitled to  conclude  from  the  documentary
    evidence which was identified and the oral evidence of the  mother  and
    the appellant as to the requirement  of  the  father  for  the  child's
    emotional wellbeing in the light of the child's medical  problems.  The
    judge was obliged to consider and evaluate the facts as they were found
    as at the date of the hearing.  I am  not  clear  whether  any  medical
    professional could give a clear picture as to the  'prognosis'  bearing
    in mind this is, in part, a mental health problem.  The child was being
    treated by the specialist paediatric service at a  Children's  Hospital
    in Bristol.  As such I find that the criticism levelled at the approach
    to the medical evidence is misconceived.

28. The judge appreciated that there is a much  stronger  emphasis  on  the
    words 'unduly harsh' which give the meaning  of  'severe'  or  'bleak'.
    The judge made a very clear and adequately finding,  having  considered
    the evidence, that it would be

         "... totally detrimental for her to have the unhindered access that
         she currently has with the appellant and I find it would be  unduly
         harsh for her to have to live without her father here in the UK".

    and in a sustainable finding having evaluated the evidence added that

         "I do not find that in this  case  the  child  could  maintain  her
         relationship with her father in the way that is in  her  interests,
         via phone or other modern means  of  communication.   I  find  that
         there would  be  serious  health  consequences  both  physical  and
         emotional if the child were to be separated  from  her  father  and
         that this would be totally contrary to her best interests".

29. It is clear that the judge did  not  consider  that  the  child's  best
    interests would always take precedence and indeed at  paragraph  32  of
    the decision he stated that "a child's best interests  are  capable  of
    outplaying  the  public  interest  in  deporting  a  criminal'.    This
    statement  clearly  reflects  a  realisation  that  the  child's   best
    interests are not a trump card, or paramount and can be  outweighed  by
    the public interest.

30. The judge also considered Section 117  B  finding  that  removal  would
    constitute a gross breach of  the  child's  human  rights.   The  judge
    equally noted that what must be show was more  than  mere  hardship  or
    mere difficulty or obstacles.

31. Following Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  00085
    (IAC)

         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge".

32. For the reasons given I find there is no material error of law  in  the
    judge's decision which incorporated adequately  reasoned  findings  for
    dismissing the appellant's claim. The First-Tier Tribunal decision will
    stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed           Helen Rimington                    Date       31st  October
    2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



