
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13883/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th June 2017                         |On 26th June 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                           Nhung Phuong Thi Nguyen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge A M S  Green  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 11th August 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Vietnamese citizen  born  24th  August  1982.
    She entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 17th June 2014,  with  a
    visa valid between 28th May 2014 and 28th November 2014.   The  purpose
    of the visit was for the Appellant to be assessed for  her  suitability
    to donate a kidney to her partner Roberto Perez, a British citizen,  to
    whom I shall refer as the Sponsor.

 3. The Appellant's visa  was  extended  until  28th  June  2015,  but  the
    transplant operation was delayed.

 4. The Appellant became an overstayer, and on 11th August 2015 applied for
    further leave to remain, to enable the  transplant  operation  to  take
    place.

 5. The application was refused  on  3rd  December  2015.   The  Respondent
    assessed the application as a human rights  application  and  therefore
    considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention) within the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Respondent firstly considered Appendix FM  in  relation  to  family
    life, not accepting  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  satisfied  the
    definition of a partner within GEN.1.2. of Appendix FM.   Also  it  was
    not accepted the Appellant and Sponsor had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and therefore they did not satisfy E-LTRP.1.7. of Appendix
    FM.

 7. The Respondent considered the Appellant's private life  with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE(1) not  accepting  that  the  Appellant  had  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least twenty years, nor that there  would
    be very significant obstacles to her  integration  into  Vietnam.   The
    Respondent pointed out the Appellant has spent the majority of her life
    in Vietnam before travelling to the UK.

 8. The Respondent then  considered  whether  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances that would justify a grant of leave to remain pursuant to
    Article 8, outside the Immigration  Rules.   The  Respondent  contended
    that the Appellant had failed to provide evidence of  when  the  kidney
    transplant would take place.  There was no date given for an operation.
     The Respondent did not accept  the  Appellant  had  been  assessed  as
    suitable to donate a kidney, and submitted  that  if  the  Sponsor  was
    still on a waiting list for an operation, the Appellant could return to
    Vietnam and make an entry clearance application.

 9. For the above reasons the application for leave to remain was  refused.



10. The Appellant appealed to the FTT and the hearing took  place  on  26th
    July 2016.  The FTT was satisfied that the Appellant and Sponsor had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  It was not however accepted  that
    they could satisfy the definition of a partner within  the  Immigration
    Rules as they had not lived together as partners for a  period  of  two
    years prior to the application.  The FTT accepted that  Article  8  was
    engaged on the basis of family and private life.  It was  not  accepted
    that an operation had been scheduled for September 2016 as  claimed  by
    the Appellant as there was no documentary evidence from the hospital to
    confirm this.

11. The FTT found the Respondent's decision  to  be  correct  in  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy Appendix FM  or  paragraph  276ADE(1),  and
    there were no exceptional circumstances to justify a grant of leave  to
    remain pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The appeal
    was therefore dismissed.

12. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was submitted that the FTT had erred by  not  considering  a  letter
    from University Hospitals Birmingham dated  7th  July  2016,  from  the
    Sponsor's consultant nephrologist  which  confirmed  an  operation  was
    planned for September 2016.  This letter had been submitted to the  FTT
    together with the Appellant's witness statement dated 15th July 2016.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  C  A  Parker  who  found  it
    arguable that the letter from the hospital had been overlooked.

14. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  Respondent  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, contending, in summary, that the FTT had not erred in  law,
    and had made findings which were open to it on the evidence.

15. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

16. The Appellant attended the hearing  together  with  the  Sponsor.   The
    Appellant confirmed that she  was  not  legally  represented,  and  was
    content to proceed without legal representation.  There was no need for
    an  interpreter  and  proceedings  were  conducted  in  English.    The
    Appellant confirmed that she  had  seen  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal, and I explained to her the procedure that would be adopted, and
    that initially I had to decide whether the FTT had made  a  mistake  of
    law, which would have made a difference to the conclusion reached.

17. Mr Mills explained that he did not support the rule 24  response  which
    had been drafted by a colleague who had not had sight of the file.   Mr
    Mills accepted that the letter from  University  Hospitals,  Birmingham
    dated 7th July 2016 was before the FTT and  had  not  been  taken  into
    account and he conceded that this amounted to a material error of  law.



18. I explained to the Appellant that I did not need to hear  further  from
    her on that point.  I was satisfied that the FTT had  materially  erred
    in law by failing to  consider  material  evidence  and  therefore  the
    decision of the FTT was set aside.  I explained that my reasons,  which
    were given orally, would be confirmed in writing.

Re-Making the Decision

19. It was  agreed  by  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Mills  that  it  would  be
    appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to re-make the decision, without the
    necessity of a further hearing.  I found  that  to  be  an  appropriate
    course of action.

20. The Appellant confirmed that she and  the  Sponsor  are  in  a  genuine
    relationship.  She had been previously assessed as suitable to donate a
    kidney to him.  He is still receiving dialysis.  The planned  operation
    could not take place in September 2016 because she did not have a visa.
     The NHS would not carry out the operation unless she had legal  status
    in the UK.

21. She explained that the operation had been  previously  cancelled,  once
    because the Sponsor was ill, and  on  a  second  occasion  because  she
    needed an operation to remove a cyst.

22. I was asked to allow the appeal so that further tests could be  carried
    out, which would be needed because of the passage of  time,  to  enable
    the operation to proceed.

23. Mr Mills did not dispute that the couple are in a genuine relationship,
    and did not dispute that the Sponsor was receiving dialysis and needs a
    kidney transplant, and it was accepted that previously,  the  Appellant
    had been found to be a suitable match.

24. Although the appeal was not conceded, Mr Mills did not argue  that  the
    appeal should be dismissed, commenting that it was  a  matter  for  the
    Tribunal to decide, whether the Sponsor's medical condition amounted to
    compelling circumstances sufficient to outweigh the public interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control.

25. I announced at the hearing that the  appeal  was  allowed  pursuant  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules  because  I  found  compelling
    circumstances to exist, having  had  regard  to  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act).   I
    indicated that  a  written  decision  would  be  issued  confirming  my
    reasons.

My Conclusions and Reasons

26. Dealing firstly with my reasons for finding an error  of  law,  I  find
    that the FTT erred by failing to consider material evidence.   The  FTT
    at paragraph 23(iv) made a finding that  no  documentary  evidence  had
    been provided from the hospital to confirm  that  a  kidney  transplant
    operation had been scheduled for September 2016, and consequently found
    that no operation had been scheduled for that date.  This was an  error
    in that a letter from University Hospitals, Birmingham, NHS Trust dated
    7th July 2016 was submitted  to  the  FTT.   This  confirmed  that  the
    operation was due to take place in September 2016 as additional medical
    and gynaecological investigations which had been  necessary,  had  been
    settled.  The letter requested a  visa  extension  for  a  further  six
    months.

27. The failure to consider this evidence meant that the FTT carried out  a
    flawed proportionality assessment.

28. I make the following findings of fact when remaking the  decision.   As
    found by the FTT, the Appellant  and  Sponsor  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship although they do not satisfy the definition  of
    a partner contained within Appendix FM, because they  did  not  cohabit
    for a period of two years prior to the application for leave to  remain
    being made.

29. I find the Sponsor to be a British citizen,  and  accept  that  medical
    evidence has been provided to show that he is receiving  dialysis,  and
    needs a kidney transplant.  The  medical  evidence  confirms  that  the
    Sponsor was assessed to be a suitable match for  a  kidney  transplant,
    and that the operation previously had to be delayed, caused firstly  by
    the  Sponsor's  illness,  and  secondly  by  the  Appellant  needing  a
    gynaecological operation.  I make the following findings based upon  my
    findings of fact.

30. This is an appeal against refusal of a human rights  claim.   The  only
    Ground of Appeal  open  to  the  Appellant  is  that  the  Respondent's
    decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.
    Reliance is placed upon Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

31. In deciding this appeal I adopt the balance sheet approach  recommended
    by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, and
    in so doing have regard to the guidance as  to  the  functions  of  the
    Tribunal given by Lord Reid at paragraphs 39 to 53.

32. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  her  personal
    circumstances in this country, and why the decision to refuse her human
    rights claim will  interfere  disproportionately  in  her  private  and
    family life rights.  It is for the Respondent to establish  the  public
    interest factors weighing against the Appellant.  The standard of proof
    is a balance of probability throughout.

33. As found by the FTT, I find that Article 8 is engaged on the  basis  of
    family and private life.

34. I find that the appeal cannot succeed by reliance upon the  Immigration
    Rules in relation to family life, those rules  being  Appendix  FM,  or
    private life, those rules being paragraph 276ADE(1).

35. This is a case where the Appellant relies upon Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  I am satisfied that her intention in coming to  the
    UK and remaining  here, is to donate  a  kidney  to  the  Sponsor,  her
    partner.  I accept the Appellant's evidence that she has no  desire  to
    remain in the UK on a long-term basis.

36. Because the appeal cannot succeed with  reference  to  the  Immigration
    Rules, I find that there must be compelling circumstances in  order  to
    justify allowing this appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

37. I have regard  to  section  117A  and  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   When
    considering the public interest question I  must  have  regard  to  the
    considerations listed in section 117B.  The  public  interest  question
    means the question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

38. Section 117B confirms that the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.

39. It is in the public interest that persons seeking to remain in  the  UK
    can speak English and are financially independent.  The  Appellant  can
    speak English, but this can only be regarded as a neutral  factor  when
    assessing public interest and proportionality.  The  Appellant  is  not
    financially independent.  She is dependent  upon  the  Sponsor  who  is
    currently not working.

40. Little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    in  the  United  Kingdom  with  a  precarious  immigration  status   or
    unlawfully.  The Appellant was initially in the UK  with  a  precarious
    immigration status as she only had limited leave to  remain.   She  has
    subsequently remained without leave.  I must  therefore  attach  little
    weight to her private life.

41. Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying partner (the Sponsor is a qualifying partner because he is a
    British citizen) established by a person when the person is in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  I do not find that this  applies  in  this  case,  as  the
    couple had formed their relationship prior to the  Appellant  remaining
    in the UK without leave.

42. I find that compelling circumstances exist in this  case,  those  being
    that the Appellant only wishes to remain in the UK for a limited period
    of time, to enable  her  to  donate  a  kidney  to  the  Sponsor.   The
    circumstances are unusual, and in my view it would be  disproportionate
    to refuse the Appellant further leave to remain.  The  explanation  for
    the delay in the operation being carried  out  has  been  explained  in
    letters from the NHS, and in particular there is a  letter  dated  18th
    August 2016 confirming medical reasons for delay, also confirming  that
    the Appellant is a suitable match, and that an operation date  was  set
    for 29th September 2016 pending visa approval.

43. The position now, is that, because of  the  passage  of  time,  further
    tests will need to be carried out on both the  Appellant  and  Sponsor.
    The length of discretionary leave to be granted is  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent.  The Sponsor made the point that if only three months leave
    was granted this would be insufficient for the tests to be carried out,
    and the operation scheduled.

44. It is difficult to be exact regarding a timescale, but in my  view  the
    length of leave that would be needed,  taking  into  account  that  the
    Appellant would need six weeks after donation of a kidney in  which  to
    recuperate, would be a minimum of six months, and the Respondent  might
    find that a grant of nine months leave would be  the  most  appropriate
    option.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  I re-make the  decision  and  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal
pursuant to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th June 2017

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 I find it is not appropriate, as the appeal has  been  allowed  because  of
evidence provided after the respondent's decision dated 3rd December 2015






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th June 2017
