
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13125/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 July 2021                   |               On 2 August 2021  |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 AA (Turkey)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I am satisfied that notice of this hearing was sent to the  appellant's
    last known address in the United Kingdom on 18 June 2021.  There is  no
    explanation for his absence (although see below) and I am content  that
    it is in accordance with the over-riding objective to proceed with this
    long-delayed appeal in his absence.

 2. There has been some concern in this case as to  whether  the  appellant
    has left the  United  Kingdom.   A  hearing  before  Judge  Pickup  was
    adjourned with directions for that  reason.   Further  directions  were
    issued by Judge Canavan in an attempt  to  clarify  the  position.   It
    seems that the respondent was previously able to confirm  that  removal
    directions were set earlier this year, at the appellant's request,  but
    there was no evidence that he had actually boarded the plane.

 3. The position has been rendered rather clearer by subsequent events.  Ms
    Isherwood was able to confirm before me that  the  Home  Office  system
    records a visit to the appellant's address in London E3 on 18 May 2021.
     The appellant's mother and brother were there but not  the  appellant.
    They informed the Immigration Officers that the appellant had  returned
    to Turkey and were able to  provide  a  telephone  number  for  him  in
    Turkey.

 4. I am satisfied, in these circumstances, that the appellant has left the
    United Kingdom and that his appeal is to be  treated  as  abandoned  by
    operation of statute: s92(8) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 refers.

 5. Ms Isherwood nevertheless invited me to  consider  and  rule  upon  the
    decision which is under appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It is a decision
    which was made by Judge M A Khan on  3  January  2020,  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of his human rights
    claim.  That decision followed an earlier one that the appellant should
    be deported from the United Kingdom as a result of  his  commission  of
    various criminal offences.

 6. Judge Khan found that the appellant was liable to  deportation  because
    he was a persistent offender who had  amassed  15  convictions  for  18
    offences in the space of four years: [41].  He noted  that  these  were
    mostly acquisitive offences which had been used to fund the appellant's
    drug habit.  The judge noted that the appellant had  lived  in  the  UK
    since the age of 11; that his immediate family lived in  this  country;
    and that he suffered from mental health issues including schizophrenia:
    [45].  He noted that the appellant had no qualifying partner  or  child
    in the  UK:  [50].   Ultimately,  he  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    deportation was a proportionate course of action: [51].

 7. The grounds of appeal are in many respects misconceived.  There  is  an
    argument directed at the correctness of  the  sentence  passed  on  the
    appellant in the Crown Court.  That is obviously a matter to be pursued
    elsewhere.    There is a complaint that the appellant's  removal  would
    be contrary to Article 3 ECHR but there is no suggestion that any  such
    argument was pursued before the FtT.  There is also a  contention  that
    the judge was required to adjourn in order to  obtain  further  medical
    evidence but there is no suggestion that  any  adjournment  application
    was  made.   Other  arguments  are  merely  a  disagreement  with   the
    conclusion as to proportionality reached  by  the  judge.  The  grounds
    conclude with an allegation  that  this  was  not  a  case  'where  the
    respondent should play around with law and policies rather than helping
    the vulnerable person to overcome his difficulties and his illness'.

 8. Unsurprisingly, the judge of the FtT who granted permission  found  the
    grounds unhelpful.  Stronger epithets might have been equally  fitting.
    Nevertheless, in fairness to  the  appellant,  permission  was  granted
    because the judge had referred to a paragraph of the Immigration  Rules
    in its  previous  iteration  and  had  failed  to  consider  the  first
    statutory  exception  to  deportation  in  s117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. There can be no doubt that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider
    whether  that  statutory  exception  to  deportation  applied  to   the
    appellant.  It is wholly unclear how he failed to do so, since  he  set
    out the whole of section 117C at [49] of his  decision.   He  certainly
    considered whether exception 2 (family  life)  applied,  and  concluded
    that it did not.  Ms Isherwood accepted, with her usual frankness, that
    the judge had erred in law in failing to  consider  Exception  1.   She
    submitted, however, that this error was immaterial to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

10. I agree with Ms Isherwood's submission in this respect.  Had the  judge
    considered whether Exception 1 applied  to  this  appellant,  the  only
    rational conclusions he could have reached are as follows.

11. As to whether the appellant has been lawfully resident in  the  UK  for
    most of his life, the position is clear.  He  was  born  in  1986.   He
    entered the UK in 1995 and was granted leave to remain  in  June  1997.
    He received Indefinite Leave to Remain the  following  year,  and  held
    that leave until a deportation order was made against him on 16 October
    2018.  He is therefore 35 years old and has lived lawfully  in  the  UK
    for 21 years.  He satisfies this first part of the statutory exception,
    therefore.

12. The second subsection  requires  the  appellant  to  show  that  he  is
    socially and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    meaning of that provision has been explored in a number of authorities,
    including Binbuga v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 551; [2019] Imm AR 1026 and CI
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027.  In the latter decision, Leggatt
    LJ (with whom Hickinbottom and Ryder LJJ agreed) observed  that  social
    and cultural integration in the  UK  connotes  integration  as  a  law-
    abiding citizen: [60].  Whilst the appellant has spent his entire adult
    life and more in the UK, it is quite clear that he has not spent all of
    that time as a law-abiding individual.  He became addicted to  class  A
    drugs, spent most of his time with other offenders,  and  financed  his
    habit by burglary and theft.  He is evidently not integrated into  this
    country and the FtT could not, had it turned its mind to that question,
    have concluded otherwise.

13. The  third  and  final  question  need  not  in  the  circumstances  be
    considered because the appellant cannot  satisfy  the  second  limb  of
    Exception 1.  He cannot, in any event, establish that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to his re-integration to Turkey.   He  is  a
    man with mental health problems who has not  been  in  his  country  of
    nationality for some years.  The judge's unchallenged findings of fact,
    however, were that he has the support of family members in  Turkey  and
    that he would be able to receive treatment for his mental health issues
    there.  Despite his long absence from his country  of  nationality,  he
    does not begin  to  cross  the  high  threshold  contemplated  by  this
    subsection, as discussed in cases such as Parveen v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 932.

14. It is for those reasons that the appellant  could  not  have  satisfied
    Exception 1 if the FtT had turned its mind to that statutory provision,
    as it should have done.

15. Nor can the appellant show that there are very compelling circumstances
    over and above those described in the exceptions.  He does have  family
    in the UK and deportation would separate him from them for many  years.
    In light of the judge's findings about his circumstances on  return  to
    Turkey, however, and in light of the very strong public interest in the
    deportation of a persistent offender such as this appellant, it is  not
    shown that there was any material legal error in the conclusion reached
    by the FtT in this regard.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of an error of law  which
was material to the outcome of the appeal.  That decision shall  accordingly
stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   I
continue this direction, which has  been  made  at  all  previous  occasions
without objection from either party.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                                 8 July 2021
