
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13700/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16th September 2016              |On 20th October 2016                  |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           mrs NITHYANANDHY KUMAR
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Brien, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 10th April 1985.   On  15th
    October 2012 the Appellant was granted entry clearance as a partner  of
    a Tier 2 applicant.  That leave expired on  21st  November  2015.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on 20th October 2012.

 2. On 27th October 2015 the Appellant made a human rights application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her  relationship
    with her partner Kumar Ranganathan.  That application  was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State on 10th December 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Rose sitting at Birmingham.  In a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 20th February 2016 the Appellant's appeal was allowed on
    human rights grounds.

 4. On 3rd March 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.   Those  grounds  noted  that  the  case  had  been
    determined on the papers  and  that  the  Appellant  had  been  refused
    further leave to remain by the Secretary of State as the spouse/partner
    of a person settled in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant did not have a current English language  qualification.   The
    grounds noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  found  that
    paragraph 34D of Appendix FM potentially applied to  the  Appellant  in
    that the Secretary of State had not exercised discretion as to  whether
    or not to accept the certificate which had been used  as  part  of  her
    entry clearance application.  The judge then decided that the Appellant
    had met Appendix FM of the Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State  contended
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  should  simply  have  remitted  the
    matter to the Secretary of State and  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law for her to consider the exercise of discretion.



 5. Further it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  erred
    in the assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules given that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had found the Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM there was therefore no need for any freestanding Article  8
    assessment to be conducted.

 6. On 2nd August  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nicholson  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Nicholson acknowledged that the only issue
    under Appendix FM was whether the Appellant could  rely  on  the  IELTS
    English language test certificate that she  had  used  successfully  in
    connection with her original  application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse.  He noted that although it was out of date, the Respondent  had
    a  discretion  to  accept  it  under  Appendix  FM-SE  paragraph   32D.
    Permission was granted because the judge  considered  it  was  arguable
    that it was not open to the judge to exercise  the  discretion  in  the
    Respondent's place and accordingly  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    should not have found  that  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.

 7. So far as the second part of the first ground was concerned, whilst  it
    would have been open for the judge to find that the decision was not in
    accordance with the law because of a failure to exercise  a  discretion
    and remit the appeal to the Respondent prior to the introduction of the
    Immigration Act 2014, Judge Nicholson found that that  option  was  not
    available to the judge in this case because the Appellant  only  had  a
    right of appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.   In  practical  terms  he
    considered that it was unlikely to have  made  any  difference  to  the
    decision because if the judge had found the decision did not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and  had  then  gone  on  to  consider  the
    proportionality of the decision under Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules on that basis, it would have been open to the judge to  find  for
    the purposes of 117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control did not count against the  Appellant  to  any  real
    extent in circumstances where the Respondent had failed to  exercise  a
    discretion and any proper application of that discretion would have led
    to the appeal being allowed under the  Immigration  Rules.   Permission
    was consequently granted to appeal on Ground 1.  It was however refused
    on Ground 2 because even if the judge  had  correctly  found  that  the
    Appellant had met the requirements of Appendix FM there would have been
    nothing to prevent the judge from making an  assessment  of  Article  8
    outside of the Rules on the basis of that as well.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr O'Brien.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Ms Ahmad.  I note that this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  However for the continuity  of  reference  to  the
    parties throughout all proceedings Mrs  Kumar  is  within  this  appeal
    referred to as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

 9. Mr O'Brien has produced a skeleton argument in support of opposition to
    the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal.   I  have  given  due   and   full
    consideration to this document which I  also  consider  as  effectively
    being the Appellant's Rule 24 response to the permission to appeal.

Submissions/Discussions

10. As set out above the issue is a very narrow one.  Ms Ahmad  points  out
    that the judge had erred in her assessment and  analysis  at  paragraph
    32D of Appendix FM-SE.  The judge had found  at  paragraph  13  of  her
    decision that the decision  maker  "may"  accept  an  English  language
    certificate which is passed its validity date as  being  valid.   There
    is, therefore, she had found a discretion in  that  regard.   Ms  Ahmad
    submits that that was where the judge erred in that the judge  was  not
    in a position to find that the  Appellant  met  the  Immigration  Rules
    because discretion was not available to the Appellant.  The  discretion
    had to be exercised by the Secretary of State.

11. Mr O'Brien takes me to his skeleton  argument.   He  submits  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was correct to conclude  that  the  Appellant
    was  not  required  to  meet  the  English  language  requirements  and
    consequently the judge was entitled to proceed on the  basis  that  the
    Appellant satisfied the requirements of Appendix  FM.   However  it  is
    important to note the English language requirement paragraph E-LTRP.4.1
    did not apply and that that is what the judge had found at paragraph 11
    of her decision.  He submits that the finding by  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant had had continuous leave as a partner since the  Home  Office
    accepted the test certificate as valid was  in  fact  the  end  of  the
    matter and that it was unnecessary for the judge to go on  to  consider
    the alternative requirements.

12. Thereafter Mr O'Brien goes on to submit, if I am not with him  on  that
    point, then it is necessary to consider whether or not  the  judge  has
    effectively erred on her interpretation at paragraph 32D and that there
    are limited circumstances when an out-of-date test certificate could be
    granted.  For reasons set out below it is not necessary to  recite  the
    submissions in great detail.

13. Ms Ahmad indicated she had no further submissions to  make  by  way  of
    response.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

16. The Appellant entered the UK in 2012 with valid entry  clearance  until
    November 2015 as the spouse of Kumar Ranganathan who works in the UK as
    a radiographer.  The Appellant passed her IELTS test on 24th July  2012
    and the Secretary of  State  contended  that  because  that  test  pass
    preceded the application by more than two years the Appellant failed to
    meet the requirement.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph
    11 that the Appellant was not required to  meet  the  English  language
    requirement.

17. If the Secretary of State fails to overcome the contention  that  there
    was an error of law in that finding then the rest of the  appeal  falls
    away.  Paragraph E-LTRP.4.1 sets out the basis on which  the  Appellant
    is not required to meet the English language requirement.  It states:

         "E-LTRP.4.1.  If the applicant has not met  the  requirement  in  a
                      previous  application  for  leave  as  a  partner  or
                      parent, the applicant must provide specified evidence
                      that they-
                      (a)  are a national of a  majority  English  speaking
                           country listed in paragraph GEN.1.6.;
                      (b)  have passed an English language test in speaking
                           and listening at a minimum of  level  A1  of  the
                           Common  European  Framework  of   Reference   for
                           Languages  with  a  provider  approved   by   the
                           Secretary of State;
                      (c)  have an academic qualification recognised by  UK
                           NARIC to be  equivalent  to  the  standard  of  a
                           Bachelor's or Master's degree or PhD in  the  UK,
                           which was taught in English; or
                      (d)  are exempt from the English language requirement
                           under  paragraph  E-LTRP.4.2.;  unless  paragraph
                           EX.1. applies."

    None of the exemptions in paragraph E-LTRP.4.2 apply  in  this  instant
    case.

18. This issue has been addressed by the judge at paragraphs 10  to  12  of
    her decision.   Those  paragraphs  set  out  the  immigration  history,
    consider paragraph E-LTRP.4.1, note paragraph 32D of Appendix FM-SE but
    conclude on a construction of paragraph E-LTRP.4.1 that  the  Appellant
    was not required to meet the English language requirement.

19. I acknowledge that I am not rehearing this matter but I am  considering
    whether there was a material error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I agree with the submissions made by  Mr  O'Brien
    that the analysis carried out by the judge discloses no material  error
    of law and that the Appellant has met the  requirement  in  a  previous
    application for leave as a partner and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant met the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 32D of Appendix FM-SE  provides  that
    an out-of-date certificate  may  be  accepted  as  valid  provided  the
    applicant has had continuous leave as a partner since  the  certificate
    was first accepted and the certificate has not been impugned for one of
    the reasons set out in paragraph 32C.  I agree with the submission made
    by Mr O'Brien that provided  those  conditions  are  met  on  its  true
    construction that paragraph 32D leaves the decision maker with no  real
    discretion and that the Rules specify the circumstances under which  an
    old certificate will not be accepted and makes clear the purpose  which
    that Rule serves.

20. In such circumstances I agree with the point made by  Mr  O'Brien  that
    having found at paragraph 12 that the certificate was valid it was  not
    necessary for the judge to go on further but the fact remains that  she
    did.  That does not in any way taint her findings.

21. For all the above reasons  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses no material error of law and the appeal of the  Secretary  of
    State is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

22. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

23. No anonymity direction was made and no application is made to vary that
    order.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           20th October 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           20th October 2016


