
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/13076/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2020                    |On 16 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                          KEN ROGERS KAMIDI ENDASE

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr M McHardy, Hatten Wyatt Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing I  reserved
my decisions and reasons, which I now give. The order made is  described  at
the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Kenyan national with date  of  birth  given  as
    20.5.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 7.1.20, dismissing  his
    human rights appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    dated 23.7.19, to refuse his application for Indefinite Leave to Remain
    on the basis of 10 years' long residence pursuant to paragraph 287B  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. The relevant background is that the appellant first came to the UK as a
    student in 2004. However, he returned to Kenya in 2006 and came back to
    the UK more than 6 months later in September 2006. He  made  a  further
    visit to Kenya in 2009. In November 2009 he applied for  further  Leave
    to Remain as a Tier 4 student, which application was invalid  for  non-
    payment of the fee. A letter informing him  that  his  application  had
    been rejected as invalid was sent to the appellant in March 2010 at the
    address he had given for correspondence. However, he claims not to have
    received this letter and to have believed that his application remained
    outstanding until he purported to vary a human  rights  application  in
    September 2016 to one based on long-residence under the  Rules.  It  is
    the refusal of this last application which is the subject matter of the
    appeal.

 3. As part of the considerations in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge
    rejected his claim not to have received the Home Office letter in March
    2010. Noting that the human rights claim related to private life  only,
    the judge went on to conduct the article  8  proportionality  balancing
    exercise, concluding that the refusal decision was  proportionate  and,
    therefore, dismissed the appeal.

 4. The grounds as drafted assert (1) that the  judge  failed  to  consider
    whether  the  appellant's  claimed  sexual  orientation  would  be   an
    "insurmountable obstacle to his return to live in Kenya," (an incorrect
    formulation of the test under the Rules), and (2) that  the  respondent
    failed to provide evidence that the letter of 9.3.10 was given  to  the
    appellant. The inference of this second ground is that the  appellant's
    leave continued from his last entry to the UK on 7.9.06.

 5. In granting permission on 27.5.20 on all grounds,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gumsley considered it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    erred in law in failing to have any regard to the appellant's claim  to
    be of gay sexual orientation when considering the article 8 claim.

 6. In relation to service of the letter rejecting the Tier  4  application
    made in time on 27.11.09, I am satisfied that in point of fact this was
    not a refusal of leave to remain but a letter informing  him  that  his
    application was invalid for non-payment of the fee. It follows that  as
    there had been no valid application, there could be no refusal to grant
    leave. The legal effect is that the appellant's leave simply  continued
    until it expired on 30.11.09, so that thereafter the  appellant  became
    an illegal overstayer with no valid immigration status. It follows that
    his continuous leave was broken on the expiry of his leave in 2009.

 7. In any event, even if I am wrong in  concluding  that  the  March  2010
    letter was  not  a  refusal  of  leave,  Articles  8ZA  &  8ZB  of  the
    Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) (Amendment) Order 2013  provide
    that:

         "Grant, refusal or variation of leave by notice in writing

         8ZA. -   (1)  A notice in writing-

                  (a)  giving  leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

                  (b)  refusing leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

                  (c)  refusing to vary a person's leave to enter or  remain
                  in the United Kingdom; or

                  (d)  varying a person's leave to enter or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, may be given to  the  person  affected  as
                  required by section 4(1) of the Act as follows.

              (2) The notice may be-

                  (a)  given by hand;

                  (b)  sent by fax;

                  (c)  sent by postal service to a postal  address  provided
                  for  correspondence  by  the  person   or   the   person's
                  representative;

                  (d)  sent electronically to an e-mail address provided for
                  correspondence   by   the   person   or    the    person's
                  representative;

                  (e)  sent by document  exchange  to  a  document  exchange
                  number or address; or

                  (f)  sent by courier.

              (3) Where no postal or e-mail address for correspondence  has
              been provided, the notice may be sent-

                  (a)  by postal service to-

                      (i)  the last-known or usual place of abode, place of
                      study or place of business of the person; or

                      (ii) the last-known or usual place of business of the
                      person's representative; or

                  (b)  electronically to-

                      (i)  the last-known e-mail  address  for  the  person
                      (including at the person's last-known place of  study
                      or place of business); or

                      (ii) the last-known e-mail address  of  the  person's
                      representative.

              (4)  Where  attempts  to  give  notice  in  accordance   with
                  paragraphs (2) and (3) are not possible  or  have  failed,
                  when the decision-maker records the reasons for  this  and
                  places the notice on file the notice shall  be  deemed  to
                  have been given.

              (5) Where a notice is deemed to have been given in accordance
                  with paragraph (4) and then  subsequently  the  person  is
                  located, the person shall as soon  as  is  practicable  be
                  given a copy of the notice and details of when and how  it
                  was given.

              (6) A notice given under this article may, in the case  of  a
                  person who is under 18 years of age and does  not  have  a
                  representative,  be  given  to  the  parent,  guardian  or
                  another adult who for the time being takes  responsibility
                  for the child.

         Presumptions about receipt of notice

         8ZB. -   (1)  Where a notice is sent  in  accordance  with  article
              8ZA, it shall be deemed to have  been  given  to  the  person
              affected, unless the contrary is proved-

                  (a)  where the notice is sent by postal service-

                      (i)  on the second day after it was  sent  by  postal
                      service in which delivery or receipt is  recorded  if
                      sent to a place within the United Kingdom;

                      (ii) on the 28th day after it was posted if sent to a
                      place outside the United Kingdom;

                  (b)  where the notice is sent  by  fax,  e-mail,  document
                  exchange or courier, on the day it was sent.

              (2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a) the period is to  be
              calculated excluding the day on which the notice is posted.

              (3) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a)(i) the period is  to
              be calculated excluding any day which is not a business day.

              (4) In paragraph (3) "business day" means any day other  than
              a Saturday, a Sunday, Christmas Day, Good  Friday  or  a  day
              which is a bank  holiday  under  the  Banking  and  Financial
              Dealings Act 1971(2) in the part of the  United  Kingdom  to
              which the notice is sent."

 8. It follows that there is a process for deemed  service  by  sending  by
    post and in respect of which the burden is on the  appellant  to  prove
    non-receipt.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted the assertion  that  the  letter
    had been sent by post  to  the  address  given  by  the  appellant  for
    correspondence, and that it had twice been  returned  marked  that  the
    appellant had gone away. Mr McHardy complained that no formal  evidence
    was given but I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to accept what
    the Presenting Officer told him about the sending  of  the  letter,  as
    evidently this had simply been gleaned from the  Home  Office  computer
    system.

10. Whilst the presumption that a 'notice' had been served can be rebutted,
    the judge disbelieved the appellant and was satisfied that he  received
    the letter. Even if he did not receive the letter, and even if it was a
    'notice' of refusal of leave, rather than  merely  a  letter  as  I  am
    satisfied it was, then by sending it by post it was deemed to have been
    given to the appellant in accordance with Article 8ZA, whether  or  not
    it was physically received by him. On the findings of  the  judge,  the
    appellant failed to rebut the presumption by proving he did not receive
    it.

11. In a related issue, Mr McHardy sought to take what  he  claimed  was  a
    Robinson obvious point not raised as a  ground  of  appeal,  suggesting
    that at ]35] of the decision the judge made a speculative finding  that
    it was likely that  the  appellant  or  his  sister  has  returned  the
    correspondence stating that he had gone away. There is no merit in this
    point as it is not material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  The  judge
    provided cogent reasons for disbelieving the appellant's claim that  he
    had not received the  letter  and  how  it  came  to  be  returned  was
    irrelevant and a mere observation rather than  a  material  finding  of
    fact. In  the  circumstances,  I  do  not  give  leave  to  argue  this
    additional point.

12. It follows from the above that the appellant's last valid leave expired
    in 2009, his lawful leave was broken at that point and,  therefore,  he
    cannot demonstrate 10 years' continuous lawful residence in the UK.  In
    addition, the refusal decision of 23.7.19 explains that the application
    was also refused for failure to meet the English  language  requirement
    of 276B(iv). The application also fell to be  refused  on  the  grounds
    that the appellant was in the UK in  breach  of  immigration  laws.  Mr
    McHardy accepted that under the Rules  the  long-residence  application
    failed to meet the requirements.

13.  It  follows  that  the  long  residence  application  made  under  the
    Immigration Rules was doomed from its inception and I  also  find  that
    there is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    relation to the letter sent to him on 9.3.10, whether or not it  was  a
    refusal of leave or merely a rejection of his application as invalid.

The Sexuality Claim

14. The remaining ground of appeal relates to the issue of very significant
    obstacles to integration in Kenya, pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE  and
    relies on the appellant's claimed sexuality as a gay man.

15. Reliance is made on the fact that his claimed  sexual  orientation  was
    raised at D17 of his application form, where the appellant claimed that
    as a homosexual he would likely face inhumane and  degrading  treatment
    on return to Kenya. As made, the claim was clearly a protection  claim,
    the appellant making no reference to integration per se.  I  note  from
    the refusal decision of 23.7.19, that the respondent was aware  of  the
    sexual orientation claim but declined to  consider  it,  stating:  "You
    have stated in your representations that you have a fear of  return  to
    Kenya as a result of your sexual  orientation.  If  you  feel  you  are
    unable to live in any part of Kenya because you fear  persecution,  you
    can apply for leave on  protection  grounds,  also  known  as  claiming
    asylum."  The sexual orientation claim is also raised in the grounds of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, where it is pleaded as  'exceptional
    circumstances'.

16. I also note that at the appeal hearing, the appellant's  representative
    handed in the CPIN for Kenya: 'Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity',
    dated March 2017, which points out that same-sex activity  between  men
    is criminalised in Kenya but that the police do  not  generally  target
    and prosecute LGBT persons.  However,  at  2.3.9  of  the  overview  or
    summary  it  states:  "In  general  the  evidence  available  does  not
    establish that LGBT persons are likely to be subject to persecution  or
    serious harm by the state." Whilst societal attitudes are said  in  the
    CPIN to be generally intolerant of LGBT persons, I  am  satisfied  that
    alone does not give rise to a well-founded fear of  persecution.  I  am
    satisfied that the evidence contained within  the  CPIN  could  not  of
    itself discharge on the balance of probabilities the  burden  to  prove
    that on return to Kenya the appellant would be persecuted for  being  a
    gay man on return. In this regard Mr McHardy  also  accepted  that  the
    burden on the appellant in an article 8 claim  was  more  difficult  to
    discharge, being on the balance of  probabilities  as  opposed  to  the
    lower  standard  of  proof  in  a  protection  claim.  Other  than  the
    appellant's own assertions of a fear of return, the CPIN was  the  only
    evidence adduce in support.

17. I also note from the grounds that the appellant's legal representatives
    wrote to the respondent before the appeal hearing, suggesting that  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing be adjourned to allow the respondent
    sufficient time to consider  the  sexual  orientation  claim,  but  the
    respondent evidently declined to do so without a formal application for
    international protection. The respondent's position at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing appears to have  been  that  this  was  a  'new
    matter' and it was open to him to make an asylum claim on the basis  of
    his sexual orientation but had not done so. There is no indication that
    the respondent consented to this new matter being  considered  when  it
    had not been considered in the refusal decision.

18. If this was a 'new matter', only with the  respondent's  consent  could
    the judge consider it. Mr McHardy denied that it was a new  matter,  on
    the basis that it had been raised by the appellant in  his  application
    and that it had been considered but rejected by the respondent. That is
    not accurate, as pointed out above, the respondent declined to  address
    it in the context of a claim for Indefinite Leave to Remain on  grounds
    of long residence and in the alternative  on  article  8  private  life
    grounds. I am not satisfied that merely  raising  what  was  clearly  a
    protection  claim  in  private  life  claim  is  sufficient.   In   his
    application the appellant did not raise his sexual  orientation  as  an
    issue for integration. In his undated witness  statement  prepared  for
    the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing he stated, "I  am  a  homosexual
    and have a genuine fear of returning to Kenya as a result of my  sexual
    orientation." In his oral evidence,  according  to  the  judge's  typed
    contemporaneous notes of evidence, the appellant  stated  that  he  had
    been homosexual all of his life and confirmed that he did not have  any
    problems because of his sexual orientation when he returned to Kenya in
    2009 and did not have any problems when he was younger because  he  had
    no partners. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  considered
    the CPIN but pointed out that the appellant had not made  a  claim  for
    international protection against return to Kenya on the basis of  being
    a gay man and declined to consider the issue further.

19. However, in his submissions to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Mr McHardy  framed  the  sexuality  issue
    rather differently to how it was originally pleaded in the  appellant's
    application. Mr McHardy now  asserts  that  the  CPIN  was  potentially
    sufficient to demonstrate 'very significant obstacles  to  integration'
    on return to Kenya and more particularly as 'exceptional circumstances'
    in the article 8  proportionality  assessment  outside  the  Rules.  As
    recorded by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at [28] of the  decision,  Mr
    McHardy submitted that "the appellant's  sexuality  was  an  additional
    factor which when taken in the  round  added  to  the  claim  that  his
    removal would breach his right to a private and family life, it went to
    proportionality." At [38] of the decision,  the  judge  considered  the
    submissions and noted that the appellant stated that  although  he  had
    not experienced any hardship in Kenya as  a  result  of  sexuality,  he
    claimed that because homosexuality was illegal  he  could  not  express
    himself openly and that this  "should  be  another  factor  taken  into
    account in considering whether requiring him to return to  his  country
    of  origin  would  be  a  disproportionate  act  on  the  part  of  the
    respondent."  However,  at  [41]  the  judge  concluded  that  as   the
    respondent had not been given the opportunity to consider  whether  the
    appellant's claimed sexuality is credible, it was  not  appropriate  to
    simply accept as a fact that he is gay and  to  rely  on  this  to  add
    weight to his claim that his return is disproportionate.

20. In his skeleton argument, Mr McHardy relies on  SSHD  v  Kamara  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813, where it was held that the concept of 'integration' calls
    for a "broad  evaluative  judgement  to  be  made  as  to  whether  the
    individual will be enough of an insider in terms of  understanding  how
    life in the society in that other country is carried on and a  capacity
    to participate in it, so as to have  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
    accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
    society and to build up within a reasonable time  a  variety  of  human
    relationships to give substance to the individual's private  or  family
    life." Mr McVeety accepted the general principle but pointed  out  that
    Kamara does not indicate that a protection  claim  must  be  considered
    under the heading of integration in a human rights  claim.  Mr  McVeety
    complained that this is yet another attempt by an appellant to  make  a
    protection claim "by the back door."

21. After due and careful consideration, I am not satisfied  that  even  if
    the judge had considered the sexuality claim in the way  contended  for
    by Mr McHardy, any different outcome to the appeal could or would  have
    ensued;  the  evidence  relied  on,  including  the  CPIN,  is   simply
    insufficient, particularly when  it  is  also  to  be  noted  that  the
    appellant returned to Kenya for some 7 months in 2006 and made  another
    visit in  2009,  without  any  difficulties  at  all  relating  to  his
    sexuality, which  rather  undermines  the  claim  of  very  significant
    obstacles  to  integration.  He  has  also  admitted  that  he  had  no
    difficulties in Kenya as a young man before coming to  the  UK.  It  is
    difficult to see on what basis either  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration or exceptional  circumstances  falling  short  of  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution or presenting a real risk of  serious  harm
    could ever a grant of leave outside the Rules could be  made  out.  The
    alternative would be the startling proposition that the mere  claim  of
    being gay was sufficient to make return to Kenya disproportionate.

22. In the circumstances, even if the judge should have considered or taken
    into account the appellant's sexual  orientation  as  relevant  to  the
    human rights claim, either under 276ADE or outside the Rules on article
    8 private life grounds, I am satisfied that  there  was  no  sufficient
    evidential basis upon which the judge, properly  directed,  could  have
    reached a conclusion either that there were very significant  obstacles
    to integration, or, alternatively, such exceptional circumstances as to
    render the refusal decision unjustifiably harsh, on the  basis  of  the
    appellant's claimed sexual orientation and the facts of this  case.  In
    relation to the relevance in the proportionality balancing exercise, as
    I pointed out to Mr McHardy, the appellant has  not  been  required  to
    leave the UK by the respondent's decision but was  clearly  advised  to
    make his protection claim in the proper way, which requires  it  to  be
    made in person. It is difficult to see how, where the appellant is  not
    subject to removal, the respondent's  insistence  that  before  such  a
    claim is considered he make a claim for international protection in the
    proper way, can be disproportionate. There was a route open to  him  to
    resist removal on such a ground, but he declined to  pursue  it.  I  am
    satisfied that the respondent's approach to this issue in  the  context
    of a long residence and human rights claim was entirely proportionate.

23. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.



Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup     Date: 9 October 2020

