
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13021/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2020 via Skype for Business    |On 31 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                          Mr Mohammad Motiur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Martyns Rose
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video). A face to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were  primarily  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, the grounds of appeal, and  the  supporting  documents,
the contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. This appeal concerns a matter of profound  sensitivity,  to  adopt  the
    terminology of Lord Wilson JSC at [1] of Serafin  v  Malkiewicz  [2020]
    UKSC 23, namely an allegation of apparent bias against  a  judge,  with
    the consequential submission that the proceedings before the First-tier
    Tribunal were unfair.

 2. I informed the parties at the hearing that the appeal was  allowed.   I
    now give my detailed reasons.

Factual background and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  in  1979.   He  appeals
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar  promulgated  on
    12 December 2019 dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 18 July 2019 to refuse his human rights claim made  on
    23 April 2019.

 4. The appellant entered this country in November 2004  with  leave  as  a
    student. His leave was renewed consecutively, and on 24 February  2015,
    he was granted indefinite leave  to  remain.  He  applied  for  British
    citizenship shortly thereafter, but that application was refused on  27
    September 2016, on the basis that he had used a  proxy  test  taker  in
    English language tests he purportedly sat in 2011 and 2012.  The  tests
    were administered by a  company  called  Educational  Testing  Services
    ("ETS").

 5. Upon the appellant seeking to re-enter the United Kingdom  following  a
    return trip to Bangladesh on 31  May  2017,  his  indefinite  leave  to
    remain was revoked and he was granted temporary admission. On 23  April
    2019, following judicial  review  proceedings  which  were  settled  by
    consent, the appellant made a human rights claim to  the  Secretary  of
    State. That application was refused on 18 July 2019, and  it  was  that
    refusal decision that was under appeal before the judge below.

 6. The judge noted the legal  framework  for  considering  allegations  of
    fraud during English language tests at [18] to [22], before finding  at
    [32] that the appellant had provided a vague, internally  inconsistent,
    and highly unlikely to be  true  account  of  having  sat  the  English
    language tests himself. The tests  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State
    alleged the appellant had relied on a proxy test  taker  were  said  to
    have taken place in October and November 2011 and August 2012. Also  at
    [32], the judge said:

         "...There is anecdotal evidence that ETS is an American company and
         does not have an office in the UK/London. Therefore, it  is  highly
         improbable  that  [the  appellant]  would  have  found  an  address
         'somewhere in North London'."

     As set out below, this strand of the judge's analysis appears  to  have
    its provenance in a question put by the judge to the  appellant  during
    the hearing.

 7. The judge's global credibility conclusions on the  ETS  issue  were  at
    [51], in which he concluded that the appellant had failed to provide an
    "innocent  explanation"  to  refute  the  allegations  raised  by   the
    respondent.  He  concluded  that  the  respondent's  refusal   of   the
    underlying  human  rights  claim  was  lawful,  by  reference  to   the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 outside the rules. The appellant failed
    under  the  suitability  criteria,  on  account  of  the  deception  he
    practised to secure earlier grants of leave to remain. The  appellant's
    removal would be proportionate for the purposes of Article 8(2) of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of appeal

 8. The primary ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge  demonstrated  the
    appearance of bias against the appellant during the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, through  having  remarked  part  way  through  the
    appellant's cross-examination by the presenting officer, Mr Avery, that
    his evidence was a "pack of rubbish" or a "pile  of  rubbish".   It  is
    alleged that the judge descended into the arena by taking  over  cross-
    examination at various points.  The second ground of appeal is that the
    judge made an error of  fact  through  reaching  a  finding  which  was
    unsupported by any evidence in the case and which was at odds with  the
    documentary materials that were before the judge, concerning his  views
    that ETS would not have an office in London.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  on
    both grounds.

10. The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  accompanied  by  an
    attendance note prepared by counsel who represented  the  appellant  at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  Mr  Afzal  Syed-Ali.   The
    attendance note records the judge interrupting during cross examination
    on several occasions. Although that note is set out in shorthand  form,
    it will be helpful to repeat some of its contents in full: see Annex 1.
     Mr Syed-Ali provided a witness statement  in  which  he  verified  the
    account set out in his attendance note with a statement of truth.

11. Pursuant to the procedure outlined in Sarabjeet Singh  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 492, and approved by  the
    Supreme Court in Serafin v  Malkiewicz  at  [45],  upon  permission  to
    appeal being granted on this basis, the Principal Resident Judge of the
    Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor, arranged for  the  judge
    to be invited to comment upon the allegations made in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The judge's response is set out at Annex 2.

Submissions

12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Gilbert advanced a  series  of  forensic
    submissions highlighting the centrality of the appellant's  credibility
    to the allegations of fraud made against him, noting that the events in
    question took place some eight years  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing. He highlighted that the judge referred in  the  decision,  for
    example at [28], to how he had thought it  necessary  to  rephrase  the
    question for the appellant's  benefit,  but  submitted  that  what  the
    judge, in fact did was to "descend  into  the  arena".  This  was  most
    evident in two distinct respects, he submitted. First, by  the  judge's
    interjection during cross examination that the appellant's evidence was
    a "pack  of  rubbish",  or  a  "pile  of  rubbish".  Secondly,  by  his
    intervention during cross-examination in which he stated that ETS would
    not have had premises in London, being an American company.

13. Mr Gilbert submitted that Mr Syed-Ali's contemporaneous  notes  of  the
    proceedings,  supported  by  his  witness  statement,   supported   the
    appellant's submissions concerning the judge's interventions. The judge
    did not, highlighted Mr Gilbert, deny having intervened in  the  manner
    alleged by the appellant, but merely said that,  had  he  done  so,  he
    would not have described the evidence  as  a  "pack  of  rubbish",  but
    rather as a "pile of rubbish". Whether it was a pile of  rubbish  or  a
    pack of rubbish, submits Mr Gilbert, this  was  terminology  which  the
    judge should not have used during the hearing, still  less  during  the
    appellant's cross-examination, which the  judge  did  not  deny  having
    used.

14. As  well  as  the  content  of  the  judge's  intervention  giving  the
    appearance of bias, its timing was significant, submitted  Mr  Gilbart.
    The judge made those remarks part way  through  the  appellant's  cross
    examination. By doing  so  at  that  stage,  before  having  heard  the
    entirety of the evidence in the round, it indicated that the judge  had
    a closed mind. That is not to say, accepts Mr Gilbert, that a judge  is
    not able to express a preliminary view during  a  hearing;  indeed,  in
    some circumstances, it will be  necessary  for  a  judge  to  give  the
    parties the opportunity to respond to a potentially  operative  concern
    held by the judge which has not been ventilated by either side: see  AM
    (Fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 656 (IAC).  However,  in  relation  to
    the judge's intervention concerning the location of the  ETS  premises,
    the judge was plainly wrong; see page 158 in  the  appellant's  bundle,
    which records a North London address for the  offices  of  ETS  Global.
    That document is  a  test  certificate  issued  following  one  of  the
    impugned tests.

15.  Drawing  the  submissions  together,  Mr   Gilbert   highlighted   the
    requirement for the appellant to provide an innocent explanation, which
    is not high  threshold.   The  judge  resolved  the  case  against  the
    appellant  having  expressed  biased  views  against  him  during   the
    evidence, speculating as to  the  unlikelihood  of  a  global  American
    company with extensive operations in this country having premises here,
    before ultimately  resolving  the  case  against  the  appellant  in  a
    procedurally unfair way.

16. In response, Mr Kovats accepted that it was "not wise" for the judge to
    have described the evidence given by the appellant as either a "pile of
    rubbish" or a "pack of rubbish", but that, on balance  and  by  a  fine
    margin, the  judge  was  not  biased  against  the  appellant.  Had  he
    expressed his views on  softer  language,  there  could  have  been  no
    complaint about that. Mr Syed Ali's note was not taken  on  a  verbatim
    basis and  was  constructed  after  the  event  on  the  basis  of  his
    handwritten notes. The presenting officer who appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal, Mr  Avery,  had  not  recorded  any  concerns  with  the
    fairness of the proceedings in his minute of the hearing. The  exchange
    under consideration lasted for only a few moments. There was nothing in
    the judgment that was irrational; the mere fact that ETS may  have  had
    some offices in North London was not determinative on that  point.  The
    key issue was that the judge found the appellant to  have  changed  his
    account, which was a credibility concern properly open  to  the  judge:
    see [29] of the judge's decision.



Discussion

17. I accept Mr Gilbert's submissions.  It is significant  that  the  judge
    did not deny having used categorised the appellant's live  evidence  as
    some form of rubbish, whether a "pack" or "pile"  of  rubbish.   It  is
    highly significant that the judge went so far in his note at Annex 2 as
    to observe that, had he sought to apply  the  label  "rubbish"  to  the
    appellant's evidence, it would have been a "pile", rather than a "pack"
    of rubbish.  I accept Mr Syed-Ali's written account of what took place.
     It fits with the judge's interventions in cross-examination which,  on
    the basis of counsel's note, appear to go beyond clarificatory  points.



18. The question for my consideration is whether the fair minded  observer,
    in possession of all the  facts,  would  conclude  that  there  was  an
    appearance of bias in the conduct of the judge. The facts that would be
    in the possession  of  the  fair  minded  observer  would  include  the
    contents of the judge's note at Annex 2,  which  includes  the  judge's
    observation that, had he used the alleged offending language, he  would
    have put matters slightly differently. I  find  that  the  fair  minded
    observer would not at all be assured by the explanation  given  by  the
    judge, such that it would not be possible to conclude that there was no
    appearance of bias. The fair minded observer would also note  that  the
    judge intervened in cross-examination, including  through  putting  his
    own questions such as, "are you making it up?".

19. In WA (Role and duties of judge) Egypt [2020] UKUT 127 (IAC),  a  panel
    of the President and the Vice-President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)
    held:

         1.       During the taking of evidence a judge's role is merely
         supervisory.

         2.   If something happens during a hearing that disrupts the normal
         course of taking evidence it is essential that  the  judge  records
         what happened and why; who said what; and what decision  the  judge
         made and on what basis.

20. Within the confines of that supervisory function, there is rarely scope
    for a judge to put  to  an  appellant  the  bald  allegation  that  the
    appellant is lying.  In  those  rare  circumstances  where  it  may  be
    appropriate, it will  not  be  appropriate  to  do  so  against  having
    announced, part way through the appellant's evidence, that the evidence
    is a "pack of rubbish" or a "pile of  rubbish."   The  judge  gave  the
    appearance of both having made up  his  mind  before  hearing  all  the
    evidence, and of assuming the role of cross-examiner.

21. The leading authority on inquiry into the unfairness of a trial remains
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal, delivered by Denning LJ, in  Jones
    v National Coal Board [1957] 2 QB 55.  Both sides complained  that  the
    judge had adopted an overly  interventionist  approach;  he  took  over
    cross-examination of some of the witnesses, to  the  extent  that  both
    sides complained that they had been unable properly to put their cases.
     The Court of Appeal upheld their complaints, noting, at page 65, that:

         "interventions should be as infrequent as possible when the witness
         is under cross-examination... the very  gist  of  cross-examination
         lies in the unbroken sequence of question and answer..."

    The cross-examiner is:

         "at a grave disadvantage  if  he  is  prevented  from  following  a
         preconceived line of inquiry"

22. Interventions during evidence for more than clarificatory purposes risk
    the judge "descending into the area".  That is a phrase which  has  its
    origins in Yuill v Yuill [1945] P. 15 at [20],  where  Lord  Greene  MR
    said that a judge who, "descends into the arena...  is liable  to  have
    his vision clouded by the dust of the conflict."

23. It is clear that this judge so descended into the arena by putting  his
    own cross-examination questions to the appellant, concerning his  views
    on the non-existence of ETS offices in London.  As  Mr  Gilbert  points
    out, there was evidence before the judge  emanating  from  ETS  with  a
    London-based address.   By  descending  into  the  arena,  and  putting
    questions to the appellant in cross-examination  which  the  presenting
    officer  himself  had  not  sought  to  pursue,  the  judge  overlooked
    documentary evidence in the case which clearly undermined the questions
    he sought to ask.

24. The  judge  strayed  beyond  the  appropriate  boundaries  of  judicial
    supervision during evidence.

25. I reject Mr Kovats' arguments that the judge reached a conclusion  that
    was open to him.   First, an operative part of  the  judge's  analysis,
    namely whether ETS would have office premises in London, was based on a
    simple mistake of fact.  Secondly,  a  judgment  that  results  from  a
    hearing in which the judge strayed beyond his  judicial  remit,  giving
    the appearance of being biased through announcing  that  the  appellant
    was telling lies part way through his evidence and taking over parts of
    the cross-examination, is tainted.  As the Supreme  Court  observed  at
    [49] of Serafin, "a judgment which results  from  an  unfair  trial  is
    written in water".  In that  case,  the  Supreme  Court  described  the
    impugned judgment of the High Court  as  "intricately  constructed  and
    beautifully written": see [44].

26. The entirety of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside
    with no findings of fact preserved.  As the appellant has been deprived
    of a fair  hearing,  pursuant  to  paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the  Practice
    Statements of the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, the appropriate  course  is  for  this
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Khawar involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

The matter is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-heard  by  a
different judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                  Date 17 December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
ANNEX 1

Extract from the note taken by Mr Syed-Ali, Counsel  for  the  appellant  at
the First-tier Tribunal

PO stands for presenting officer.  Square brackets in the original.

         1. PO: "did you do anything when you came to know the certificate
         was not genuine"
         Ans: "had to travel and it was not in mind, I was confident I took
         my test"
         2. PO: "what was family situation"
         Ans: "I was fully confident nothing happened to me". PO repeats Q.
         Ans: "I chased up ETS several times.
         FTJ interposed: how did get in contact? Did you send them an email?
         Ans: no
         3. FTJ: "are you making it up". [FTJ commented "twice by me and
         twice by PO you are asked and you're not sure what you did"].
         [Appellant sought clarification and answered], "when, after my
         refusal of nationality". "I contacted... Find out the telephone
         number, nobody picked up the phone, ETS online website gave the
         number".
         4. At this point FTJ interrupted answer and asked "what did you do
         when no one answered".
         Ans: "when? I couldn't... Their office... I find out the address...
         I went there..."
         5. FTJ: "where was it".
         Ans: "North London... But cannot remember... Forgot".
         6 FTJ: you cannot remember? Which underground you used?
         Ans: I went there with a friend, did not use tube, with his car.
         Syed Shamim, I can bring him..."
         7. FTJ commented "we have a pack of rubbish".
         8. [I objected to this observation and asked the court to consider
         the evidence holistically and evidence has not come to an end. FTJ
         asked me "what do you think Mr Ali, of course ETS is an American
         company, there would be no office in UK". I responded "I will
         reserve my positions on US companies having UK offices and I will
         address in submissions and so far as my position is concerned I
         will submit appellant has given credible account" FTJ said "that
         you will do".]
         9. FTJ: did you write to them?
         Ans: no. Try to find their office, did not have email did not try.
         10. PO: 16/11/2011 - Charles Edward College, you remember the day
         of the examination?
         [Appellant gave detailed description of travel to centre and
         attendance; I did not take detailed notes, his evidence was not
         contested/challenged]
         Ans: 14 - 15 students - individuals, next to my seat was empty,
         nobody was there. I did not see any cheating going on... Very
         strict... Two people was God - inside room, I never saw any
         suspicious thing [in my handwritten notes at this point there is a
         reference a 3, this must be a reference to a page in bundle]
         11. [PO asked about to confirm photocopy of a document in bundle]
         12. PO: why did you find the exam [I sought clarification and PO
         rephrased 'why did you take this exam']
         Ans: limited time to get certificate, other tests were not sure.
         13. PO: what scores you got?
         Ans: I fail the test, writing 150, speaking on 70, failed writing
         test, 8/9 years back, can't remember all. After failing writing,
         took lots of mock test, no course attended, online test...
         14. PO: where did you live at that time?
         Ans: at that time I was on Bow Road
         15. How did you travel on test day?
         Ans Hounslow - by train - one change Hammersmith - Piccadilly line
         16. PO: why did you go to Birmingham Aston College?
         Answer: I was not living in Birmingham, a friend found it. I could
         not find a college [to take the test on suitable date] he suggested
         me to go there.
         17. PO: fee you paid to Charles Edward College?
         Ans: �150 cash. They gave me a receipt. Normally I don't keep
         receipts. Sometimes Syed Shamim took test. I did not ask him if he
         had ETS problem. It a personal matter. After my rejection of ILR he
         knows about my problems.
         18. PO: at tested they check who you work?
         Ans: check my passport in reception - in class
         FTJ: where were you in October 2011, in Birmingham?
         Ans: in October 2011 I was not living in Birmingham."


ANNEX 2

HOPO stands for Home Office Presenting Officer

Extract from a letter from Judge Khawar to the Principal Resident Judge,
Upper Tribunal (IAC), 19 August 2020

         "1. I understand the time requested to provide only information as
         to what happened at the hearing and questions of law in relation to
         the appellant's application are a matter for the Upper Tribunal. My
         recollections are as follows:


         2. Shortly after the appellant's evidence, I formed the impression
         that the appellant may not have understood Mr Avery's (HOPO's)
         questions and sought to assist the appellant by rephrasing
         questions, in a simplified manner, in relation to whether or not he
         contacted ETS. This is borne out by my handwritten ROP notes and
         referred to in the decision.


         3. Immediately after my aforesaid attempts to assist and in a
         conversation with Mr Syed-Ali (appellant's counsel) I indicated
         that I was satisfied the appellant had understood the questions
         posed and my provisional view that I thought the appellant was not
         providing a truthful account. I do not recall using the words "pack
         of rubbish". In any event, if I had used such words, it would have
         been "pile of rubbish", had I spoken in the vernacular.


         4. During the conversation with Mr Syed-Ali, which was brief,
         lasting no more than a few seconds, Mr Syed-Ali properly objected
         that the whole of the appellant's account should be heard before
         concluding adverse credibility. I wholeheartedly agreed with him
         and informed him that I had not come to any conclusion about the
         appellant's credibility as a whole and would only do so after I had
         heard all of the appellant's oral evidence and also taken into
         account his witness statements and documents filed, the
         respondent's documentary evidence and indeed and [sic] interview
         which had been conducted at the airport, upon the appellant seeking
         re-entry. Having explained this to Mr Syed-Ali, the appeal
         continued without anything else of any significance (if the above
         is considered significant), occurring during the remainder of the
         hearing, which, from my recollection, lasted approximately one and
         a half hours.


         5. At paragraphs 24 to 51 of the decision I have particularised all
         of my reasons for the adverse credibility findings. I did not know
         Mr Rahman prior to this appeal and did not/do not have, any reason
         to have been biased against him.


         6. I should add I have been assisted in my recollections of the
         hearing by re-reading the decision, the type notes provided by the
         appellant in relation to the part of the oral evidence complained
         of, my handwritten notes (the [Record of Proceedings]) and the
         grounds of appeal. Unfortunately, I am unable to decipher Mr Syed-
         Ali's handwritten notes of the evidence and I have not seen the
         full tribunal file. However, I suspect, neither of these handicaps
         is likely to impact on my recollection of events."


