
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13218/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2018                     |On 13 February 2018                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Tarik Semaoune
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Lam, instructed by David Tang & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Tarik Semaoune,  was  born  on  22  February
    1972.  He claims to have entered the United Kingdom in  November  1995.
    He lived in the United Kingdom illegally using a false  identity.   The
    appellant made a human rights application to the respondent  which  was
    refused by a decision dated 17 May 2016.  The appellant appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Plumptre) which, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 12 October 2017, allowed the appeal on human rights grounds (Article
    8 ECHR).  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by  Judge  Landes  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. She noted the challenge to Judge Plumptre's analysis at [35]:

         "In summary I find  as  submitted  by  Mr  Lam  that  although  the
         appellant does not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)
         that he does meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) and  find  that  he  has
         lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty years."

 3. Refusing permission  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  Judge  Landes  had
    addressed the apparent confusion[2]:

         "It is right the judge has recorded a concession that the appellant
         does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(i).  If there
         had indeed been such a concession then it would  be  arguable  that
         for the reasons given in the grounds that there would have been  an
         arguable error of law.  However I consider that  the  reference  to
         276ADE(1)(i) is a typing error for 276B(i)."

 4. It is clear from the  renewed  grounds  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepts  this  "clarification"  provided  by   Judge   Landes.    Judge
    Plumptre's typographical error at [35] was  not  revisited  during  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The  renewed  grounds  focus  on  the  question  of  suitability.   The
    appellant's application had been refused under 276ADE(1)(i) in addition
    to 276B(i)(ii) and (v).  Paragraph 276ADE(1) provides as follows:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM;

 6. Paragraph 276B provides as follows:

         276B. The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:

         (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in
         the United Kingdom.

         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
         it would be undesirable for him to be  given  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

         (a) age; and

         (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

         (c) personal history, including  character,  conduct,  associations
         and employment record; and

         (d) domestic circumstances; and

         (e) compassionate circumstances; and

         (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

         (iii) the applicant does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general
         grounds for refusal.

         (iv) the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
         English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the  United
         Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

         (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
         laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of these Rules applies,  any
         current period of overstaying will  be  disregarded.  Any  previous
         period of  overstaying  between  periods  of  leave  will  also  be
         disregarded where -

         (a) the previous application was made before 24 November  2016  and
         within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or

         (b) the further application was made on or after 24  November  2016
         and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied.

 7. The Secretary of State had refused the appellant on the basis  that  he
    could not meet the requirements of S-LTR1.6 of Appendix FM:

         S-LTR1.6

         The presence of the applicant in the UK is  not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not fall within paragraphs S-LTR1.3 to 1.5) character, associations
         and other reasons make it undesirable to allow them  to  remain  in
         the UK.

 8. As the grounds point out, the appellant had used  deception  and  false
    identity in order to obtain illegal work in the United Kingdom  over  a
    period of years.  The grounds  assert  that  Judge  Plumptre  (and,  by
    extension, Judge Landes by refusing permission) had  failed  to  engage
    with the adequacy of reasoning regarding the appellant's poor character
    and conduct.  Further, factors such as the appellant's ability to speak
    English and to live without recourse to public funds were "at best  ...
    neutral factors".

 9. Under paragraph 276ADE(1) the appellant  would  qualify  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private life in the UK provided he  did  not
    fall for refusal under paragraph S-LTR1.2-2.3 and S-LTR3.1.  The  other
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)  have  been  met  by  the  appellant.
    First, he has made a valid application for leave to remain on the basis
    of his private life in the UK and secondly he has lived continuously in
    the UK for at least twenty years.  These facts are not disputed by  the
    Secretary  of  State.   Further,  it   is   unnecessary   to   consider
    subparagraph (vi) in the light of the appellant's long residence; there
    need be no consideration as to whether the appellant faces obstacles to
    prevent  his  return  to  Algeria,  significant  or   otherwise.    Not
    surprisingly, the renewed grounds of appeal focused  on  the  mandatory
    requirement in paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) that the appellant should not  be
    excluded for reasons connected with poor conduct or character.

10. The submissions before the Upper Tribunal concentrated on  the  judge's
    application of ZH (Bangladesh) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  8.   At  [32],  Judge
    Plumptre wrote:

         "I accept that the respondent has not  challenged  the  appellant's
         true identity of Tarik Semaoune and acknowledge the reasoning in ZH
         (Bangladesh) paragraphs 24 and  25  referred  to  in  the  skeleton
         argument that whilst  it  would  not  normally  be  in  the  public
         interest to grant indefinite leave to remain to a person unless  he
         has been economically self-sufficient for a significant  period  of
         the time he has spent here and that the Home Office recognise  that
         applicants under the fourteen year Rule, as it then  was,  if  they
         were to be successful must be expected to  have  worked  unlawfully
         for much of their time here."

11. In ZH, the Court  of  Appeal  noted  the  tension  between  the  public
    interest in not granting indefinite leave to remain to a person who has
    not been economically self-sufficient and  the  recognition  that  such
    applicants under the 14 year Rule (which applied at that time) must, in
    many cases, be expected to have worked unlawfully during their time  in
    the United Kingdom.  As a consequence, the fact that an  applicant  has
    worked unlawfully does not necessarily indicate that he  or  she  is  a
    person of bad character.

12. Mr Tufan sought to distinguish facts of the  present  appeal  from  the
    ratio in ZH on the basis that the rule has now changed.  There  is  now
    no 14 year route to leave to  remain;  the  route  is  under  paragraph
    276ADE (requiring 20 years' continuous residence.)

13. I do  not  accept  Mr  Tufan's  submission.   First,  the  twenty  year
    requirement under HC 395 makes no distinction (as  the  previous  Rules
    had done) between lawful and unlawful residence.  Continuous  residence
    of twenty years may, on the face of the Rules, be unlawful  or  lawful.
    What the Court of Appeal had to  say  in  ZH,  therefore,  may,  in  my
    opinion, be equally applicable to the new provisions.  It follows  that
    what Judge Plumptre said at [32] is an accurate statement of the law.

14. There remains the additional circumstance that the appellant, in  order
    to work unlawfully and maintain himself, has adopted a false  identity.
    I find that there is some difficulty in distinguishing  the  use  of  a
    false identity from working illegally.  It follows that,  in  order  to
    work illegally, one would have to use deception; if the  appellant  had
    given his true identity and immigration status  to  his  employers,  he
    would have been unlikely to have found any work.   I  acknowledge  that
    Judge Plumptre has not  addressed  the  appellant's  use  of  deception
    separately from her consideration of his illegal working but I  do  not
    find that her failure to do so amounts to an error of law sufficient to
    vitiate her decision.  In any event, the assessment of the  appellant's
    character is a matter which lay within the discretion of the judge  and
    there was no evidence to show that,  beyond  using  deception  to  work
    illegally, the appellant's conduct had been in any way  egregious.   It
    was,  therefore,  not  perverse  of  Judge  Plumptre  to  find  in  the
    appellant's favour.

15. The remaining grounds  have  no  merit.   Mr  Lam  submitted  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) is of no relevance given that the appellant  is  able  to
    meet subparagraphs  (i)-(iii).  I  agree.   Finally,  the  question  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended) returns the argument  to  the
    appellant's character.  Obviously, the appellant's private life in  the
    United Kingdom has been precarious.  I also accept that his ability  to
    maintain himself is, as the grounds say, a "neutral factor".   However,
    the fact remains that it was open to the judge on the evidence to  find
    that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  The judge
    was, in particular, not bound to share the respondent's  objections  to
    the appellant's character and conduct.

16. In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

17. This appeal is dismissed.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 8 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




