
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13269/2018
                                                               HU/13271/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2019                  |On 24 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                    D A A
                                     Y B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Moran, of Alex Moran Immigration and Asylum


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    We make an anonymity direction under rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) in the  light  of
    the matters raised  in,  and  parties  to,  this  appeal.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellants.  Any disclosure  in  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by the Upper  Tribunal  or  an
    appropriate Court.

    Introduction

 1. The appellants are a mother and her 8 year old  son.  They  are  Syrian
    nationals. They appeal decisions refusing them leave to  enter  as  the
    polygamous wife and child of a Syrian national businessman  in  the  UK
    with leave as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur which expires in January 2020.

 2. The marriage is a factually polygamous Muslim  marriage  contracted  in
    Syria. Syria is a country where the law allows a man to have up to four
    wives. As the parties were domiciled in  Syria  at  the  time  and  the
    marriage was in accordance with their national and personal  civil  and
    religious laws, reflecting the national social mores,  it  is  a  valid
    marriage and recognised as such under UK domestic law by s.11(d) of the
    Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.

 3. The sponsor has two wives, and already has one of his polygamous  wives
    in the UK along with his two children by that wife.

 4. The applications were made in March 2018. The ECO's refusals are  dated
    29 May 2018 and were upheld by the ECM on 10 January 2019.

    The Appeal

 5. The appellants appealed. The appeal against refusal  was  dismissed  at
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. On appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  DUTJ  Chapman  concluded  that  the
    decision contained errors  of  law  not  least  because  the  reasoning
    described the public interest as immigration control in the context  of
    such being directed at the legitimate aim of the economic well-being of
    the country. The rules against polygamy involved the additional  public
    interest question of the  protection  of  morals.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded  this  was  a  mischaracterisation  which  meant   that   the
    assessment of the weight of the public interest was not demonstrated as
    having been properly assessed. Further, there was no reasoned  separate
    consideration of whether the circumstances of  his  child  (the  second
    appellant) and his best  interests  were  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public interest considerations.  The decision was set aside. The appeal
    was retained in the UT for rehearing.

    The Re-hearing of the Appeal

 7. So it was that the matter came  before  us  for  rehearing.  Additional
    evidence has been submitted by the parties and neither  party  objected
    to the production of the additional  evidence.   Bearing  in  mind  the
    appeal involves a minor child, we exercised our discretion to admit  it
    under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    (SI 2008/2698 as amended).  At the end of the hearing, we reserved  our
    decision.

 8. The basis for refusal as maintained before us are two-fold:

      1)  Immigration Rules:

          i) The wife does not meet the spouse requirements under  Appendix
             FM because she does not have the  requisite  English  language
             skills. In respect of the  entry  clearance  requirements  for
             children set out at  appendix  FM  there  are  no  exceptional
             circumstances  operating  to  make  exclusion  of  the   child
             undesirable;

         ii) The Rules at  paras  278-280  require  the  refusal  of  entry
             clearance to a polygamous wife when a sponsor  already  has  a
             wife in the UK (in line with the statutory provisions  of  s.2
             of the Immigration Act 1988 in relating to a  polygamous  wife
             seeking to assert her right of abode). The Rules at  para  296
             similarly require the refusal of entry clearance to the  child
             of a polygamous marriage.

      2) Article 8 ECHR outside of any specific Rules-based  entitlement  as
         encompassed by Appendix FM Gen.3.1:

             whilst the  relationships  constitute  family  life,  and  the
             decision was an interference sufficient to engage  Article  8,
             the decision was  proportionate  to  the  public  interest  in
             refusing leave because:

               i) the Rules were not met because  of  the  lack  of  English
                  language which impacted upon integration and  because  the
                  marital relationship was polygamous and with another  wife
                  already here the appellants' entry  would  facilitate  the
                  forming of polygamous households here;

              ii) it concerned out of country family  life  which  had  been
                  enjoyed at a distance since 2015 when the sponsor  entered
                  as a visitor;

             iii) since April 2017, when the sponsor  successfully  switched
                  status to a Tier 1 entrepreneur and so could leave the  UK
                  with  a legitimate expectation of return,  the sponsor had
                  gone twice each calendar  year   to  Damascus  which   had
                  resulted in his having spent 10 months  of  the  following
                  32 months with the appellants;

              iv) the relationships could continue to be enjoyed outside the
                  UK;

               v) the circumstances of the appellant and son in Damascus did
                  not show that there  were  compelling  circumstances  that
                  outweighed the public interest in refusing them because of
                  the failure to meet the Rules.

 9. At the outset, the legal representatives indicated agreement as to  the
    legal framework applicable. Article 8  ECHR  sets  out  that  where  an
    individual's private and family life is  of  a  character  and  quality
    sufficient to justify respect, the convention protects that family  and
    private life. If the State makes a  decision,  such  as  here  refusing
    leave to enter, which interferes with that private and family life to a
    severe degree article 8 is engaged. The rights are not absolute  rights
    but qualified  and  must  be  balanced  against  any  competing  public
    interest.  Our task is  to  decide  the  disputed  components  of  that
    principle.

    Discussion

10. There was no issue before us that both the appellants have  established
    family  life  with  the  sponsor,  based  on  marriage  and   paternity
    respectively. It is accepted the parties  enjoy  a  family  life  of  a
    character and quality that engages article 8. It is accepted  that  the
    refusal decision interferes with their prospective  enjoyment  of  that
    family life because they want to enjoy it in the  United  Kingdom,  and
    the interference with the right is of a severity sufficient  to  engage
    article 8.1. The decision is in accordance with  the  law  and,  as  we
    shall see, in particular is for the legitimate aims of  the  protection
    of morals, for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others  and
    for the economic well-being of the country (i.e. effective  immigration
    control). Accordingly, the dispute before us  features  what  is  often
    described as the 5th question in the case of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  40,
    that of proportionality.

11. In assessing proportionality, we must give significant  weight  to  the
    public interest as expressed through the  correct  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules (s.117B(1), NIA Act 2002 and R (Agyarko and  another)
    v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11). The relevant Rules are set out in paras 278 and
    296 and the 'partner' provisions at Appendix FM, Section EC-P.

12. We have rehearsed their content in terms of the impact on  the  factual
    matrix in the summary of the respondent's reasons for refusal.  Nothing
    in dispute before us turned on the wording of the Rules and  so  we  do
    not set them out in detail. The representatives were  agreed  that  the
    Rules' test of exceptional circumstances making exclusion  of  a  minor
    undesirable would be adequately encompassed in our  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the refusal,  and  we  were  invited  to  frame  our
    discussion in the context of whether or not the  decisions   result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences without additional, separate  specific
    Rules-based reasoning.

13. To help us with the specific context of polygamous  marriages  we  have
    the benefit of the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in  the  case  of  SG
    (child of polygamous marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 00265 (IAC)  (Blake  J
    and UTJ Dawson). In that case it was held that:

         "(i) Educational advantages and economic betterment, which might be
         enjoyed by a child, if admitted to  the  United  Kingdom,  are  not
         compelling  considerations   to   make   that   child's   exclusion
         undesirable, whether biological mother has cared for the child, and
         will continue to do so, in the country of origin:

         (ii) There is a legitimate aim in excluding from admission  to  the
         United Kingdom a woman who  is  party  to  a  naturally  polygamous
         marriage and  that  aim  justifies  the  indirect  effect  of  that
         exclusion on the child of such a marriage, in that it will be  more
         difficult for the child to satisfy the immigration  rules  relating
         to full responsibility and circumstances making  exclusion  of  the
         child undesirable:

         (iii)    (not relevant here and omitted);

         (iv) Paragraph 296 of  HC  395,  as  presently  applied,  does  not
         prevent the admission  of  such  children  and  would  probably  be
         contrary to Article 8 and 14 ECHR if it did:

         (v)  In these circumstances it is  not  unreasonable  to  expect  a
         sponsor to choose between coming to the United Kingdom with part of
         the family or remaining in Nepal with all its members, where  there
         has been no previous resident and establishing a family life in the
         United Kingdom:

         (vi) The wishes of the child  and  both  parents  are  relevant  to
         ascertaining what her best interests  are  in  the  context  of  an
         application for  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  but  are  not
         decisive of the proportionality balance:

         (vii)    The proportionality  balance  in  such  cases  is  a  fact
         sensitive one rather than determined by the rules."

14. We also have the benefit of the 1992  Strasbourg  case  of  Bibi  v  UK
    (application number 19628/1992) which found  the  restriction  on  more
    than one foreign wife joining a husband already settled in the  UK  was
    intended to prevent the formation of polygamous households in the UK:

          "the  practice  of  polygamy  being  deemed  unacceptable  to  the
         majority of the people who live in the UK. The aim of the provision
         would appear therefore to be  the  preservation  of  the  Christian
         based monogamous culture dominant in that country.  The  Commission
         considers that such an aim is legitimate and falls within the scope
         of the protection of morals  and  rights  and  freedoms  of  others
         within the meaning of article 8 of the Convention." (our emphasis)

15. We must bring forward  our  factual  findings  to  our  proportionality
    assessment. We must take into account the family and  private  life  of
    the appellants, their finances and the wife's abilities in the  English
    language (to see if they  are  adverse  or  neutral),  along  with  the
    factors brought forward in terms of the position in Syria including the
    best interests and welfare of the child in the context  of  his  health
    and the character and quality  of  the  relationships  enjoyed,  before
    conducting an overall  balancing  exercise  weighing  the  individuals'
    circumstances against the public interest.

16. The expectation is that the proportionality of the decision will follow
    the outcome of the proper application of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    only rarely will a family's circumstances otherwise  be  sufficient  to
    warrant leave to remain.

17. We must decide whether there are 'compelling' circumstances  such  that
    the  decisions  will  result  in  "unjustifiably  harsh   consequences"
    sufficient to  outweigh  the  public  interest  (see,  R  (Agyarko  and
    another) v SSHD at [60]). The burden of proof is on the  appellants  to
    establish, on a balance of probabilities, their circumstances  and  the
    consequences of  refusal.  It  is  for  the  respondent  to  show  that
    decisions are proportionate to the public interest considerations (i.e.
    immigration control as it encompasses the economic  well-being  of  the
    country and the protection of public morals and the rights and freedoms
    of others), on the facts as we find them.

18. We note that the Rules  have  been  amended  by  CM4851  to  cover  the
    position of polyandrous husbands.

19. The appellants' case as it was put to us was on two bases.

20.  First,  too  much  weight  had  been  given  to  the  public  interest
    considerations. Although the formation of a  polygamous  household  was
    against the public interest the weight to be attached to that  position
    was not so high as might appear from the outright societal  disapproval
    of polygamy as expressed in the 1988 Act (preventing the exercise of  a
    right of abode by a polygamous wife) and the  Rules.  That  disapproval
    had to be seen in the wider context that Parliament  had  also  decided
    polygamous wives could, for example, still be granted  entry  clearance
    in their own right, as  for  example  a  student  or  business  person.
    Accordingly, polygamy was not so wrong as to mean that any party  to  a
    polygamous marriage was banned from entry to the  UK.  Another  example
    was that our Welfare State  made  provision  to  pay  polygamous  wives
    public funds in qualifying circumstances.

21. We find no merit in this submission. The public  policy  considerations
    of the examples are entirely different. The relevant provisions in  the
    1988 Act and the Immigration Rules have as their aim the prevention  of
    the  establishment  of  polygamous  households  in  the   UK   directly
    facilitated by immigration provisions. The instances  relied  upon  are
    not examples of the State supporting or facilitating the  formation  of
    polygamous households here. They  are  directed  at  entirely  distinct
    matters such as the ability of individuals to study and the  prevention
    of destitution. The application of individually  applicable  provisions
    such as those facilitating studying, whilst incidentally applicable  to
    parties to a polygamous marriage,  are  not  contrary  to  the  express
    public policy of  not  facilitating  the  establishment  of  polygamous
    households in  the  UK.  The  provisions  protecting  individuals  from
    destitution are similarly only incidentally applicable to parties to  a
    polygamous marriage. The submission conflates and confuses the issue of
    the public interest in not facilitating  the  formation  of  polygamous
    households with  the  entirely  separate  position  of  the  State  not
    penalising the individuals who are party to what the  State  recognises
    to be a valid, albeit a polygamous marriage, in matters which  are  not
    directly concerned with facilitating the establishment of a  polygamous
    household.

22. Mr Moran invited us to find that because  in  this  case  there  is  no
    formation  of  a  household,  because  the  polygamous  household   was
    established in Syria several years ago, the relevant public policy  has
    no application or is reduced. That  too  is  misconceived.  The  public
    policy is expressly directed to the question  of  facilitation  of  the
    households in the UK which are polygamous, it is not  about  the  first
    inception of the polygamous household per se.  That  position  reflects
    the Matrimonial Causes Act which sets out the  circumstances  in  which
    foreign polygamous marriages are recognised.

23. Mr Moran invited us to note that in the context of the comments in  the
    briefing documents - such as the Swedish government's view -  contained
    in the respondent's bundle, that polygamous marriages  denigrate  women
    and were adverse to gender equality, was not the position on the  facts
    of this case. The sponsor was a committed  husband  who  supported  his
    family, but even if that were not the case it could be  said  that  the
    appellant would be better off in the UK:  able  to  access  the  gender
    equality safeguards provided here. That submission takes  the  argument
    no further. The policy is  the  policy.  Parliament  has  seen  fit  to
    legislate on it. It is not our role to disapply it.  Nor is it the  aim
    or purpose of our domestic immigration provisions to improve the gender
    equality of women in Syria or elsewhere in the World.

24. This is a  case  in  which  there  is  a  polygamous  foreign  marriage
    recognised under UK law and where the  sponsor  has  already  benefited
    from the entry to the UK of one  of  his  polygamous  wives.  The  full
    weight of the  public  policy,  without  reduction,  applies  to  these
    applications. The weight  to  be  attached  to  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance is to be assessed in accordance with the provisions  set  out
    in ss.117A and 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    and  we  return  to  this  in  the  reasoning  in  our  proportionality
    assessment.

25. The second limb of the appellant's appeal is  that  the  decisions  are
    disproportionate because the weight of the public interest  is  in  any
    event  outweighed  by  the  family  circumstances.  In  summary,    the
    sponsor's son has PTSD as a result of living in a war zone and needs to
    live outside Syria in a safe place, and he also needs to  benefit  from
    daily contact with his father. Although his father does not  assert  an
    asylum or humanitarian protection claim based on a fear of  the  regime
    or indiscriminate violence in the context of internal  armed  conflict,
    his evidence is that he cannot reasonably be expected return  to  Syria
    to live with his family to provide daily support to his son, not  least
    because his son psychologically needs to leave Syria and live in a safe
    place, but also because as a result of the economic  down  turn,  as  a
    wealthy businessman returning from the West he is at risk of kidnap  by
    criminals. On one of his 2018 visits the sponsor was with his wife  and
    child in a car when a window was smashed, and everything was taken from
    the back seat and the sponsor believes he was at  risk  of  kidnap.  He
    reported the incident to the police, but did not submit the  report  in
    these proceedings or earlier mention the  incident  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because, for him, the risk to himself is not  at the heart  of
    the reason he wants his son to come to the UK.  He  wants  his  son  to
    come because he needs to be out of Syria for his safety and mental well-
    being. The sponsor in his oral evidence explained that when  he  is  in
    Syria he minimises the risk of exposure to kidnap by not going out.

26. The issue for us to decide,  put  shortly,  is  whether  the  decisions
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

27. There are medical reports from Dr Mohammad Al Faoori who has a  PhD  in
    Special-Needs-Education and is variously described as a  Consultant  in
    Behavioural,  Educational  and  Emotional  Disorders,  a  lecturer   at
    Damascus University and Consultant  in  Psychological  Behavioural  and
    Academic Problems and Disorders.

28. The first report is dated 25 August 2018. This is an initial assessment
    which confirms that the child was referred because of a lack of fluency
    in his speech, and language  and  speech  delay.  At  that  time  tests
    revealed that the child suffers from behavioural and  memory  problems,
    sleep disorder, medium to severe ADHD and  various  symptoms  resulting
    from trauma. He was found to have medium to severe speech delays,  poor
    cognitive skills which impact negatively  on  his  learning,  and  some
    problems  in  his   development   skills.   Analysing   his   drawings,
    particularly the Draw A Person  Test  revealed  he  suffered  emotional
    problems resulting from trauma. The report states:

         "enquiring about the circumstances surrounding  the  child,  Mother
         has indicated he has suffered  many  traumas.  The  most  important
         traumas he is exposed to are his separation from his  siblings.  He
         constantly asks about them and why they do not visit him and why he
         cannot see them. He extremely misses his father.  This  child  does
         not understand the reason that forced them to be separated."

29. The report continues:

          "The results of  Azayat  Autism  Battery  indicate  poor  academic
         ability. Mother states the child has  become  afraid  of  going  to
         school because of the bombing. In the past when he was coming  back
         home from school a missile landed right near him. He ran  away  but
         fell, and his arm was broken as a result."

30. We pause to note that photographs of  the  second  appellant  receiving
    treatment for a broken arm in May 2018 are in the bundle.

31. Under the heading conclusion and diagnosis Dr Mohammad Al Faoori states
    that the child appellant has PTSD resulting in speech  delay  and  poor
    development skills which have impacted on his cognitive skills:

         "his productive ability is poor compared to  his  mental  age.  His
         behavioural difficulties are a natural outcome of the  disorder  he
         has. "

32. We pause to note that the behavioural problems  are  clarified  in  the
    later report.  He is overly dependent on the mother, poor attention  to
    studies, and as featured in the oral evidence before us bedwetting, and
    on occasion, anxiety attacks requiring additional calming medication.

33. There follows a treatment plan which recommends  medication  under  the
    supervision of a paediatrician and neurologist. In this regard the oral
    evidence  of  the  sponsor  is  that  this  includes   medication   for
    bedwetting, ADHD, with additional  medication  from  time  to  time  as
    required. Dr Al Faoori also recommends intensive speech therapy as well
    as  cognitive   and   behavioural   therapy,   academic   therapy   and
    generalisation exercises, with bimonthly IQ tests and an annual EEG.

34. At the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  in  November
    2018 the sponsor's evidence was  that  the  child  appellant  had  lost
    weight and  was  taking  vitamins  but  was  in  receipt  of  no  other
    treatment.

35. There is a second report from Dr Mohammed Al Faoori dated February 2019
    in the additional evidence submitted before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    doctor says that the child appellant does not  seem  to  be  benefiting
    from the therapy as his problems are still the same  in  severity  with
    the following symptoms: insomnia, difficulty in falling  asleep,  hyper
    arousal. He is easily scared or startled, has difficulty concentrating,
    absent mindedness,  poor  memory,  irritability  and  anger  outbursts,
    involuntary urination (Enuresis) and social withdrawal. The doctor says
    the following:

         "I enquired about the family situation and I have  found  out  that
         the child's father and siblings are away. As a result  of  this  he
         has developed a severe attachment to his mother.  He  is  extremely
         afraid he might lose her. The emotional gap is demonstrated by  the
         Draw A Person Test. The child's drawings  are  random.  The  symbol
         father and siblings are missing. The  sun  symbolises  the  father.
         Trees symbolise siblings. Based on the above,  the  child  suffered
         emotional insecurity which results from being away from his  family
         members. There is an absence of a very  important  therapeutic  and
         supportive factor which helps him to feel  secure  and  safe.  This
         impacts adversely on any treatment he receives."

36. Dr Al Faoori concludes that the child appellant needs constant  therapy
    dealing with  the  developmental  and  psychological  issues  alongside
    support from his family members to reduce the problems he suffers  from
    and bridge the emotional gap he suffers from  as  a  result  of  family
    deprivation. Prescriptions in the bundle show that he is in receipt  of
    10 mg of Ritalin twice a day and 2 mg of risperidone nightly.

37. Mr Howells invited us to question the evidence  that  the  son  suffers
    from PTSD because the evidence lacks consistency and is limited in  its
    quality. The oral evidence  of  the  sponsor  that  his  son  has  been
    diagnosed and in treatment for PTSD since 2017 was not borne out in the
    medical evidence dated 25 August 2018, in  which   Dr  Al  Faoori  only
    refers to the child entering treatment in June 2018 which is after  the
    application in March and the refusal in June. The sponsor explained  in
    cross examination that this was because he  had  changed  doctors.  The
    sponsor had concluded that the previous doctor was  not  achieving  any
    success as his son was still not sleeping well and  continued  to  bed-
    wet, and so decided to change practitioners.  Asked why Dr  Al  Faoori,
    who provided the report, seemed to have no knowledge  of  the  previous
    treatment as he made no reference to that earlier period of  treatment,
    the sponsor said that he had told him that his son had previously  seen
    a doctor. Asked if the previous medical records had been  requested  by
    Dr Al Faoori, the sponsor said that they had not  been,  and  this  was
    unsurprising because he had wanted Dr Al Faoori  to start afresh and so
    he had not given specific details to Dr Al Faoori   about  the  earlier
    period of treatment including who had treated his  son  and  for  what.
    Mr Howells also queried why, and asked us to take note, that the report
    failed to set out, contrary to usual practice  in  medical  reports  to
    which the Tribunal gives weight, the relevant medical qualifications of
    Dr Al Faoori to make the diagnosis of PTSD. The sponsor's evidence  was
    that Dr Al Faoori was  eminently  qualified  because  he  had  recently
    returned to Syria from abroad  where  he  had  had  work  with  the  UN
    concerning the treatment of children affected by war zones.

38. Despite the limitations of the evidence identified by Mr Howells we are
    satisfied that the child has seen a specialist and has a  diagnosis  of
    PTSD. Dr Al Faoori explains that the prescriptions are supervised by  a
    paediatrician and so whilst it may be that Dr Al Faoori's expertise  is
    based on a doctorate and his expertise in special educational needs  we
    are  satisfied  that  he  is  working  in  tandem  with  other  medical
    professionals  and  there  is  a  medical  evidential   basis  for  the
    diagnosis.

39. Even allowing for  the  absence  of  evidence  as  to  the  history  of
    treatment, we can see no reason to doubt the evidence of Dr  Al  Faoori
    and we are satisfied that it meets the burden  of  showing  on  balance
    that the child is suffering from PTSD. As a matter of common sense,  we
    see no reason to disagree with the evidence of the  Dr  Al  Faoori.  We
    reach our findings in the context of the  country  information.  For  a
    child to suffer trauma as  a  result  of  living  in  Damascus  is  not
    inherently implausible. There is nothing inherently implausible in  the
    child having been close to  a  missile  attack  and  running  away  and
    breaking his arm. Dr Al Faoori's evidence is that the  child  appellant
    suffers PTSD, is missing his father, is missing his half siblings,  and
    is overly reliant on his mother.

40. The area where the appellant lives is described as  upmarket,  in  oral
    evidence the sponsor described 60% of the people  who  live  there  are
    wealthy. Mr Howells made the point that it was an area of Damascus that
    had been less impacted by the conflict than other  areas  of  Damascus.
    The sponsor acknowledged as much in  his  oral  evidence.  The  country
    information shows, as the sponsor acknowledged  in  his  oral  evidence
    before us when he said that fighting is very reduced, that there is not
    currently a significant generalised risk to  the  inhabitants  of  this
    area, or any  other  in  Damascus,  from  armed  conflict,  nonetheless
    incidents do occur. The sponsor pointed out that  Israelis  had  bombed
    his area in Damascus recently, targeting a Hamas leader's residence  in
    the building behind his own. Indeed, the country evidence shows that an
    Islamic Jihad Politburo  member  had  a  Damascus  home  in  the  Mezze
    district of Damascus, and that the  Israelis  carried  out  a  targeted
    bombing of his residence on 13 November 2019. The sponsor  also  points
    out that the area has a military airport in the vicinity and that  this
    makes the area a potential target. The real  thrust  of  the  sponsor's
    evidence was that this was case where the subjective fears of  his  son
    arose from real past experience and, whilst  the  fighting  along  with
    actual danger was now significantly reduced, it was  not  extinguished,
    and his son needed to be living with him, outside of Syria, to  recover
    and restore his life.

41. We conclude on the evidence before us that the risk of bombing  is  not
    significant and does not carry  significant  weight  in  our  balancing
    exercise.

42. So far as the risk of kidnapping to the sponsor is concerned,  we  note
    the evidence that has been put before us in respect of the practice  of
    kidnapping. The sponsor is not a foreign national  as  several  victims
    have been however the evidence is that he is very wealthy, and he comes
    from a very wealthy family and  so  his  subjective  concerns  are  not
    entirely  unreasonable.   It  is  not  suggested  that  the  appellants
    themselves are at risk and that is borne out by their proven ability to
    continue to live in Mezze going about their  daily  business  including
    taking the son to his bus to go to school and  attending  appointments.
    The sponsor himself has spent a considerable  period  of  time  in  the
    country and managed to avoid that risk

43.  We concluded that any risk of kidnapping does not weigh heavily in our
    balancing exercise.

44. That the child appellant would  be  best  off  outside  of  Syria,  and
    benefit from the daily face to face support of his father  as  well  as
    contact with his siblings, is as a matter of common sense in  his  best
    interests, and as reflected in the evidence of Dr Al Faoori.

45. The son does have his mother living with him. The appellants are  amply
    financially  provided  for  and  comfortably  accommodated.  The  child
    appellant is going to school and  receives  supplemental  academic  and
    behavioural assistance. He is  receiving  medical  treatment  including
    pharmacological treatment, cognitive and behavioural therapy,  as  well
    as additional academic assistance. He  also  has  the  benefit  of  the
    presence in the country of extended family members through his mother's
    bloodline, including his maternal grandmother. As the history of visits
    show he enjoys regular periods where his father is able to be  present.
    The son is described as being unable to understand why he is not in the
    same place as his  siblings.  That  is  understandable.  The  sponsor's
    evidence is however that he did not live with his  siblings,  and  that
    they lived in a different district in Damascus before they came to  the
    UK.   He can maintain contact with his siblings.

46. The factors relevant to the circumstances of the child appellant do not
    all point one way.  However  it  is  his  circumstances  and  his  best
    interests which are at the heart of (and the only)  substantive  factor
    that counts positively in our  balancing  exercise  and  we  take  that
    matter forward to balance against the public interest.

47. These appeals raise  immigration  control  considerations  because  the
    appellants fail to meet the Rules on two counts.  However,  Mr  Howells
    did not place significant emphasis on the English  language  point.  We
    deal with it briefly in light of the arguments presented  and  findings
    we have made. Mr Howells did  not  suggest  that  in  the  hypothetical
    position that it was the only reason in the context of this  polygamous
    marriage, where no other wife had been admitted and on the facts as  we
    have found them, it would be sufficient  to  justify  the  refusals  as
    proportionate. Although it is adverse in our consideration, we  do  not
    give it much weight.

48. We find, standing back and looking at the evidence in the  round,  that
    the evidence falls far short of establishing that as a  result  of  the
    refusal decisions the interference with  family  and  private  life  is
    unjustifiably harsh vis � vis the public interest considerations and we
    conclude that the public interest in refusing entry  clearance  is  not
    outweighed.

49. It is of course open  to  the  sponsor  to  ameliorate  the  impact  of
    separation from his child by either returning to live in  Syria  or  by
    continuing his visits. The evidence is that the father has spent almost
    a third of the last three years in Syria.  The information recorded  in
    the report as being provided to Dr Al Faoori  is  that  he  is  absent,
    which does not reflect that evidence. Indeed, when it was put in  those
    stark terms Mr Moran was taken by surprise and queried the source,  but
    accepted when Mr Howells took  him  through  the  detail,  meticulously
    setting out and counting up the periods  of  time  spent  in  Syria  as
    described in the witness statements and shown in the passports, it  was
    self -evident that Mr Howells was correct.

50. The sponsor told us that he appreciated  that  the  law  prevented  him
    bringing more than one wife to the United Kingdom, but he simply  could
    not understand why because, as UK law  recognises,  his  marriages  are
    valid. He told us that it was always his intention when he came to  the
    United Kingdom using his pre-existing visit visa that he  would  settle
    here, and that he would bring both wives and all their children to join
    him here. As our  law  shows  by  respectfully  treating  both  of  his
    marriages as valid because they have been conducted by parties who  are
    domiciled  in  countries  where  polygamy  is  lawful  and   culturally
    acceptable,  his  position  is  understandable  from   the   subjective
    viewpoint of the parties to a polygamous marriage. However, by choosing
    to reside in this country he makes himself subject to the laws of  this
    country, including those which reflect the Christian  social  mores  of
    this country.

    Decision

51. The appellants' appeals are dismissed.




Signed                              Date 12 December 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
