
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13033/2016
                                                               HU/13041/2016
                                                               HU/13043/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2018                          |On 29th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         binod [t] (first Appellant)
                         neer [m] (second Appellant)
                      [e t] (A MINOR) (third Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms L Turnbull, Counsel, Asher & Tomar Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nepal.  They were born  respectively  on
    3rd July 1982, 4th January 1987 and 23rd August 2014.   The  first  and
    second Appellants are husband and wife.  The  third  Appellant  is  the
    child of the first and second Appellants.

 2. This matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Spicer sitting
    at Taylor House on 27th November 2017.  Following the  refusal  of  the
    judge's decision an appeal was made to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  that
    appeal led to a grant of permission by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald who noted that the grounds  of  application  raised  an
    issue of what was a new matter under Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act  and
    also whether the judge was required to direct the question  of  consent
    to the Respondent.  That appeal came before me sitting at  Field  House
    on 22nd June 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 27th  July
    2018 I found that there was no error of law in the approach adopted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to the decision under Article 8 and  that
    that decision would stand.  However, I did conclude that the judge  had
    failed  to  give  due  and  proper  consideration  of  the  claim   for
    humanitarian protection and therefore, so  far  as  that  decision  was
    concerned, the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was set  aside.
    As a result, I gave directions  hereinafter  inviting  the  parties  to
    agree the  process  upon  which  any  forthcoming  appeal  relating  to
    humanitarian protection should be based, bearing in mind  that  it  had
    not been an issue that had been dealt with by the judge and bearing  in
    mind that the matter would be retained by myself in the Upper  Tribunal
    as I had found an error of law on only part of the decision.

 3. Written submissions were made by the  Secretary  of  State  by  way  of
    letter dated 20th September 2018 and following that, on 12th  September
    2018, in a decision and reasons latterly promulgated on 25th  December,
    I ordered:

      1) that there be leave to admit the new matter of the  effect  of  the
         earthquake of 25th May 2015 as creating a potential claim  pursuant
         to Article 3.

      2) that the appeal would stand retained in the Upper Tribunal reserved
         to myself on the first available date 42 days hence; and

      3) that there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         such objective/subjective evidence on which they seek  to  rely  at
         least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 4. It is on that basis that the appeal is returned before me.  I  attended
    today expecting a full bundle of evidence and  the  attendance  of  the
    Appellants.  It  is  appropriate  to  set  out  the  recent  historical
    developments in this matter.  On  31st  October  2018  the  Appellants'
    instructed solicitors Asher & Tomar wrote to the Tribunal:

         "We understand from our client  that  he  has  been  attempting  to
         obtain further evidence to support his appeal however he is  unable
         to receive the documents before the hearing.  In  the  interest  of
         fairness we respectfully request court for an adjournment."

    Attached to that letter was an email from the  Appellant  referring  to
    his contact in Nepal.

 5. The request for an adjournment was placed before Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Smith.  Judge Smith responded as follows:

         "Your application to adjourn the hearing on 6th  November  2018  is
         refused.  It is, and has been, since the challenge  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal's decision your clients' position that the  situation
         in Nepal following the earthquake in 2015 is a matter  relevant  to
         their appeal and that this should have  been  taken  into  account.
         Even if it were reasonable to await the  Respondent's  confirmation
         that he consented to this being dealt with as a  new  matter,  that
         confirmation was forthcoming as long as 20 August 2018 and  at  the
         very latest, when the further directions  were  promulgated  on  25
         September 2018.  The Appellants have consequently been  aware  that
         this is an issue - indeed the issue - on which their appeals  turn.
         In those circumstances and in the absence of  any  explanation  why
         evidence on that issue was not sought until nearly one month  after
         the directions were issued and two months  after  the  Respondent's
         confirmation, I am not prepared to agree to the adjournment of  the
         hearing  in  order  for  the  Appellants  to  obtain  that  further
         evidence."

 6. I am totally satisfied that that was a perfectly proper order for Judge
    Smith to make.  Confirmation of that order was sent by first class post
    to the Appellants on 2nd November 2018 and to their solicitors.

 7. It is on that basis that the  appeal  comes  back  before  me  for  the
    rehearing today.  I am advised that the Appellants do not  appear.   No
    explanation is provided.  I am satisfied they have been validly served.
     The Appellants appear by their  instructed  Counsel  Ms  Turnbull.   I
    think it is fair to say that Ms Turnbull is extremely embarrassed about
    the scenario that has developed and the lack of evidence that has  been
    provided along with the failure of her clients to  attend  or  for  her
    instructed solicitors to provide any explanation.  I emphasise that  no
    criticism whatsoever can be made  of  Ms  Turnbull.   Regrettably  this
    course of events does not preclude such criticism  being  made  firstly
    against  the  Appellants'  solicitors  and  secondly   the   Appellants
    themselves.   The  Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Ms Brocklesby-Weller.

Documents

 8. Ms Turnbull advises me that there is a supplemental bundle which I need
    to consider alongside that of the original  bundle.   That  bundle  was
    sent on 5th November and  I  have  seen  and  note  its  contents.   It
    consists of an email exchange made between  the  Appellant  and  family
    members in Nepal, a photograph of what is purported to be  the  remains
    of the Appellants' residence indicating that the Appellants'  house  is
    derelict and needs rebuilding  and  a  copy  of  the  letter  from  the
    Tribunal setting  out  Judge  Smith's  decision.   In  addition,  I  am
    referred by Ms Brocklesby-Weller to the  update  provided  by  the  Red
    Cross on the Nepal  earthquake.   I  acknowledge  this  is  an  updated
    document stemming from 24th May 2018.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. Ms Turnbull goes through the detailed background of this case including
    the Appellants' immigration history.   I  acknowledge  that  the  third
    Appellant is only age 4.  She submits that the  Appellants'  claim  for
    humanitarian  protection  stems  from  the  earthquake  and  that   the
    Appellants rely on documents set out in their  previous  appeal  bundle
    namely the first Appellant's  main  witness  statement  and  supportive
    letters.  In addition, I am referred to objective evidence to be  found
    at pages 11 to 27 of the original bundle, most of which she contends is
    purely factual and not in dispute.  In addition, she seeks to  rely  on
    the additional documents set out in the second bundle pointing out that
    the Appellant's case is that his house has been destroyed and  that  he
    has nothing to return  to  and  that  his  own  family  are  unable  to
    accommodate him, his wife and their daughter.

10. Ms Brocklesby-Weller starts by referring me to  the  updated  objective
    evidence relating to the  emergency  appeal  operation  update  of  the
    International Federation of the Red Cross dated 24th May 2018 and takes
    me to the summary therein and the cumulative data of achievements as at
    30th April 2018.  She submits that the Appellant had  not  made  out  a
    case in order to sustain a  claim  for  humanitarian  protection.   She
    notes that there has been  provided  historic  objective  evidence  but
    before me today there is a complete  lack  of  evidence  regarding  the
    country situation and that many families have had support provided  for
    them  in  Nepal  and  that  substantial  cash  grants  have  been  made
    available.  She submits that the  Appellants'  case  effectively  stems
    from the contention that  there  is  not  sufficient  room  for  family
    members to accommodate them if they return to  Nepal  and  she  submits
    that that does not mean that the threshold of  humanitarian  protection
    is reached.  She reminds me that the first Appellant  came  here  as  a
    student and that he must have had some funds in those days in order  to
    meet the Immigration Rules and  she  submits  that  this  therefore  is
    indicative that it is highly unlikely that the  first  Appellant  would
    have no monies available to him on return and that in any event, having
    been here in this country, and come in  as  a  student  he  would  have
    skillsets that he would enable him to work.  She reminds  me  that  the
    Article 8 claim based very largely on the claims on behalf of the third
    Appellant have been dismissed.  It is her submission that  there  is  a
    complete lack of evidence that the Appellant would come to any harm and
    that there is no evidence produced to me showing that schools would not
    be available for the third Appellant.  She reminds me that both parents
    are well-educated and further that it is has never been submitted  that
    there  any  medical  conditions  that  would  prevents  the  Appellants
    returning to Nepal.  It is her strong  submission  that  the  threshold
    necessary to succeed on  a  claim  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    Article 3 is not reached.

Findings

11. The Appellants have not helped themselves in this matter.  I gave  very
    clear directions as to how this appeal would be dealt with, having  let
    in this late appeal to raise a new issue.  It is clear from emails that
    the Appellants' solicitors appear to have left it to the Appellants  to
    obtain evidence.  That evidence has not been forthcoming.  All that  is
    produced is a picture of the Appellants' former  house  showing  damage
    from the earthquake.  I have no reason to  believe  that  that  is  not
    their house  but  on  the  other  hand  there  is  no  constructive  or
    supportive evidence  produced  upon  which  they  seek  to  rely.   The
    Appellants, having failed to produce evidence other than the very small
    bundle which is handed up by Ms Turnbull then  inexplicably  failed  to
    attend to give evidence.   I  would  have  expected  witness  statement
    evidence and a considerable amount of documentary evidence setting  out
    the specific hardship that the Appellants feel that they  would  suffer
    on return.

12. I remind myself that the threshold to be reached in a  appeal  of  this
    nature is a high one and I take into account the submissions that  have
    been made by both legal representatives.  It seems to me that there  is
    no possibility whatsoever that the relevant threshold can be  met.   If
    it were to be met, it would be necessary for  the  Appellants  to  have
    adduced evidence to show that it has been reached.  They have failed to
    do so.  The only evidence that is before me and which  I  accept  is  a
    picture of a damaged house and an email indicating  that  other  family
    members would find it a case of overcrowding if they went to live  with
    them.  Such arguments cannot possibly begin to reach the threshold that
    would enable a claim of this nature  to  succeed.   From  the  lack  of
    evidence, and indeed in the  lack  of  preparation  of  such  evidence,
    backed by the failure of the Appellants to attend  to  give  their  own
    testimony, it is clear that the appeal must fail as  the  threshold  in
    order to succeed on such a claim cannot possibly be shown to have  been
    reached.   The  appeal  is  consequently  dismissed.   When  looked  at
    alongside  the  previous  finding  upholding  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision under Article 8  the  end  product  is  that  all  the
    Appellants' claims have now been dismissed.

Notice of Decision

13. The Appellants' appeal is dismissed.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           16 November 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           16 November 2018
