
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/13337/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 19 June 2017                        |       On 20 June 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Timson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant's minor children.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan.   He  entered  the  UK  on  12
    February 2011 as a student.  His leave was extended as a student on two
    occasions, the latter period ending on 28 June 2014.   His  application
    dated 2 May 2014 to remain as a spouse  was  refused  on  13  September
    2014.  The appellant appears to have become an overstayer at this point
    but shortly thereafter made a further  application  to  remain  on  the
    basis of his family life.  That application was refused in  a  decision
    dated 1 December 2015, and is the subject of this appeal.


 3. The appellant married a British citizen when he had leave to remain  as
    a student in an Islamic ceremony on 17 January 2014.  This marriage was
    registered on 17 March 2014.  They have three British citizen  children
    born in 2014, 2016 and 2017 respectively.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 4. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the  SSHD  refused  the  application
    under the Immigration Rules on the basis that the appellant relied upon
    a false English test, thereby breaching the 'suitability  requirements'
    and his relationship with his wife  was  not  genuine  and  subsisting,
    thereby  breaching  the  'eligibility  requirements'.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not accept either of these and found  in  the  appellant's
    favour that his relationship is genuine and the SSHD had not  displaced
    the burden of establishing deception.


 5. The First-tier Tribunal accepted at [36] that


           "it would  not  be  appropriate  or  reasonable  to  expect  the
           children, or indeed Mrs B to leave the UK...the  best  interests
           of these young children are to be raised in a family  home  with
           their father present..."


 6. The First-tier Tribunal  went  on  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds, having found  there  was
    no need to carry out an Article 8 assessment.

Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me there was substantial  agreement  between  the
    parties.  Mr  Bates  accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    material error  of  law  when  considering  the  SSHD's  policy.   Both
    representatives invited me to remake the decision under Article  8,  in
    light of the First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact.


 8. Mr Bates acknowledged that the SSHD's policy  clearly  applies  in  the
    appellant's favour, and that this is an important consideration for the
    purposes of Article 8.


 9. After hearing very briefly from both representatives, I indicated  that
    the appeal would be allowed on human rights grounds, for reasons I  now
    provide.

Error of law discussion

10. I can give my reasons briefly as Mr Bates conceded there was a material
    error of law such that I should remake the decision.


11. The First-tier Tribunal began its assessment of  the  appeal  by  first
    considering whether the appellant met the Immigration Rules.  It is not
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  finding  that  he  did
    not.  However, both representatives agreed before me  that  the  appeal
    was on human rights grounds only.


12. In any event, the grounds of appeal rely entirely upon  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  failure  to  apply  section  117B(6)  of  the   Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The First-tier Tribunal considered at
    [46] that section 117B(6) considerations do not arise in  the  case  as
    there is no basis for going on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.
     Both representatives agreed that this is a clear  error  of  law:  the
    appeal was on human rights grounds only and the appellant  prima  facie
    met the requirements of section 117B(6) on  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    own findings.


13. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the appellant has a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his British citizen  qualifying  children.
    As set out above, at [36] the First-tier Tribunal  expressly  found  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.


Re-making the decision

14. Section 117B(6) provides as follows:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child; and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom."


15. The First-tier Tribunal clearly accepted that (a) is met, and there has
    been no challenge to this  factual  finding.  It  is  agreed  that  the
    question for me is the reasonableness  of  expecting  the  children  to
    leave the UK in accordance with (b).  I note the First-tier  Tribunal's
    express finding in this regard.  I must however take all  the  relevant
    factors into account when assessing reasonableness  and  not  just  the
    impact upon the children - see MA Pakistan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  705.
    A  relevant  countervailing  factor  is  the  appellant's   immigration
    history.  Mr Bates realistically accepted that even  if  the  appellant
    was an overstayer for a short period,  he  made  concerted  efforts  to
    comply with the Immigration Rules and did so  in  large  measure.   The
    First-tier Tribunal rejected the SSHD's contention that  the  appellant
    had exercised deception.


16. When considering reasonableness, it  is  also  relevant  to  take  into
    account the SSHD's policy.  Paragraph 11.2.3.  of  the  IDI  on  Family
    Migration provides the SSHD's decision makers with  guidance  on  cases
    involving British children. The August 2015 version states  that,  save
    in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not  take  a
    decision in relation to the  parent  or  primary  carer  of  a  British
    Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force  that
    British child to leave the EU, regardless of the  age  of  that  child.
    However, it also states that:


           "where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer".


17. The SSHD's  decision  to  refuse  the  application  would  require  the
    appellant ('a parent') to return  to  a  country  outside  of  the  EU,
    Pakistan.  As such, the SSHD's own policy states that the case must  be
    assessed on the basis that it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    British citizen children to leave the EU with  that  parent.   For  the
    purposes of the policy the question is not  limited,  as  it  would  be
    under EU law (see VM Jamaica v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  255),  to  whether
    the British (and EEA) citizen wife and children would  be  required  to
    leave the UK.  The  policy  poses  an  additional  question:  would  'a
    parent' be required to leave the UK?  That this is so  is  demonstrated
    by the guidance in the policy regarding the granting of leave.  In such
    cases, the policy states it will usually be appropriate to grant leave,
    provided that there is evidence of a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship.  The policy then states:


          "It may be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct
          of the parent or primary carer gives rise  to  considerations  of
          such  weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
          otherwise stay with another parent or alternative carer in the UK
          or in the EU.  The circumstances envisaged  could  cover  amongst
          others:
          Criminality...
          A very poor immigration history, such as  where  the  person  has
          repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules"


18. The ability of the child to stay with  another  parent  or  alternative
    carer, for the purposes of the policy, is only relevant  if  there  are
    considerations of such weight to justify separation.   As  acknowledged
    by Mr Bates, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its application of
    the policy to the facts of this case.  First, there was  a  failure  to
    acknowledge that the policy addresses a requirement on the part of  the
    non-British citizen to leave the UK.   Second,  the  appellant  clearly
    fits into the category of 'a parent' being required to  leave.   Third,
    the requirement to maintain immigration control  of  itself  is  not  a
    consideration of such weight to justify separation, for the purposes of
    the policy.  As conceded by Mr Bates, this appellant does  not  have  a
    very poor immigration history and there is no element  of  criminality.
    He squarely meets the terms of the SSHD's policy.   This  needs  to  be
    factored into the proper approach to section 117B, with the  inevitable
    conclusion  that  notwithstanding  the  need  to   maintain   effective
    immigration controls and having recognised that the appellant does  not
    meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   it   would   be
    unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  He meets the  requirements
    of section 117B(6).


19. Should it be necessary to do so I also find that after considering  all
    the section 117B factors, including the need  for  immigration  control
    and the appellant's failure to meet the  Immigration  Rules,  the  best
    interests of his British citizen children and the length and breadth of
    his family life in the UK taken together with the SSHD's own policy  as
    discussed above, are such that, the  appellant's  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate breach of his right to family life.  Mr Bates did  not
    seek to argue otherwise.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


21. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.




Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 19 June 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
