
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13973/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th January 2017                 |On 26th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS LILIAN YANKEY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. J Rothwell, Counsel, instructed by One
                    Immigration (Leicester)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hopkins promulgated on 5th October 2016.  The
    appellant before me is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    and the respondent to this appeal, is Miss Yankey.  However,  for  ease
    of reference, in the course of this decision I shall adopt the parties'
    status as it was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  shall  in  this
    decision, refer to Miss Yankey as the appellant, and the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.


 2. The underlying decision that was the subject of the appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was  the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  3rd
    December 2015 to refuse the appellant's application for leave to remain
    in the UK.


 3. The appellant is a national of Ghana.  Her immigration history and  the
    background to her application is set out at paragraphs [3]  to  [9]  of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent's reasons  for
    refusing  the  application  made  by  the  appellant  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [10] to [12] of the decision.  At paragraphs [13] to [19] of
    the decision, the Judge sets out the evidence before the  Tribunal  and
    at  paragraphs  [20]  to  [24]  the  Judge  notes  the  relevant  legal
    provisions.  The Judge's assessment of the evidence and his conclusions
    are to be found at paragraphs [26] to [35] of his decision.  The  Judge
    found that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  the
    appellant and sponsor continuing outside the UK, and thus the appellant
    meets the requirements of paragraph  EX.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


The grounds of appeal and the appeal before me


 4. The respondent submits that although  in  reaching  his  decision,  the
    Judge refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Agyarko  &  Ors.
    -v- SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440, and the demanding test to be applied, the
    reasons given by the Judge for  finding  that  the  test  is  met,  are
    inadequate and  suggest  that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  test
    properly.  It is said that the Judge  treated  the  inconveniences  and
    difficulties advanced by the appellant as being determinative,  whereas
    in Agyarko, the Court of Appeal had said that  the  mere  fact  that  a
    person is a British citizen, has lived here all his life and has a  job
    here - and hence might find it difficult and might be reluctant to  re-
    locate  to  continue  their   family   life,   could   not   constitute
    insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
      on 9th November 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider  whether
      the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


 6. Before me, Mr. Mills adopted the respondent's grounds  of  appeal.   He
    submitted that the respondent's challenge to the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is not that there is a lack of reasoning,  but  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to properly acknowledge the  stringent
    test that must be applied before a Tribunal can conclude that there are
    insurmountable obstacles to the family life between the  appellant  and
    her sponsor continuing outside the  UK.    He  submits  that  what  are
    presented as the insurmountable obstacles to the  family  life  of  the
    appellant and her sponsor continuing in Ghana here, are  precisely  the
    types of obstacles that the Court of Appeal found in Agyarko, could not
    constitute insurmountable obstacles.  He submits that on the  facts  as
    found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the  appellant  cannot  satisfy
    the demanding test, and high threshold that applies before an appellant
    can succeed under paragraph EX.1(b).


 7. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Rothwell accepts  that  the  test  is  a
    stringent one, but she submits that  any  assessment  of  whether  that
    stringent test is satisfied, is one that is necessarily fact sensitive.
    She submits that at paragraphs [28] onwards of his decision, the  Judge
    sets out the factual matrix and his findings against which the decision
    that the requirements of paragraph EX.1 are met, is reached.


Discussion


 8. In Agyarko -v- SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440, the Court of Appeal held  that
    although the 'insurmountable obstacles' criterion in Appendix FM of the
    immigration rules involves a stringent test, it was intended  in  case-
    law and the rules, to be  interpreted  in  a  sensible  and  practical,
    rather than a purely literal way [23]. It was used in  the  immigration
    rules to define one of the preconditions set out in  paragraph  EX.1(b)
    that needs to be satisfied, before  an  applicant  could  claim  to  be
    entitled to be granted leave to remain [24].


 9. I accept, as Mr Mills  submits,  that  the  'insurmountable  obstacles'
    criterion provides a stringent test and imposes a high  threshold.   It
    is right that in Agyarko, the Court of Appeal found that the mere  fact
    that a person is a British citizen, has  lived  all  his  life  in  the
    United Kingdom and has a job here - and hence might find  it  difficult
    and might be reluctant to re-locate to continue their family life there
    - could not constitute surmountable obstacles to his doing so.


10. The Judge repeatedly refers in his decision to the stringent test to be
    applied.  The requirements of EX.1(b) are referred to at paragraph [22]
    of the decision. At paragraph [27] the Judge notes that the question is
    whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to  them  continuing  their
    family life together outside the UK within  the  meaning  of  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph [28] of his
    decision, the Judge states there is no doubt that the appellant and the
    sponsor would face considerable hardship if they were  to  do  so.  The
    particular reasons  for  that  conclusion,  and  importantly,  why  the
    sponsor would find it especially difficult to live in Ghana are set out
    at paragraphs [28] and [29] of the decision.  At  paragraph  [31],  the
    Judge, having noted the evidence before him at paragraphs [28]  a  [29]
    in particular, records that the question he had to consider is  whether
    the difficulties in the appellant and  the  Sponsor  continuing  family
    life outside the UK are so great  as  to  amount  to  very  significant
    difficulties which could not be overcome or would entail  very  serious
    hardship for them.  The Judge refers to the Court of Appeal decision in
    Agyarko and notes again that it is a stringent test.  He states:


         "... It is more demanding than a test as to  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable for the couple to continue their family life outside the
         UK (paragraph 21 in Agyarko)."


11. At paragraphs [32] to [33] the Judge refers to other evidence that  was
    before him, and at paragraph [34] the Judge concludes:


         "I have indicated that the test to be  applied  is  more  stringent
         than whether it would be reasonable for the Sponsor to continue his
         family life with the Appellant outside the UK. But,  on  the  other
         hand, the test of insurmountable obstacles is a practical test, not
         a literal one. It could not be said,  in  my  judgement,  that  the
         obstacles  to  their  living  together  in  Ghana   are   literally
         impossible   to   surmount.   But,   looking   at   the   practical
         possibilities, it is not realistic for  the  Sponsor  to  relocate.
         This would mean that, if the Appellant were to be removed to Ghana,
         he would not be able to go and live there with her. I find he would
         face very significant difficulties in continuing  his  family  life
         with the Appellant outside the UK which would entail  very  serious
         hardship."


12. In my judgement, it was properly open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude, on the evidence, that the stringent and  demanding  test  had
    been met. The matters advanced on  behalf  of  the  respondent  in  the
    grounds of appeal amount to nothing more than a disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Judge.  The findings were reached following  a  careful
    consideration of all of the evidence that was before the Judge, from  a
    number of witnesses.


13. It is now well established that what is required in a decision is  that
    the reasons provided must give sufficient detail to  show  the  parties
    and the  appellate  Tribunal,  the  principles  upon  which  the  lower
    tribunal has acted, and the reasons that led it  to  its  decision,  so
    that they are able to understand  why  it  reached  its  decision.  The
    reasons need not be elaborate, and need not deal  with  every  argument
    presented. The Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
    982 held that a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the
    grounds of perversity if it  was  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
    Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.


14. The Judge properly directed himself,  having  considered  the  relevant
    provisions and the submissions made by the parties. The Judge found, on
    the evidence before him, that it is not realistic for  the  sponsor  to
    relocate to Ghana.  Thus, if the appellant were to be removed to Ghana,
    he would not be able to go and live there with her. The Judge found, on
    the evidence, that the sponsor would face very significant difficulties
    in continuing his family life with the appellant outside the UK,  which
    would entail very serious hardship.


15. In my judgement, it was open to the Judge on the  evidence  before  him
    and the findings made, to allow the appeal for  the  reasons  he  gave.
    There is no error of  law  and  it  follows  that  the  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


Notice of Decision


16. The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shall stand.


17. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal made a fee award.  I have dismissed the appeal,  and
the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

