

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/13011/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 6 February 2018                    |          On 13 March 2018           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                     R.V
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bolivia born in 1975.


    Anonymity Order


    This appeal turns on the presence in the UK of  the  appellant's  minor
    children. I am concerned that identifying the appellant could  lead  to
    the identity of the children  being  revealed  in  the  public  domain.
    Having had regard to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules I consider it appropriate to  make  an  order  in  the  following
    terms:
    'Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.'




    Background



 2. The immigration history is that he arrived in the UK in May  2008  with
    entry clearance as a visitor until November 2008.  He  overstayed.   In
    November 2009 he made an asylum claim which was subsequently withdrawn.
     In April 2012 he sought leave to remain which  was  refused  in  April
    2013.


 3. On 7 December 2015 he again sought leave to remain on the basis of  his
    relationship with his  partner  and  his  child  born  in  2012.   That
    application was refused on 6 May 2016.

 4. The reasons for refusal in summary, were  that  he  did  not  meet  the
    eligibility requirement for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules
    on the basis of his relationship with his partner because she is not  a
    British citizen and is not settled in the UK.  Further  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  his  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.


 5. In respect of the child the requirements of paragraph EX1 could not  be
    met because the child is not  a  British  citizen  and  has  not  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years.


 6. The respondent  went  on  to  decide  that  there  would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  his  home
    country.  It was noted that his partner was pregnant with their  second
    child but the respondent considered that there would be family  support
    for them in Bolivia.


 7. In consideration of whether there  were  exceptional  circumstances  in
    respect of the young child who has  disability  including  autism,  the
    respondent considered that  suitable  medical  care  was  available  in
    Bolivia and Peru (his partner's home country).


 8. He appealed.


    First tier hearing


 9. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 16 October  2017  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Devittie dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.


10. His findings are at paragraphs 11-14.  In summary, he found  (at  [11])
    that the appellant does not meet the  requirements  under  the  partner
    route as his spouse 'does not have any lawful residence status' in  the
    UK.


11. Having noted that a second child had been born (in  December  2015)  he
    found that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the continuance of
    family life outside the UK.  Also, he noted that the  older  child  had
    not lived in the UK for more than seven years.


12. In going on to consider  family  life  outside  the  rules,  the  judge
    accepted the gravity of the  older  child's  condition  which  includes
    severe developmental issues and  found  that  his  best  interests  are
    served by his remaining in the UK where medical  and  support  services
    may well be superior to those he would receive in Bolivia.  However, he
    found that there are 'appropriate services' in Bolivia for children who
    suffer from such conditions.


13. Having regard to section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002  he  noted  that  both  the  appellant  and  his  partner  had
    overstayed and had developed a family life in  the  full  knowledge  of
    their precarious status.  He concluded that the best interests  of  the
    child must yield to the  public  interest  and  that  removal  was  not
    disproportionate.


    Error of law hearing


14. He sought permission to appeal which was  granted  by  a  judge  on  13
    December 2017.


15. At the error of law hearing before me the  appellant's  submission  was
    brief.  The judge has made two fundamental errors.  First, the  partner
    has lawful status, namely, indefinite leave to remain.  Further,  their
    two children are registered as British citizens.  That information  was
    before the judge.


16. Mr Nath in response simply left the matter for me.


    Decision on error of law


17.   It is clear that the partner was granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    in May 2016. Such information was in the papers before the  judge.   As
    for the children, both of whom have disabilities,  the  judge  made  no
    reference at all in the decision to the  relevant  evidence  which  was
    also before him (copy of residence permit, certificates of registration
    of the children as British citizens).  That  evidence  was  stamped  as
    received as far back as June  2017.   Indeed,  the  grounds  of  appeal
    enclosed a letter from the Home Office to the appellant telling him his
    children had been registered as British citizens.  In making errors  of
    fact based on ignorance of established and  relevant  facts  the  judge
    materially erred.


18. The decision was set aside to be remade. I was able to proceed to do so
    at the hearing. There was no further evidence or submissions.


    Consideration


19. By virtue of section 117D of  the  2002  Act,  a  British  child  is  a
    'qualifying' child in the context of section 117B(6)(a).  As  indicated
    it is clear that both children are British.  In such cases the Tribunal
    is required to weigh the public  interest  into  its  consideration  of
    whether the children might reasonably be expected to leave the  country
    with the parent who is facing expulsion.


20. At Section 11.2.3 of the Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  'Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b  Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life: 10 Year  Routes'  (August  2015),  under  the
    heading 'Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child  to
    leave the UK?' the following answers are given to case workers:


           'Save in cases involving criminality, the  decision  maker  must
           not take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer
           of a British citizen child where the  effect  of  that  decision
           would be to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless
           of the age of that child.  This reflects the European  Court  of
           Justice judgment in Zambrano.


           Where a decision to  refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer.


           In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
           the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK
           with the child, provided there is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
           genuine and subsisting parental relationship.'


           (emphasis added)


21. It should be noted that the terms  'parent'  and  'primary  carer'  are
    distinguished, and separated by an 'or'.   The  clear  impact  of  that
    policy statement is that where a parent of a  British  child  is  being
    required to leave the EU, the case must always be assessed on the basis
    that it will be unreasonable to expect the  British  citizen  child  to
    leave the EU with that parent.


22. I consider what  the  significance  of  the  guidance  is.   This  case
    involves the family life of the appellant, his partner  and  their  two
    very young children.  There is no dispute  that  the  appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental  relationship.   It  would  plainly  be
    contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  absent  any
    criminality,   disproportionate   to   separate   the   family    unit.
    Realistically, there are therefore only two options: expect mother  and
    children to go to Bolivia with the appellant, or allow him to remain in
    accordance with the principles in section 117B(6).  Applying the  terms
    of the policy, which I take to represent the respondent's case on where
    the balance should be struck, I find that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the children to leave this country.   There  is  accordingly  no
    public interest in the appellant's  removal  and  his  appeal  must  be
    allowed.






Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law.  It is set aside.

The decision is remade as follows:


The appeal is allowed.


There is an order for anonymity.





Signed                                             Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
