
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13184/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2017                                 |On 10 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr CHANDRAPRASAD GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood     Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 14  October  2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Herbert  OBE  which  allowed  the  appeal
    against deportation of Mr Gurung on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to Mr Gurung  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that Mr Gurung has been a  soldier  in
    the British Army for many years.  He came to the UK  in  2001  in  that
    capacity and went on a number of foreign tours with the  army.   On  18
    April 2008 he married another Nepalese national.  On 27 April 2009  the
    appellant's wife came to the UK.  On 19 August 2010 the  appellant  and
    his wife had a son, Ryson.  The appellant's wife and son are  both  now
    British nationals.  On 7 March 2013 the  appellant  was  subject  to  a
    court martial and was convicted of counts of theft and fraud.   He  was
    sentenced to one year's detention at  a  Military  Corrective  Training
    Centre.  He was also reduced in rank and dismissed from army service.

 4. On 27 November 2015 the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant as his behaviour was found not to be conducive to the  public
    good.  The index offences were  within  military  proceedings  and  not
    "criminal" in the usual legal sense, hence   the  respondent  made  the
    decision to  deport  on  conducive  grounds  under  Section  5  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and not under the automatic deportation provisions
    in s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The appellant appealed against the
    decision to deport on Article 8 grounds  and  on  4  October  2016  the
    appeal came before Judge Herbert.

 5. Judge Herbert allowed the appeal under paragraphs 399(a) and 399(b)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  He found that it would be unduly harsh for  the
    appellant's son if the appellant were to be deported.  He found that it
    would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant's  partner,  also  a  British
    citizen, if the appellant were to be deported.

 6. It was conceded at the hearing before me that the decision relating  to
    the partner was erroneous as the judge failed to take into account  the
    fact that little weight could be placed on the  relationship  where  it
    had been formed  whilst  the  appellant  was  here  without  leave  and
    precariously.  At the same time, it was also conceded by the respondent
    that this could not be a material error here where the decision  really
    turned on the circumstances of the appellant's son.    Ground  four  of
    the appeal was not pursued further as a result.

 7. The  first  ground  of  appeal  was  that  in  the  assessment  of  the
    deportation of the appellant being unduly harsh for his son, the  judge
    failed to have a proper regard for the public  interest.   This  ground
    alleges that "the only real mention  of  the  public  interest  in  the
    judge's findings appears at [45]".  This ground  goes  on  to  indicate
    that in the view of the Secretary of  State  the  judge  minimised  the
    severity of the offending by referring three  times  to  the  appellant
    having repaid the money concerned in the index offence.  The  Secretary
    of State also  objected  to  the  judge's  reference  at  [45]  to  the
    appellant's  sentence  being  "limited"  to  twelve  months  which  the
    Secretary of State maintains indicates that the judge did not view  the
    offence as serious.  The respondent also considered that when assessing
    the  public  interest  the  judge  appeared  to  "largely  ignore   the
    sentencing remarks in his findings" and preferred the positive evidence
    of the appellant's former commanding officer.

 8. This ground is wholly unarguable. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out
    the respondent's case at [9] to [26].  In paragraphs [10],  [12],  [14]
    and [24] the  judge  set  out  the  respondent's  view  of  the  public
    interest.  The public interest is referred to again at  [26].  At  [39]
    the judge cites the provisions of  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which set out to the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
    Secretary of State.  At paragraph [44] the judge refers to the case  of
    MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 8617, quoting a passage that considers  the  provision  of  Section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that "the more
    serious the offence  committed  by  a  foreign  national  criminal  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal".

 9. As the grounds indicate, the judge went on at [45] to  refer  again  to
    the public interest not requiring  deportation  if  Exception  2  under
    Section 117C(5) was met.  It is therefore simply not the case that  the
    judge referred to the public interest only at  [45].   He  set  out  at
    numerous  points  the  proper  role  of  the  public  interest  in  his
    assessment.

10. It is also unarguable that the judge  minimised  the  severity  of  the
    offending. At [10] the judge set out the sentencing  remarks  from  the
    court martial and in the first line indicates his  awareness  that  the
    sentencing panel found that the appellant had committed "a particularly
    serious offence". At [37] the judge says this, in the  first  paragraph
    of his findings:

         "It is also clear that this was a serious set  of  offences  and  a
         clear breach of trust in a position that this former  corporal  had
         with the recruits for which he was responsible".

11. The reference in [45] to the sentence being "limited"  is  entirely  in
    line with the provisions of s.117C(1) which requires  the  Tribunal  to
    assess the degree of seriousness of an offence. It is not my view  that
    this comment can in any way be read as the judge minimising the offence
    one which  he  clearly  characterises  within  his  decision  as  being
    "serious", as  above.   The  comments  of  the  appellant's  commanding
    officer which are commented on by the judge at [43] were  part  of  the
    evidence before the judge which he was entitled to  take  into  account
    and no error arises in that regard.

12. The second ground of appeal maintained that although the judge referred
    at [44] to the correct approach to the "unduly harsh"  provisions  this
    was not reflected in his decision.  The grounds also argued that  where
    the judge set out at [40] to [42] his view of the difficulties for  the
    appellant's son, referring to his situation being "unduly harsh" if the
    appellant left the UK, this came before any consideration of the public
    interest and showed that the judge had already made up his mind without
    taking into account the public interest.

13. Again, this ground is not arguable.  As above, the judge  set  out  the
    correct test from legislation in paragraphs [39]  and  [40]  confirming
    his understanding that the deportation of the appellant was  "conducive
    to the public good and in the public interest" because of  his  offence
    and only then went on to consider the  situation  of  the  child.   The
    consideration of whether the appellant's deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh for his son was set out in [40] to [45].  To  suggest  that  they
    are made without proper account of  the  public  interest  ignores  the
    numerous correct self-directions  considered  above  and  is  really  a
    challenge only to the ordering of the paragraphs in this  part  of  the
    decision. As above, almost his first comment in  his  findings  on  the
    factual situation here is that it was "clear that this  was  a  serious
    set of offences  and  a  clear  breach  of  trust".   The  respondent's
    challenge is really one of perversity rather than  legal  misdirection.
    Given the materials before the judge, including a psychologist's report
    and the evidence of the appellant and his wife on the difficulties  for
    the child if the appellant were to be deported, it was manifestly  open
    to  him  to  reach  a  decision  in  the   applicant's   favour   here,
    notwithstanding the fixity of the public interest in deportation.

14. The third ground maintains that the judge "augmented" the  findings  of
    the psychologist  who  interviewed  the  family  who  stated  that  the
    appellant's son would be "very traumatised" rather than the appellant's
    deportation having a "devastating" effect on the child as set out at 40
    of the decision. This challenge is one  of  semantics  and  is  without
    force.  The judge does  not  misquote  or  mistake  the  psychologist's
    report in stating that the appellant's  removal  would  be  devastating
    where it is characterised by the psychologist as very traumatising. The
    appellant and his wife also gave evidence which was not challenged that
    the son was strongly attached to his father who was a very regular  and
    important presence in his life.  The  grounds  referred  to  the  judge
    falling into error in relying on the  psychologist's  comments  on  the
    child situation in Nepal but this cannot be material where the decision
    is made on the basis of the child remaining in the UK and the appellant
    being removed, any comments on the child situation in  Nepal  therefore
    being immaterial.  The grounds also argue that the situation  here  was
    harsh but not "unduly harsh" and that the consequences  for  the  child
    were those that arise in the normal course of deportation.   As  above,
    the judge here had a report from a  psychologist  indicating  a  higher
    level of difficulty for this child and also the evidence of the parents
    which he was also entitled to take into account.  These assessments are
    made on the particular circumstances of each case and it is  rarely  of
    assistance to refer to other cases with different facts.

15. I have dealt with the fourth ground of appeal above  which  related  to
    the finding on the appellant's partner  which  the  respondent  accepts
    cannot be a material point here.

16. For all of those reasons I concluded that the decision  here  does  not
    disclose a material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed: [pic]                           Dated: 9 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
