
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number:  HU/13070/2017
                                                               HU/13085/2017
                                                               HU/13086/2017
                                                               HU/13088/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 17th December 2018  On 11th January 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     T K
                                     M S
                                     S K
                                     J K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik (Counsel, instructed by Ashfield
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants' applications for LTR on the basis of their private and
    family life in the UK were refused. Their appeals were heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hussain at Hatton Cross on the 16th of July 2018
    and dismissed for the reasons given in the decision promulgated on the
    20th of September 2018. The Appellants had entered the UK in November
    2010, their full history is set out in the decision. Subject to the
    application under consideration substantive leave had been curtailed
    from June 2016.

 2. The Judge found that the Appellants could not meet the Immigration
    Rules and that there were no compelling circumstances that would
    justify a grant of leave under article 8 outside the rules having
    regard to the best interests of the children. Permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on the basis
    that the Judge arguably had not properly considered article 8 and the
    best interests of the younger child in the light of the misdirection.

 3. Between the grant of permission and the Upper Tribunal hearing the
    decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 was promulgated. The decision
    in the appeal of NS (Sri Lanka) in the same judgment is particularly
    relevant. That was raised at the start of the hearing before me.

 4. In submissions it was argued that the Judge had applied the wrong test
    in paragraph 20 and in paragraph 23 had incorrectly referred to
    insurmountable obstacles instead of the correct test of very
    significant difficulties. It was also submitted that the Judge had not
    made clear findings on section 55, there was evidence before the Judge
    in the letter from Miss Wright at ages 28-29 and the Judge had not
    engaged with that evidence. It was also said that the proportionality
    assessment was inadequate, at this point Mr Malik referred to a
    supplementary bundle but I pointed out that that was irrelevant to the
    question of whether the Judge had made an error as it was not before
    him. In paragraph 29 the emphasis was on education.

 5. For the Home Office it was submitted that the decision taken as a whole
    contained no material error. In practical terms there was no difference
    between insurmountable obstacles and very significant difficulties. The
    Judge had noted the immigration history and that the children
    benefitted from support and in paragraph 29 made findings in relation
    to South Korea.

 6. There is guidance from the Court of Appeal on the approach of reviewing
    courts to the approach to be taken but which also contains observations
    on First-tier Tribunal decisions. Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA
    Civ 10 at paragraph 27 gave made the following observations: "Decisions
    of tribunals should not become formulaic and rarely benefit from
    copious citation of authority. Arguments that reduce to the proposition
    that the F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a series of cases in the
    Court of Appeal or elsewhere will rarely prosper. Similarly, as Lord
    Hoffmann said in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372,
    "reasons should be read on the assumption that, unless he has
    demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how he should perform his
    functions and which matters he should take into account". He added that
    an "appellate court should resist the temptation to subvert the
    principle that they should not substitute their own discretion for that
    of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which enables them to claim
    that he misdirected himself". Moreover, some principles are so firmly
    embedded in judicial thinking that they do not need to be recited. For
    example, it would be surprising to see in every civil judgment a
    paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof; or in every
    running down action a treatise, however short, on the law of
    negligence. That said, the reader of any judicial decision must be
    reassured from its content that the court or tribunal has applied the
    correct legal test to any question it is deciding."

 7. In paragraph 276ADE the test is whether there are very significant
    difficulties to reintegration. In paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM the
    phrase insurmountable obstacles is used in the EX.1(1)(b) and defined
    in paragraph EX.2 as "very significant difficulties". Given that the
    Immigration Rules definition of the term matches the term used by the
    Judge there is no practical difference. The Judge focussed on relevant
    issues and there is no error.

 8. Paragraph 20 is a bald statement of the burden and standard of proof.
    There is no reference to the balancing exercise in the proportionality
    assessment but as a statement of where the burden lies and how an
    Appellant is to discharge it is correct. In paragraph 8 the Judge
    referred to the best interests of the children, how that is generally
    met and section 55. The Judge observations on the Appellants' length of
    residence at paragraphs 24 and 25 is accurate.

 9. Whilst the Judge did not refer directly to the letter from Miss Wright
    in the Appellant's bundle it was considerably out of date and the Judge
    correctly observed that there was evidence that the Third Appellant had
    received support but also that there was no evidence that that he was
    still receiving support and no evidence that the support needed would
    not be available in South Korea. In those observations it is clear that
    the Appellants had not provided evidence to show that there were facts
    which supported their application to remain in the UK.

10. How the Appellants come to be in the UK without leave is not a relevant
    consideration. The fact is that the family do not meet the Immigration
    Rules. To succeed outside the rules the Appellants would have to show
    that there were compelling circumstances not adequately addressed by
    the rules that justified such a grant.

11. The grounds effectively rely on a narrow textual analysis of the sort
    deprecated by the Court of Appeal. Reading the decision as a whole,
    without being unduly formulaic and having regard to the approach now
    approved I am satisfied that the Judge considered all relevant factors.
    The Judge clearly had in mind the best interests of the children and
    properly considered the circumstances at the date of the hearing with
    regard to whether there was continuing treatment available and whether
    there would be treatment in South Korea. Whilst it may have been better
    to have avoided using the word "exceptional" in the circumstances the
    criticisms of the decision are unjustified.

12. The decision of Judge Hussain was a sufficient consideration of the
    evidence presented in the context of the Appellants overall immigration
    history and the applicable Immigration Rules. The Judge was justified
    in finding that the evidence did not show that the Appellants'
    circumstances were such that a grant of leave under article 8 outside
    the rules would have been justified. On that basis the decision did not
    contain an error of law and stands as the disposal of the Appellants'
    appeals.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 27th December 2018


