
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13428/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 22 January 2019                            |On 25 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                  MR T B R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nepal  born  on  8  October  1987.   The
    appellant had sought entry clearance to the UK as the  adult  dependent
    child  of  his  mother,  a  widow  of  a  former  Gurkha  solder.   His
    application was refused by the respondent. That decision was upheld  on
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands  ("the  FTTJ")  found  that  the
    appellant was not dependent on his mother, that  he  had  a  source  of
    income in Nepal and that Article 8 was not engaged.  He  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul in the
    following terms:

         "It is arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands misdirected
         himself in law in assessing whether there was family life and  thus
         wrongly considered only financial dependence.

         All grounds are arguable.

         It is my preliminary view that the decision did involve the  making
         of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome, and  that  the
         decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set  aside,  the
         appropriate course of action being to remit the case to the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a fresh determination on all issues.

         Unless within ten working days of the  issue  of  these  directions
         there is any written objection to this course of action,  supported
         by cogent argument, the Upper Tribunal will  proceed  to  determine
         the appeal without an oral hearing and will remit it to the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

         In the absence of a timely response by a party, it will be  presume
         that it has no objection to the course of action proposed."

 4. Unfortunately, despite these  directions,  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    standard directions and the matter was listed for oral  hearing  before
    me. However, both Mr Jaisri and Ms Cunha were in agreement  that  there
    was no objection to the course proposed by UTJ Rintoul for the  reasons
    he had given in granting permission to appeal.

 5. I adopt UTJ Rintoul's preliminary view and find that  the  decision  of
    the FTTJ contains a material error of law in that the FTTJ  misdirected
    himself as to the assessment required in order to decide whether family
    life existed between the appellant and his mother.  His assessment  was
    consequently flawed in that the FTTJ based his decision solely  on  his
    findings with regard to the absence of financial dependence.

 6. The nature of the appellant's relationship with his mother  is  at  the
    crux of the appeal on Article 8 grounds. The decision must be set aside
    in its entirety.

Decision

 7. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error on a point of law.  The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ Rowlands.

 8. The appellant is entitled to anonymity in these proceedings and I  make
    a direction accordingly.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 24 January 2019


Anonymity Direction - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 24 January 2019
