
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/13943/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 March 2019                        | On 16 April 2019                   |
|Prepared 12 March 2019                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                             mr goutam choudhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, counsel instructed by Paul John &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Willocks Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant a national  of  India,  date  of  birth  16  March  1976,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 25 October  2017,  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis of  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the UK and on human rights grounds.

2.   The appeal against that decision of FtTJ O'Keeffe was dismissed  on  11
    October 2018.

3.   The Judge concluded that the Appellant did not succeed under the  Rules
    because for reasons given periods of time he had been in the  UK  where
    he had "overstayed" militated  against  the  current  application.   In
    addition the Judge also concluded  that  the  appeal  failed  on  human
    rights grounds under Article 8 ECHR.

4.   The grounds of appeal against the Judge's decision  did  not  challenge
    the Judge's conclusions on the human rights based claim.

5.   Permission to appeal the Judge's decision was given by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Frances on 13 February 2019.  The basis of  the  application  was
    made by the Appellant on the basis of his understanding as the  law  as
    it was taken to be at the  time.   It  was  said  that  the  Judge  had
    essentially not properly reasoned the conclusion he reached  under  the
    Rules.

6.   Most unfortunately for the Appellant events have overtaken him  because
    of the decision delivered by Mr Justice Sweeney on 7 March  2018  dated
    22 October 2018 but it is thought was promulgated.  The case of  R  (on
    the application of) Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    (para 276B - ten years' lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 10 addressed  the
    issue of to what extent it is required at the date of application  that
    you have accumulated the ten years lawful residence for the purposes of
    the application under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

7.   The unfortunate consequence of the analysis which stands  is  that  the
    Appellant had not at the material time accumulated the necessary period
    of lawful residence and could not  do  so  unless  he  also  took  into
    account other periods which for the purposes of paragraph 276B are  not
    to be counted in.  In  the  result  whilst  the  appeal  has  not  been
    conceded by the Appellant I find that in the light of the current  case
    law there was no material error of law in the Judge's  decision.   Even
    if albeit I accepted that the reasons the Judge  gave  were  wrong  the
    outcome was the inevitable consequence come what may.

8.   For those reasons I find the Original Tribunal made no  material  error
    of law, the Original Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

9.   The appeal is dismissed.

10.  No anonymity direction was made nor is one required or necessary.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and therefore no fee award is appropriate.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

