
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13863/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2020                   |On 3 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    MMHS
                            (ANONYMITY IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 I re-make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make this
order because the appellant is vulnerable because of ill health and
publicity could harm him.

2. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent on
30 July 2019 refusing his application for indefinite leave to remain, for
settlement and/or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

3. The appeal has previously been determined unsatisfactorily and I set
aside an earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal and directed the case
be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.  A copy of my Reasons for Finding an
Error of Law is appended hereto.

4. Although I had the assistance of Mr Malik and Ms Cunha I want to begin
by considering the respondent's decision that led to this appeal.

5. This shows that the appellant entered the United Kingdom in September
2009 with entry clearance as a student.  His leave was extended until 23
June 2012.  On 22 June 2012 he made an application for leave to remain as a
spouse and the application was successful.  He was given leave to remain
until 4 March 2015.  On 4 March 2015 he applied for indefinite leave to
remain as the spouse of a settled person but the application was refused.
He appealed but his appeal was unsuccessful and his appeal rights were
exhausted on 22 May 2018.  On 22 May 2018 he made an application for
settlement which he varied twice, most recently to an application for
indefinite leave to remain outside the Rules.

6. The Reasons for Refusal referred to a document published on 28 February
2018 and described as "Modernisation Guidance - Leave Outside The
Immigration Rules - version 1" which identifies the level of the
seriousness that exceptional circumstances must reach before they justify a
grant of settlement outside the Rules.  The respondent acknowledged that
such circumstances could occur but it was expected that such cases would be
extremely rare.

7. The respondent explained that this was not such a case.

8. The key points are that in the opinion of the respondent the appellant
had lived in the United Kingdom for nine years and ten months.  He was then
36 years and 1 month old and he would be able to reintegrate himself into
Bangladesh, being the country of his nationality.  He had spent his
formative years there, leaving when he was 26 years old.  He spoke the
national language and was familiar with the customs and indeed had
relatives living there.

9. The appellant said that he was married to a British citizen but he was
refused leave to remain on account of that marriage because neither of them
attended a marriage interview.  It was the appellant's case that he had no
longer any contact with his wife.

10. The respondent noted that the earlier application had been refused and
an appeal dismissed for wide-ranging reasons.

11. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant could not
obtain work in Bangladesh.  The appellant said that he could not get a
government job or any other job.

12. The decision noted health problems.  The appellant had produced a
letter showing he had both physical and mental health problems.  The
physical problems included bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and surgical
treatment was expected and he suffered from anxiety and depression.  His GP
had prescribed medication and advised closer observation and support.

13. The Secretary of State found that the appellant had not established a
medical condition so exceptional that he could not obtain treatment in
Bangladesh or that he would be disadvantaged in obtaining such treatment.

14. There were no strong links with the United Kingdom of a kind that would
justify an exceptional decision to remain.

15. The Secretary of State was aware of the length of residence although
the appellant had not produced a passport to show absences since September
2017, he had not passed the Life in the UK Test and the English Language
Test.  The Secretary of State also found that he was not suitable because
he had been identified as a TOEIC cheat.

16. There was nothing weighty in his private or family life or exceptional
circumstances generally.

17. Before me it is for the appellant to prove the facts on which he relies
on the balance of probabilities and then for the respondent to show that
any interference with his private and family life is justified.  I must
conduct a balancing exercise weighing any public interest in his removal
against the consequences of interfering with his private and family life.

18. Much has been said in this case about the appellant's vulnerability and
although the appellant did give evidence before me, and I consider his
evidence later, I want to begin by outlining the medical evidence.

19. I concentrate mainly on the report of Ms Mai Atas-Kelly dated 14 July
2019.  Ms Atas-Kelly's qualifications include her being a consultant,
chartered psychologist and registered practitioner psychologist working in
private practice.  She has lectured at Royal Holloway University and has
been a clinical lead in the National Health Service.  Her report shows a
proper appreciation of her role as an expert. There is no significant
challenge to her evidence and, having reflected on the case as a whole, I
found her report honest and competent and deserving of significant weight.

20. The appellant presented to her as a Bangladeshi Muslim who had married
a UK resident who was Somalian.  It was his case that this caused such a
degree of family disapproval that his relatives stopped communicating with
him and then his wife left him and left the United Kingdom and, he
understood, remarried in Somalia.  This prompted a deterioration in his
mental health that has been exacerbated by uncertainty over his immigration
status.

21. Ms Atas-Kelly noted that the appellant appears to have made "multiple
suicide attempts over the past few years, that left me very concerned with
his wellbeing". This is one of several similarly chilling observations in
the report and I have reflected on them.

22. Ms Atas-Kelly was satisfied that the appellant presented with a Major
Depressive Disorder.  She believed that his condition required highly
specialist Cognitive Behavioural Therapy with a minimum duration of about a
year.

23. She believed that any additional stress or "negative change" is:

  "very likely to worsen [the appellant's] mental health and suicidal
  ideation.  It is my professional view that if [the appellant] attempts
  suicide following a negative change in his circumstances he might reach a
  significant level of desperation and is likely to aim to succeed in his
  attempt."

24. Ms Atas-Kelly then set out the background to the case.  She noted that
the appellant presented as "honest and forthcoming" but appeared to be "low
in mood and energy".  She outlined his claim that following his marriage,
and because of it, to a non-Bangladeshi woman his father and siblings had
stopped contacting him.  He had always found his parents supportive and
they had paid for him to move to the United Kingdom and study there.  He
had to find out from friends about his parents' health and circumstances.
The appellant believed he was married lawfully in the United Kingdom to his
wife and he wanted to divorce her but could not make contact to initiate
proceedings.

25. He was taking medication for hallucinations and for depression and
anxiety and was awaiting surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome.

26. He outlined his thoughts of self-harm and suicide attempts and general
mood.

27. Ms Atas-Kelly concluded that the appellant met the diagnostic criteria
for a "major depressive disorder with psychotic features of a sever
course".

28. She said:

  "It is my professional opinion that [the appellant]'s emotional and
  psychological states are at a risky disequilibrium, and that any
  additional stress/negative change is very likely to worsen [the
  appellant]'s mental health and suicidal ideation. It is my professional
  view that if [the Appellant] attempts suicide following a negative change
  in his circumstances he might reach a significant level of desperation
  and his is likely to aim to succeed in this attempt."

29. The other evidence about the appellant's health includes a letter from
a consultant psychiatrist, a Dr A Adenola, and a general medical
practitioner.  These tend to show that the Ms Atas-Kelly are well founded.

30. The appellant gave evidence before me.  He adopted his statement dated
10 December 2019 starting at page 34 in the bundle.

31. He began by outlining his immigration history including his marriage to
a British citizen.  He began by addressing the contention that he is a
TOEIC cheat.

32. He denied using a proxy taker for his test, commenting "because I did
not need one".

33. He said at paragraph 12 that he completed a pre-university programme in
Bangladesh at London Newcastle College which he regarded as comparable to a
foundation year in the United Kingdom and it was taught in English
specifically with the intention that students could prepare for university
level lectures in English when they studied abroad.  He also passed a
relevant exam in English.

34. He studied a Hotel Management course in Bangladesh in English and
passed at a high standard.

35. He said he spoke English fluently before coming to the United Kingdom.
After coming to the United Kingdom and studying he successfully completed a
Professional Diploma in Tourism and Hospitality Management.  Again the
course was in English.  He had also enrolled to study at diploma level at a
course in London and produced his form CAS.

36. He said that he married in May 2012.  His wife did not speak Bengali
and he did not speak her native tongue.  Their only common language was
English.

37. He had also worked as a shift manager at McDonald's and was only able
to do that job because he could speak English.  He said that he was more
than capable of passing the test that he was said to have avoided by
cheating.  He then complained about incompetence by the Secretary of State.
 He referred to page 6 of the refusal letter where the Secretary of State
stated:

  "In relation to paragraph 276B(ii)(c).  In your application dated 30
  January 2012 you submitted a TOEIC certificate from Education Testing
  Service ('ETS') ...  Your scores from the test taken on 18 April 2012 at
  Elizabeth College have now been cancelled by ETS ..."

The appellant pointed out the incongruity of referring to a document
relating to a test taken on 18 April 2012 in support of an application
dated close to three months earlier on 30 January 2012.

38. He explained how he was confident in his ability to pass the necessary
test and chose a TOEIC test because it was recognised.

39. He said he tried to book the test before getting married as he
understood a TOEIC test could be booked in a short timeframe and the
results would come quickly.

40. He said he checked online on the available tests and found suitable
dates at Elizabeth College at a time convenient to him.  He said he had
time to do the test even after getting married but he wanted it "out of the
way" because there was much else to do.  He knew that attending the
Elizabeth College test centre would not involve a big detour on his way to
college.

41. He said he made the booking to do the test about two weeks ahead.  It
was scheduled for 18 April 2012, he paid the test fee in cash and paid �20
to get additional material to prepare.

42. He was very confident about passing the test.  Given what he had
achieved he expected it to be easy.

43. He explained that at the relevant time he was living in Southall near
the Ealing Broadway underground station.  He took the bus to Ealing
Broadway, then the District Line to Victoria and then the Victoria Line to
Vauxhall and it took a ten minutes' bus journey to the test centre.  He did
not remember everything that had happened.  He was recalling something that
had happened seven years before he made the statement.

44. He remembered the starting time was 10 o'clock in the morning.  He
remembered there were many computers in the room and twenty or 25 people
there to sit their test.  He was told which computer he had to sit at to do
the work and he opened the computer screen and followed the instructions.
He said he had to speak about pictures shown on the computer screen, about
the environment of the pictures and he was asked to express an opinion.
The test was automated with limited timeframes.  The speaking test took
fifteen to twenty minutes and then he began "the writing part".

45. The writing part of the test started after a ten or fifteen minute
break.  He had to compile sentences in accordance with pictures and reply
to emails as if he were a customer service employee and write to a customer
service department.  He had to write an opinion essay which took about an
hour.  He prepared by downloading examples of tests of this kind and was
confident.

46. He was happy with the results but not surprised that he had scored well
when he collected his certificate two weeks or less later.  He expressly
confirmed he had attended the test centre.  He denied in emphatic terms
that he had taken the test by proxy.

47. He said that he had contacted ETS about the allegation of deception and
received a reply by email which he enclosed in his bundle.  The detailed
reasons given by the respondent, namely that ETS had a computerised voice
recognition software system and a system of additional review by human ear
was not confirmed by ETS, who gave only a very general reply.

48. The appellant explained that he had since developed an affectionate
relationship with an English-speaking partner.

49. The appellant said that he was a competent user of the English language
and could communicate fluently and was not able to accept that he had been
identified as a fraud and treated accordingly.  He said in very emphatic
terms that he had paid the required fee and had taken the test in good
faith and had not cheated.

50. He then said how his circumstances had changed since the refusal.
Then, according to the respondent, he had accumulated nine years ten
months' residence but he had not passed his "Life in the UK" and "English
Language Test" as required by Immigration Rules and he had now lived in the
United Kingdom for over ten years and had passed the "Life in the UK Test"
and had passed the "English Language Test" and he produced copies of
documents in support of his claim.  He also submitted his passport to show
that he had not travelled out of the United Kingdom since 2017, in fact he
had not left the UK since his arrival in 2009.

51. He then went on to explain why in his opinion there were exceptional
circumstances in this case.

52. The appellant said that he came to the United Kingdom leaving
everything he had in Bangladesh and had established a life in the United
Kingdom where he had made friends and studied and learnt to work and indeed
met his wife and fitted in with UK culture.  He found his wife had helped
him integrate into the United Kingdom and regularise his immigration status
although the marriage had not gone as he wanted.  He said it had caused him
to lose his ties with his family in Bangladesh and indeed with his friends
there.  He said his relationship with his wife started to deteriorate only
after the refusal of his previous indefinite leave to remain application
and his life would have been different if that problem had not arisen.  He
now had to divorce her.

53. He said he had lost all ties with Bangladesh including his family and
all he had left was his friends and achievements in the United Kingdom and
he would be destroyed as a person if he had to go back to Bangladesh on his
own and start again.  He said it was wrong of the Home Office to refuse his
previous application as a spouse of a British citizen.  He said how his
mental health had deteriorated, he thought as a result of the experiences
he had had.  He described the Bangladeshi community now as alien to him.

54. He then outlined his medical conditions and he gave details of stormy
episodes in their marriage.

55. He had made suicide attempts and had been admitted to the Memorial
Hospital in East Ham for therapy.

56. He said that the conclusion that the false allegation of him being a
TOEIC cheat had ruined his life and impacted adversely on his health.

57. The appellant was cross-examined.

58. He was asked questions no doubt intended to indicate that he had had an
opportunity to improve his English language skills since he did the test in
April 2012.

59. He said that he thought his score was 200 out of 200.  He believed he
had top marks.  He accepted he had probably improved his language skills in
the meantime but not that they had improved greatly because he was a
competent speaker then.

60. He was asked about his reaction when he was told that his test results
were invalid.  He said he asked about this in a letter and was told there
had been management irregularities.  Mr Malik interrupted politely to draw
attention to correspondence beginning at page 73 in the bundle which begins
with a letter from ETS telling the appellant that his test result had been
cancelled.  I cannot see a date on that letter.  He had produced a reply in
19 November 2019 which the appellant identified himself and subsequent
correspondence in which he confirmed that he had taken the test in April
2012 and denied any wrongdoing.  The appellant was possibly a little
confused about when he had all of the documentation from the Home Office.

61. He was asked why he had chosen to do the test at Elizabeth College and
he said that he was getting ready for the marriage and wanted to spend time
with his wife and he had wanted the test "out of the way".  He said when he
made his application on 30 June 2011 he did not rely on a test.

62. He said when he booked his test he bought a book to help him with his
preparation and download examples online to prepare for the exam.  He
prepared for the oral examination by looking at examples of tests.  He did
not have a tutor.  He was asked if he remembered any questions and said it
was too long ago and he could not remember.

63. He said that he was about an hour by bus and direct tube line from his
home to the test centre.  The visit when he took the test was not his first
time. He had been there to book the test and he went to collect his
certificate but he had not been back since he had his certificate.

64. He said he only did the speaking and writing, not the reading tests.

65. He was then asked why he could not get a job in Bangladesh.  He said
that he had not tried to get a job in Bangladesh.  He was no longer on
speaking terms with his siblings and his father and mother had died.

66. He was asked why he could not find work in Bangladesh. He was an
English speaker who had developed skills in the United Kingdom.  He
insisted that he could not.  It was suggested that he did not want to get a
job in Bangladesh but he said there was no-one there to support him or help
him.  He said he did have friends who helped him in the United Kingdom.  He
did not accept that if he returned to Bangladesh he would be able to make
friends or find a job although he had been able to do those things in the
United Kingdom.  He also said he had an operation coming up and he had not
made any plans for that.  He last worked in the United Kingdom at the end
of 2017 or the start of 2018, he could not remember.  Friends were
supporting him in the meantime.

67. He was not re-examined.

68. Ms Cunha said that her submissions were based on the cross-examination.
 She said it was unbelievable that the appellant would score maximum marks
in his tests even though there was scanty evidence of how he had prepared.
It was not believable that he could produce a perfect paper. The inference
was he had used a proxy.  The appellant had not done a reading test.

69. She submitted that it was not believable that he would be able to
recall accurately the bus route to and from the centre including the route
number and could remember nothing about the test.  The route number does
not feature in my note of evidence but I do recall the appellant giving the
route number when he talked about taking a bus.

70. Ms Cunha said that the Secretary of State was entitled to regard it as
an invalid test.  The results did not put him in the questionable category
but the invalid category.

71. Further, it was unbelievable that he could not re-establish himself in
Bangladesh.

72. There was no evidence he was suffering from depression or evidence that
he could not get proper treatment in Bangladesh.  She submitted the simple
fact was he did not want to go to Bangladesh.  He was benefitting from
medical treatment for which he did not appear to be paying and did not want
to leave.  He had no significant private life and the decision was sound.

73. Mr Malik then addressed me.

74. Mr Malik began his submissions by saying that the key issue was whether
or not the claimant had cheated in his TOEIC test.

75. He reminded me, correctly, that there was a three stage approach.  The
Secretary of State must show that there was sufficient evidence to
establish a prima facie case of fraud.  He accepted that that clearly is
the case here.  In that event the appellant must put forward an innocent
explanation which the Secretary of State must then rebut.

76. He submitted that the appellant's evidence that he had taken the test
was capable of belief and the appellant had therefore raised with the
minimum level of plausibility an innocent explanation and it was for the
Secretary of State to disprove it.

77. It is his first contention that the appellant did not need to cheat.

78. He said the perfect test result was not indicative of cheating but of
competence and supported the appellant's underlying contention that he had
no interest in cheating.

79. Mr Malik said that there was no direct evidence of the appellant
cheating.

80. Certainly the appellant had denied in very emphatic terms any need for
the proxy.  He claimed that he had studied in English and that had not been
challenged.  He had claimed that English was the only common language
between him and his wife and that was not challenged.  He had got a job in
McDonald's which he had held for the best part of three years.  He had
become a "team leader" when he worked for Tesco.

81. His response to the test being disqualified was innocent protestation,
an enquiry about what was happening, which Mr Malik submitted was the
response of an honest person.  Further, he had answered questions
competently and clearly, indicating that his present understanding of
English is very good.

82. The assertion that it would be hard to obtain a perfect mark is wholly
unsupported by any reference to the standard that he required to meet. I
was in no position to know if there was anything suspicious about the
appellant being given full marks in the test. In any event it is not clear
to me if the perfect mark was for work attributed to the appellant but done
by a proxy. The appellant took no issue with the "Look-up Tool".  It was
clearly the case that the test results submitted for assessment were not
the appellant's work. The appellant did not explain this and did not have
to explain it. The appellant said he had taken the test and what happened
after that we do not know.

83. Mr Malik then contended that if the "suitability" bar is removed then
the appellant is now someone how has lived continuously in the United
Kingdom for over eleven years, which is ordinarily sufficient to permit
leave to remain.  His application for leave that led to the present appeal
was made on the day that his existing leave ran out.  If he was late at any
point, he was no later than the fourteen days' grace period of starting a
period of overstaying.

84. He also maintained that the claimant really did not have any meaningful
links to Bangladesh.  He was estranged from the family that he had there
and had not been there for eleven years.

85. Mr Malik submitted that the appellant had no family life of any kind in
Bangladesh.

86. Additionally, he did have mental health problems.  He is a man who had
attempted to take his own life.  It was hard to see how with those
disadvantages he could establish himself in Bangladesh.  He submitted he
was not going to be someone who depended on the state where she was able to
work.

87. He then turned to whether there were issues of dishonesty.  He drew my
attention to the decision in Majumder and Qadir v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ
1167.  He referred me particularly to paragraph 18 where it was noted that
approval that:

  "In considering an allegation of dishonesty the relevant factors include
  the following: what the person accused had to gain from being dishonest;
  what he had to lose; what is known about his character; the cultural
  environment in which he operated; how the individual accused of
  dishonesty performed under cross-examination, and whether the Tribunal's
  assessment of that person's English language proficiency is commensurate
  with his or her TOEIC scores; and whether his or her academic
  achievements are such that it was unnecessary or illogical for them to
  have cheated."

88. He submitted that this analysis only benefits the appellant.

89. Finally, he referred me to the case of Ahsan and Others v SSHD [2017]
EWCA Civ 2009 and particularly paragraph 33, Underhill LJ where we are
told:

  "The observations of the UT in SM and Qadir should not be regarded as the
  last word.  Where the impugned test was taken at an established fraud
  factory such as Elizabeth College, and also where the voice file does not
  record the applicant's voice (or no attempt has been made to obtain it),
  the case that he or she cheated will be hard to resist.  We were not
  ourselves taken to any of the underlying evidence, but I am willing to
  accept that that appears to be a reasonable summary of the effect of the
  recent decisions to which we were referred.  However, I am not prepared
  to accept - and I do not in fact understand Ms Giovannetti to have been
  contending - that even in such specially strong cases the observations in
  the earlier case law to the effect that a decision whether the applicant
  or appellant has cheated is fact-specific are no longer applicable and
  that there is no prospect of their oral evidence affecting the outcome."

90. It is very difficult to make clear findings in this case.

91. I have considered the appellant's evidence.  His story has the
advantage of consistency.  Ms Cunha did not expose any obvious or
undeniable errors.  I have reflected on her submission that it seems
incongruous that he was able to remember in detail the route by public
transport but nothing at all about the questions asked.  Certainly, he did
give very clear evidence about the bus he had travelled on but I am not
sure where this gets me.  The route to the test centre by public transport
will be obvious and can be checked by the appellant whether he made that
journey or not and if the appellant had made the journey as he has claimed
he may very well deliberately or possibly without really thinking about it
have checked it out in his mind because it is the sort of thing that he
could be asked.

92. I really cannot draw strong or any adverse inferences from the fact
that he knew the way to the centre.  Neither could I get excited about his
not knowing in much detail about what happened there.  He is recalling
something that is some years before that he had no reason to recall in
great detail until some significant time after the event.

93. His case is made very persuasively in his witness statement but that in
part is a credit to the way it was assembled by his solicitors.  There is
nothing wrong about that.  When drawing statements solicitors have a duty
to present their client's case in a proper way but as persuasively as they
can in accordance with their instructions.

94. I approached the case from this perspective and I asked myself if the
appellant is telling the truth then what can he be expected to say or do.
What he could do is say how he prepared for the test, which he did, what
happened when he got there, which he did, how he got there, which he did,
and how he reacted when he was told that something had gone adrift and he
reacted by protesting innocence and asking for further details.  There is
nothing there that I find hard to believe or that points to his being
dishonest.

95. The appellant has offered no explanation for the voice recording that
he is supposed to have prepared in answer to the test being provided by
another person but if he is telling the truth he may very well not be able
to provide that information.

96. In the extract from Ahsan above Underhill LJ refers to Elizabeth
College being notorious as a place where people conducted tests dishonestly
but also accepts that each case should be considered on its own facts.  I
find it unlikely that the appellant needed a proxy to take the test.  His
English is competent now; he has been taught in English and has obtained
employment in jobs which could be expected to require him to use the
English language competently. He is somebody who could be expected to have
passed the test.  It does not follow that he took the test.  A very rich
person can be guilty of stealing cheap goods from shops but the evidence
certainly points to the conclusion that the appellant would have passed the
test if he had taken it.

97. The Appellant's test is said to have been taken on 18 April 2012. The
papers before me include a statement from T/Detective Inspector Andrew
Carter dated 15 May 2015. He said that between 18 October 2011 and 26
September 2012 Elizabeth College undertook 3919 TOEIC speaking and writing
tests identified as "invalid" or "questionable" and the ETS identified 69%
of these as invalid. It is not clear to me if the total of 3919 was the
total number of tests conducted or the total number of tests said to be
either "invalid" or "questionable", I think he means that 3919 is the total
number of tests so that none of the results were reliable.

98. There is no evidence before me indicating how the proxy results were
submitted to ETS. In MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450(IAC) the
Upper Tribunal (The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President, and Upper
Tribunal Judge Rintoul) at paragraph 15 set out matters about which the
joint experts had expressed concern. In particular the Tribunal refers at
paragraph 15(x) to a "distinct lack of clarity relating to the process as
described by ETS in (ix) above. The description of uploading of the data
following completion of the test is not consistent" and at (xi) "to the
integrity of the test taking procedures and systems established by ETS in
its manuals depends heavily on the reliability and probity of test centre
staff. Further, the ETS security precautions concentration [is] on the
elicit conduct of candidates and not test centre employees" whereas it is
the reliability of the submission system and the integrity of the staff
that are in question.

99. A difficulty in the path of believing the appellant is that, even on
his version of events, someone provided false data in response to a test
that the appellant was required to sit. It is improbable that anyone would
do that deliberately unless they did it for gain.

100. I have reread the decision of this Tribunal in SSHD v MA (ETS - TOEIC
testing) [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC).  Paragraph 15 is illuminating.  Having
expressed gratitude to the three experts for their efforts in producing a
joint report (there were some differences but nothing of significance to
this appeal), the Tribunal expressed disquiet at the evidence linking a
particular set of records to a particular candidate.  In short terms, it
seems that procedures were laxed and non-existent.  Rather (15(xi)), the
integrity of the system depended heavily on the "reliability and probity of
test centre staff" and we know from other sources that that was not a
startling feature of Elizabeth College.

101. Two related explanations suggest themselves. The organisation of the
centre could be so shambolic and so corrupt that it was easier to falsify
each candidate's entries regardless of the wishes of a particular candidate
than it was to submit results properly. I have been told nothing in this
case that excludes such an explanation.

102. It could be that the wrong records were linked because somebody was
acting with deliberate dishonesty either because it is is what the
appellant wanted or because they just made a mistake and "helped" the wrong
person.  In the absence of any direct evidence on the point it is very hard
to discount the appellant's story.  Applying these tests as I find that I
should, and certainly, as Mr Malik argues that I should, I find that the
Secretary of State has not discharged the burden of showing the appellant
was dishonest.  It follows from this that I find he should not be burdened
with findings that he has cheated or made false representations.

103. I have come to the conclusion that I have to accept the appellant's
story.  There is a prima facie case against him but that is as far as it
goes.

104. I am not persuaded that this appellant was probably dishonest.

105. Much was made in the error of law hearing about the appellant's
vulnerability.  I have to say although I have read the medical evidence
this was not something that featured in his conduct before me where he
appeared to answer questions confidently and sensibly.

106. I remind myself of the need to consider the evidence as a whole.  I am
not at all persuaded that the appellant could not manage in the event of
his return to his country of nationality.  If he is mentally ill then he
may well find it harder to get treatment there than in the United Kingdom
but treatment is available in Bangladesh.  However, I accept his claim that
he is no longer able to look to his family for support.  He clearly has
married and the marriage has proved disastrously unhappy.  He has married
someone from Somalia and the marriage has now ended in all but name and the
appellant may well be finding it difficult to have sufficient contact with
her to end the marriage formally.  Of course what remains of his family in
Bangladesh might be supportive in the event of his returning but I accept
that he does not expect any support and has given reasons to make that
credible.  His family had fallen out with him.

107. I accept the appellant has now passed his Life in the UK Test and
English Language Test and he has had ten years' lawful residence and he has
produced a passport to show that he has remained in the United Kingdom as
Mr Malik suggested.

108. I disagree with the finding that the appellant is a "TOEIC cheat" and
therefore "unsuitable".

109. The reasons for refusing his application have largely fallen away.  It
has not been established that he has misbehaved in the way suggested and he
now appears to satisfy the requirements of the rules based on 10 years
continuous lawful residence.

110. That is probably sufficient to allow the appeal.  There is no public
interest in refusing an application from someone who is entitled to remain
and the appellant now meets the requirements of the rules.

111. I do not accept that the appellant could not be returned to
Bangladesh.  It has not been shown that he could not get the treatment that
he needs and I do not understand the case to have been argued on that
basis.  It is not an "Article 3" case.  For the same reasons I find that it
would not be refused on health grounds or on Article 8 grounds.  The
appellant is perfectly capable of holding a job and making friends, as was
established in cross-examination.  I do not accept that he needs family or
other support to achieve that end.  It will be harder for him because of
his health problems, maybe very significantly harder, but that is as far as
it goes.

112. Given my findings on his character, this has become unimportant.  I
have, however, asked myself if the fact I reach a different conclusion from
that urged by the appellant on his ability to establish himself in
Bangladesh ought to undermine his evidence about taking the test.  I think
to some extent it necessarily does but not very much.  We differ because of
emphasis and degree.  The appellant is mentally unwell and does not want to
return to Bangladesh and has persuaded himself that he cannot.  It would be
different if he had been shown for example to be malingering, making up
symptoms that he does not have, or if he could be shown to be lying about
links with his family but none of that has happened.  I do not regard my
conclusion that he has exaggerated the personal difficulties he would have
on return as a proper reason to say that he is not telling the truth about
whether or not he took the test.

113. I realise that from the Secretary of State's point of view this is a
disappointing decision.  The Secretary of State is faced with somebody who
appears to have cheated in a test and who is not therefore qualified under
the Rules.  He took the test at a notorious centre for dishonesty and no
good explanation has been given for how the test results could be false.
As I hope is apparent, the difficulty I experienced is that although I
acknowledge all this I also have to accept (and not just because this is
established by authority relied on by Mr Malik but because it is self-
evident) that a person can be innocent of any problems and this appellant's
conduct, I find, is entirely consistent with a person who genuinely took
the test.  I have been given no proper reason to disbelieve his claims that
he did, only to doubt them, which is not the same.

114. I conducted the balancing exercise with regard to Part 5A of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but as I have indicated, there
is not much to do when the person appears to satisfy the requirements of
the Rules and he has rid himself of the disadvantages of not being able to
speak the language or integrate himself.

115. This I fear is another less than entirely satisfactory decision to add
to the many concerning decisions made in the wake of the ETS/TOEIC scandal
but I have resolved it in a way that I find right on the evidence before me
and I allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

116. The appeal is allowed.



                              Jonathan Perkins


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 May 2021                    |

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 13863 2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 July 2020                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                   m m h s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Chunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because  there  is  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  mentally   ill   and
"vulnerable". The division of the Tribunal that  finally  disposes  of  this
appeal will consider if it is necessary to continue the order.

This is an appeal by a citizen of  Bangladesh  against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain on 30 July 2019.

I begin by considering the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  This  notes
that the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  September  2009  as  a
student and he was given leave on different occasions until  4  March  2015.
He then applied for further leave.  That application  was  unsuccessful  but
he appealed to the Court of Appeal so his appeal rights were  not  exhausted
until 22 May 2018.  On that day he applied for settlement.   He  varied  his
application to apply for leave to remain on the basis of ten  years'  lawful
residence and varied it again to apply  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
Rules on 15 October 2018.  It was that third, varied, application  that  led
to the decision complained of.

It was necessarily implicit in the application for leave outside  the  rules
that the appellant did not claim to meet any of the Rules  that  would  have
led to his being allowed leave to remain.  The Secretary  of  State  decided
that the appellant was just over 36 years old at the date of  the  decision.
He had been in the United Kingdom for just less than ten years  (nine  years
and ten months) and he could re-establish himself in Bangladesh.

The appellant had applied for leave on the basis  of  a  marriage  but  that
application foundered when the appellant and his wife  failed  to  attend  a
marriage interview and  they  are  now  separated  but  not  divorced.   The
appellant said his wife was not co-operating.

The appellant said that he could  not  reintegrate  in  Bangladesh.   At  36
years old he was too old for a government job.  He was highly  educated  and
removal would harm his career.  He had not been in trouble with  the  police
and was no threat to anyone and not a burden to the taxpayers.

He had claimed that he had  mental  and  physical  health  problems.   These
included carpal  tunnel  syndrome,  anxiety  and  depression.   He  did  not
support the application  for  exceptional  leave  with  appropriate  medical
evidence and could not find medical evidence in the  extended  time  offered
to him  by  the  Secretary  of  State  who  refused  the  application.   The
Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant  could  not  integrate
into life in Bangladesh and found that  the  appellant  could  maintain  his
friendships in the United Kingdom albeit at a distance.  He had  not  passed
his "Life in the UK" test  or  his  English  Language  Test  and  the  Rules
required him to have passed both.

A particular difficulty in his case  is  that  he  had  been  identified  as
someone  who  had  obtained  a  TOEIC  certificate  fraudulently  and   used
deception in an earlier application (in his case 22 June 2012).   The  judge
noted that the application was considered outside the Rules  but  there  was
little on which to build a case. The appellant did not  have  a  partner  or
children.  Additionally, the Secretary of State decided he was not  suitable
because he had obtained a test certificate fraudulently.

The Reasons for Refusal Letter stated that the appellant's presence  in  the
United Kingdom was "not conducive to  the  public  good".   Further  it  was
thought that the appellant had retained enough knowledge of  life,  language
and culture in  Bangladesh  and  had  family  members  there  who  could  be
expected to assist him so there were no "very significant obstacles" to  his
reintegration into Bangladesh.

The judge considered the  evidence  and  submissions.   The  judge  reminded
himself that leading decisions had established  that  the  generic  evidence
relied on by the Secretary of State in TOEIC cases was reliable but  that  a
finding that someone had cheated had to be made on the specific evidence  in
the particular case  and  that  the  appellant  had  raised  a  prima  facie
innocent explanation.  At paragraph 124  the  judge  explained  his  finding
that the appellant was not  credible.   In  particular  the  appellant  gave
answers that the judge found lacking in detail and cogency.  He was  willing
to blame others and was sketchy about important dates  in  his  relationship
with his wife saying, for  example,  on  different  occasions  that  he  had
parted from his wife in 2015, and 2016 and 2017 although he  was  describing
only one separation.

At paragraph 125 the judge found the appellant's  evidence  of  his  medical
conditions was exaggerated.   Although  he  had  been  diagnosed  as  having
anxiety and depression there was nothing to support his claim  of  self-harm
except medical notes recording that the appellant  had  made  the  claim  to
have done things to himself.

The judge did not believe that the appellant was estranged from  his  family
in Bangladesh; he had rejected  the  appellant's  explanation  that  he  had
attended the test centre honestly and had not been involved in any  cheating
but found that he had relied knowingly on a dishonestly updated  certificate
and that made him "unsuitable".  The judge  noted  "very  limited  evidence"
that the appellant was mentally unwell and the evidence  came  nowhere  near
to establishing the degree of  severity  necessary  for  the  appeal  to  be
allowed on protection grounds.  The judge went on  to  find  that  he  could
establish himself in  Bangladesh  and  obtain  treatment  for  a  depressive
illness.

These findings were challenged in carefully drawn  grounds  prepared  by  Mr
Malik who, in his oral submissions, did little to expand  or  explain  them.
This is not a criticism.  The grounds  were  detailed  and  intended  to  be
sufficient and Mr Malik saw little point in reading out what  I  could  read
for myself.  He did make oral submissions but they were short.

Mr Malik's first ground is that the decision  and  findings  on  credibility
were "vitiated by procedural impropriety, namely, there  was  a  failure  to
recognise that the appellant was a vulnerable witness."

Mr Malik's grounds  acknowledge  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  recognised
there was medical evidence of the appellant having carpal  tunnel  syndrome,
anxiety and depression.  However, the judge also recorded how the  appellant
had "depression, low mood and suicidal thoughts" and he  had  made  "various
suicide attempts" and that he was admitted to the Memorial Hospital in  East
Ham for "therapy and suicide attempts".   Mr  Malik  argued  that  this  was
clearly sufficient to show that the appellant was a vulnerable  witness  and
should have been treated differently.

The second part of the submission is less clearly made out than  the  first,
but I am concerned at the  readiness  with  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge has "written off" the evidence of mental difficulties.   They  do  not
necessarily help the appellant by providing him with a strong  case  but  he
is entitled to be  dealt  with  on  his  own  terms  and  I  am  immediately
concerned that this has not been done here.

Ground  2  complains  that  the  judge  "erred  in  law  in  making  adverse
credibility findings without considering whether  the  deficiencies  in  the
evidence were due to his mental health issues and  vulnerability".  This  is
an entirely fair criticism.  There were deficiencies  in  the  evidence  but
there was also evidence that the appellant  may  not  have  been  at  fault.
This does not mean that his  evidence  has  to  be  accepted  or  that  "bad
evidence" becomes "good evidence" by reason of ill health but more care  was
needed. It is particularly important that "dishonesty" is  not  unthinkingly
correlated with "unreliability".  It is also  at  least  possible  that  the
anxiety and depression was the explanation for the  lacking  in  detail  and
cogency and the  findings  are  flawed  because  this  possibility  was  not
considered.

The third ground is that  the  treatment  of  the  expert  evidence  of  the
consultant-chartered psychologist was flawed.  Again I agree with Mr  Malik.
 The Judge should not have given little weight to that evidence because  the
psychologist  "was  only  repeating  what  [the  appellant]  had  told  her"
(paragraph 125). The judge was concerned that the psychologist had not  seen
the general medical practitioner's notes. It  may  be  that  the  judge  was
making a fair point but expressing it badly but I must make my  decision  on
what the judge said and psychologists  do  not  accept  uncritically  things
that their patients say.

Ground 4 complains that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  finding  that  the
appellant was dishonest and was failing to  conduct  a  balancing  exercise.
Mr Malik is certainly right in his contention that there  was  no  balancing
exercise  carried  out.   The  judge  simply  equated  cheating  with  being
unsuitable and offered no explanation or consideration of other factors.   I
do not in making this observation wishing  to  encourage  the  appellant  to
think  that  there  are  other  factors  that  would  lead  to  a  different
conclusion but I accept that there is  a  material  error  here.  The  point
needs to be revisited.

I appreciate that I have said little so far about  the  submissions  of  the
Secretary of State.  This does not mean  that  I  have  ignored  them.   The
difficulty Ms Chunha faced is that Mr Malik's grounds were well crafted  and
supported by authority and identified tangible faults.  This appeal  has  to
be heard again but I direct it be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.

     Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred.  I set aside this decision  and  direct  that
the case be re-determined in the Upper Tribunal,  before  me  if  reasonably
practicable.  No findings are preserved.

I consider this appeal to be suitable for determining  remotely.  Any  party
who objects to a remote hearing should make know its objections forthwith.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 September 2020              |

