
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13072/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2018                            |On 15 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 GUANGYAO WU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance and unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the Appellant is  called  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    ("the ECO") and the Respondent is called the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of the People's Republic of China (PRC),  date
    of birth 2 October 1996, appealed against the ECO's decision to  refuse
    entry clearance on human rights grounds.  His  appeal  was  also  heard
    along with that of his mother Qiaomei  Yao.   The  matter  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge K Swinnerton who on 15 May 2017 allowed their
    immigration appeals under the Rules, being satisfied that the  Claimant
    had complied with the  necessary  requirements  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

3.   Permission to appeal was given  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson on 19 October 2017.  As a fact the ECO did not challenge the
    Judge's decision, albeit it was outside the Judge's  powers,  to  allow
    the appeal of Mrs Yao (a national of the PRC, date of birth 10 February
    1970).

4.   It seems the reason no challenge was made to the decision  in  relation
    to Mrs Yao was quite simply that the Judge had  made  findings  on  the
    relevant issues of maintenance. Addressing Mrs Yao, the view  had  been
    taken that, pursuing the procedural point, that the  appeal  could  not
    have been allowed under the Immigration  Rules  having  regard  to  the
    amendments to Section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.  Nevertheless the point was raised which  the  Judge  had  wholly
    failed to appreciate namely that the Claimant was at the material  time
    of the application over the age of 18 and was also over the age  of  18
    at the date of the ECO's decision.  The Judge effectively recorded  the
    relevant facts as to the Claimant's date of birth but the point was not
    picked up or addressed as to his ability to meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules bearing in mind he was over the relevant threshold age at the
    date of application  (9  October  2015).   That  point  was  maintained
    against the Claimant by the ECO.

5.   Notice of hearing on  31  January  2018  was  sent  to  the  Claimant's
    representatives Bloomsbury Law Solicitors, to the Sponsor  Mr  Zhiqiang
    Wu and to the Claimant at the last recorded  address.   On  30  January
    2018 Bloomsbury Law on behalf of Mr Wu sought to  withdraw  the  appeal
    but as the Tribunal pointed out the appeal was that of the ECO and  not
    Mr Wu.   Therefore it was not open to them to withdraw any appeal.

6.   By an e-mail of  30  January  2018  the  representatives  also  made  a
    request that the case be listed in the afternoon of 31 January at  2pm.



7.   Given their non-appearance at the hearing at 10am on 31  January  2018,
    enquiries made by the Tribunal staff and the Presenting Officer led  to
    Bloomsbury Law sending a faxed letter to the Tribunal  indicating  that
    they did not intend to appear; they were without instructions and  they
    would take no  further  part.   Confirmation  was  also  obtained  that
    Counsel had not been instructed and would not be attending.

8.   In the circumstances the Claimant having notice of the hearing did  not
    communicate with the  Tribunal,  did  not  request  an  adjournment  or
    indicate that he wished to appear but could not do so  and  no  further
    evidence had been provided by the Claimant pursuant to  the  directions
    given concerning his claim and the Claimant was told  in  writing  what
    might happen if the Tribunal was to  find  the  error  of  law  and  to
    determine it in the absence of the Claimant or his representative.

9.   I therefore have considered  whether  or  not  it  was  appropriate  to
    proceed in the absence of the Claimant.  I conclude in the light of the
    absence of any evidence of further involvement in  the  appeal  process
    that there was nothing to indicate any unfairness in proceeding to deal
    with the Article 8 private/family life considerations that have arisen,
    I was fully satisfied the Claimant could not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules pertinent to  him  because  of  his  age  at  the
    material time.

10.  I have therefore considered the evidence that was filed in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which includes a statement from  the  Sponsor,  a  letter
    from Mrs Yao and a letter from the Claimant.  The letter from  Mrs  Yao
    dated 20 March 2017 explained the strong feelings  of  love  she  feels
    towards her children, the circumstances in which she was  left  in  the
    PRC, whilst her husband, the Sponsor, came to  the  United  Kingdom  to
    earn a living, her desire that her children should prosper  and  be  in
    her and the Sponsor's company.  There is  very  little  description  of
    that life but it seemed to me the natural position  was  that  she  had
    brought up the Claimant.  He had gone to  university  and  studied  and
    that she said:

         "My child is already grown up and facing graduation.  We learned  a
         long time ago that Britain has a better environment for  education.
         We would like our son to advance his education in  Britain,  so  he
         could pay back to his family and society.  Dear Judge please  would
         you kindly reconsider our case.  I hope if you can  empathise  with
         the pain we have been suffering  from  long  years  of  separation.
         Please give one chance to our child and to  our  family,  a  chance
         that allows our family to live together in Britain."

11.  The Claimant's statement essentially explains  the  difficulties  there
    had been for  his  father  being  absent  and  seeking  to  maintain  a
    relationship with his family in the PRC.  He said:

         "... He fully understands my mother has made  huge  sacrifices  for
         our family.  Although thousands of miles away, I can  never  forget
         what my father has always taught me tirelessly: how to  be  a  good
         person, pay respect to the teachers as well as keeping the  Chinese
         tradition of respect for the old and love for the young.  My father
         had been so insistent in urging me to study English so I  am  fully
         prepared for my future life in Britain.

         My beloved mother, for years of enduring  hardship,  she  tried  to
         take on the roles of both father and mother to  her  two  children,
         struggled to keep us fed and taken care of.  I  will  treasure  the
         love and care my parents have given me for the rest of my life.  It
         was through the hard work of my father that our family was able  to
         have enough food and clothing.

         My father's hard work of more than ten years eventually paid off in
         2011, when he was finally granted a permanent residency in the  UK.
         It was a great relief to  my  father.   I  was  very  proud  of  my
         father's achievement because it meant my father showed  initiative,
         worked hard and in compliance with the law during all his years  in
         Britain.  As soon as my father had obtained his rights to stay,  he
         returned immediately to China  to  see  us.  Even  though  he  only
         visited use a few times, we understood the long journey between  us
         and the huge costs associated with his visits each time.  My father
         was not able to stay with us for  very  long  due  to  his  status.
         Every time my father had to leave  us,  my  longing  for  the  next
         reunion grew stronger.

         My father has been actively trying to obtain my residence status in
         the UK since 2013, however the reality always hit me  hard.   Every
         refusal brings deep pain to our family.  What we have been  through
         is unbearable for ordinary people, from hope to  despair  and  then
         seeking for hope again from despair.  Fortunately,  we  have  never
         given up hope despite having to bear the pain of family  separation
         and we are still trying.

         I am due to graduate this year and  I  would  like  to  further  my
         education in Britain to improve myself further.  There is a  saying
         in Chinese, describing one of the biggest regrets  in  life,  which
         is: "The offspring wants to show his filial love with  his  parents
         but they are gone (dead)".  As a caring son, my biggest fear  would
         be if I have no chance to look after my parents before  it  is  too
         late.  My parents' greying hair and  faces  covered  with  wrinkles
         constantly reminds me that they are no longer youthful.  This makes
         my decision even firmer that is to  join  my  parents  in  Britain,
         accompany them and take good care of them.  ... "

12.  The statement from the Sponsor describes the existence of the  marriage
    to Mrs Yao, his work and the role that she has played  in  bringing  up
    the children, including the Claimant.  He expressed his upset at  being
    further separated from the Claimant  and  his  desire  to  establish  a
    permanent relationship through his son in  the  UK.   The  material  is
    silent as to who is the other  child  sibling  of  the  Claimant.   The
    balance of the material in the Claimant's bundle was  essentially  some
    photographs which could have been taken at any time, they are  undated,
    and they appear to include pictures  of  the  Claimant,  Mrs  Yao,  his
    father, and  possibly  his  sister.   I  am  unaware  of  the  sister's
    circumstances.

13.  In considering this matter outside of the  Immigration  Rules  I  apply
    the case law of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11.
    There is no threshold of exceptional circumstances but it is plain when
    the Rules do make provision and the Rules are in this  case  applicable
    to the circumstances of the case that it does not seem to me that there
    is anything about this case other than the fact that the  Claimant  has
    plainly had a close relationship with his mother Mrs Yao and  that  the
    effect of her coming to the United Kingdom would be an interference  in
    that relationship.

14.  It struck me that if the Claimant wished to come to the United  Kingdom
    to study then it is open to him to make the appropriate application.  I
    conclude from the description in the documents that have been  provided
    with, that the relationship is plainly that of mother and  son  and  it
    represented the perfectly normal relationship that  one  might  expect.
    However whilst fully understanding his desire to remain  with  Mrs  Yao
    and  to  be  with  his  Sponsor  father  I  do  not  find  that   those
    circumstances are in any sense unusual or  indicate  that  this  is  an
    appropriate case where Article  8(1)  family/private  life  rights  are
    engaged in the sense that the ECO's decision is a material interference
    in that chosen relationship.  If I was wrong in that view and Article 8
    ECHR rights are engaged then I conclude that the interference is lawful
    and properly serves the immigration control  purposes  contemplated  by
    Article 8(2) ECHR.  Therefore looking at the brief evidence that I have
    as a whole concluded that  it  is  appropriate  to  take  into  account
    Sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

15.  In that respect  I  take  into  account  that  the  Claimant  has  been
    learning English, he would be supported in the United Kingdom and would
    not evidently be a burden on the taxpayer and he has  the  capacity  to
    work, if he wishes to enjoy the fruits of a  UK  education  that  is  a
    matter for him, and the potential cost to the  taxpayer.   I  find  the
    public interest is a matter which must be given significant  weight  in
    this case and quite simply choices that people make as  to  where  they
    live and at whose expense is not the basis on which it  is  shown  that
    the decision is disproportionate.  I conclude that the public  interest
    is not outweighed by those of the Claimant.  I conclude therefore  that
    the ECO's decision is proportionate.

DECISION

The appeal of the ECO succeeds to the extent that  the  original  Tribunal's
decision cannot stand.  The following decision is substituted.   The  appeal
based on human rights grounds is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity order was sought nor is one appropriate.


Signed                                  Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal of the Claimant on human rights grounds has  been  dismissed  and
therefore no fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
