
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13444/2018
                                                               HU/13446/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th July 2019                    |On 25th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     A b
                                    A A T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Adewale, instructed by Dynamic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Eldridge dismissing their appeal against the refusal of leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Migrant and dependant on Article 8 grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill  on  10
    June 2019 for the following reasons:

         "According to paragraph 14 of the grounds lodged in support of  the
         application to the First-tier Tribunal for  permission  to  appeal,
         the Respondent emailed the ETS bundle on 15th  January  2019,  i.e.
         just five working days before the  hearing  on  23rd  January  2019
         before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Eldridge. It  is  at  least
         arguable that the late submission of the bundle by  the  Respondent
         may have led to unfairness in that the first Appellant arguably did
         not have sufficient time to deal with the Respondent's bundle.


         It is therefore at least  arguable  that  the  judge's  refusal  to
         adjourn the hearing has led to the Appellants having been denied  a
         fair hearing.


         All the grounds may be argued".


Submissions

3.   Mr Adewale submitted that  the  failure  to  adjourn  had  resulted  in
    unfairness because the judge had not given the Appellant an opportunity
    to respond to the serious allegation  of  submitting  a  false  English
    language certificate and, given that  the  Respondent's  witnesses  had
    been criticised in SM and Qadir, the judge's reliance on  the  evidence
    of Mr Gopal at paragraph 35 amounted to an error of law.  The  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal was  not  sufficient  to  discharge  the
    legal  burden  on  the  Respondent  without  giving  the  Appellant  an
    opportunity to offer an innocent explanation.

4.   Mr Adewale referred to a letter from the Respondent dated  14  February
    2014 stating that the Appellant should seek to take another  test.  The
    Appellant had done so and passed the test but this subsequent test  had
    not been taken into account. The judge had failed to consider  this  in
    his decision.

5.   Mr  Adewale  relied  on  JO  (Nigeria)  [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC)  and
    submitted that, even though the second Appellant was under 7 years old,
    it was still necessary to look at  the  circumstances  and  whether  it
    would be reasonable for her to return with  the  first  Appellant,  who
    would be a single mother returning to India. Paragraphs 44  and  45  of
    the judge's decision were an inadequate assessment of  the  duty  under
    Section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2007. Although  the  second  Appellant
    was 4 years old at the time of the hearing, she had lived in the UK all
    her life and did not speak any other language. It  would  be  difficult
    for her to integrate on return to India. The judge failed  to  consider
    the child's circumstances  in  detail  and  failed  to  properly  apply
    Section 55.  Further, because of the refusal to adjourn, there  was  no
    statement from the Appellant. The judge's refusal of an adjournment was
    unfair because it denied her an  opportunity  of  putting  forward  her
    Article 8 claim. There was medical evidence before the judge to explain
    why the Appellant had not attended the hearing. She was suffering  from
    anxiety and depression and was a victim of domestic  violence.  In  all
    the circumstances, it would be disproportionate to return her to India.


6.   Mr Jarvis submitted the GP  records  were  the  only  medical  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the refusal of an  adjournment
    was not procedurally unfair. There was no challenge to Article 8 in the
    renewed grounds to the Upper Tribunal and permission was not granted on
    that basis. The letter from the Respondent of 14 February 2014 was  not
    relevant. It was during that month that the Panorama  documentary  came
    out and the fraudulent use of ETS certificates was discovered.

7.   In relation to the adjournment, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  Appellant
    had decided not to attend the appeal hearing  and  was  relying  on  an
    adjournment being granted. She did not attend the hearing even when the
    adjournment was refused the previous day by the Duty Judge.  There  was
    no obligation on a judge  to  grant  an  adjournment  just  because  an
    Appellant did not attend the appeal. This Appellant had known that  the
    adjournment had been refused  and  was  therefore  on  notice.  It  was
    submitted before the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant was  unable
    to give a statement at any time in the past. Mr Jarvis submitted  there
    would have to be evidence that she was not medically able to produce  a
    witness statement. The GP records submitted in the  Appellant's  bundle
    were insufficient to  show  that  was  the  case.  It  was  clear  from
    paragraph 16 of the decision that the Appellant  had  seven  months  to
    provide a statement and had failed to do so.

8.   The Appellant was not taken by surprise by the  failure  to  serve  the
    ETS bundle until five days before the  hearing  because  she  was  well
    aware from the refusal letter what the issues were. The  Appellant  had
    an unrealistic expectation of the amount of  time  given  in  order  to
    prepare for a hearing. It was clear that the Respondent was not able to
    give any further evidence and the Appellant stated it was  not  her  on
    the audio recording.

9.   Mr Jarvis submitted that at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    there was no request for an adjournment on the basis that the Appellant
    was unable to attend as a result of medical issues. The recent  witness
    statement prepared for this appeal did not engage with the  Appellant's
    non-attendance before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  At  paragraph  24  it
    stated:

         "I have (sic) suffering undue mental distress, depression,  stress,
         panic attack and anxiety for over five years. I am  also  suffering
         heart palpitation anxiety. My career and life aspiration have  been
         destroyed.  My family life was frustrated and broken."

    Although there was a  record  of  depression,  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show that the Appellant was unfit to attend court.

10.  The judge gave  a  detailed  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  claim
    notwithstanding her non-appearance. He concluded that it would  not  be
    unreasonable for the parties to return to India. The judge decided  the
    case as best he could on the evidence before him. There was no error of
    law.

11.  Mr Adewale submitted that the Appellant was not there to challenge  the
    allegation of fraud or to give an explanation and therefore there was a
    problem of unfairness. The Appellant was  unable  to  submit  full  and
    detailed evidence because she was suffering from  anxiety,  stress  and
    depression and was unable to attend the hearing. Because she  had  been
    accused of fraud it  was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to  do  everything
    possible to allow her  to  attend.  It  was  inappropriate  to  proceed
    without giving the Appellant a chance to explain.


Judge's relevant findings

12.  The judge made the following findings with respect to the adjournment:

         "16. I informed the parties I was not willing to adjourn and said I
             would give detailed reasons in my decision notice which I  now
             do.  The Appellant was aware of the  decision  to  refuse  the
             basis for the refusal on or shortly after  8th  June  2018,  a
             period of more than seven months. It is plain however that she
             was actually aware of the underlying  problem  concerning  her
             English language test certificate from at least 14th  February
             2014, see page 12 of her bundle. Although Mr Mussa  said  that
             he wished to contact the solicitors for ETS again he had  also
             informed  me  that  they  said  they  could  give  no  further
             information. I was of the opinion that this was an  appeal  in
             which the Appellant had not engaged with her solicitors.  That
             extended to failing even to make a witness  statement  despite
             the long period available to her to do so.


         17.  The question of the Appellant's ill health was not pursued  in
             the application   before me but I did consider it.   I  agreed
             with the decision of the  Duty  Judge  on  the  previous  day.
             Whilst  the  medical  evidence  provided  disclosed  that  the
             Appellant has a history of anxiety and  depression  since  she
             was a teenager and  is  treated  with  medication,  which  has
             recently been increased, this is a  first  line  intervention.
             The notes produced from the Appellant's GP did not state  that
             she was unfit to attend but merely that she had reported  that
             she felt so.


         18.  I had regard to the provisions  of  Rule  2  of  the  Tribunal
             Procedure Rules 2014 and the issues of fairness.  In  my  view
             an adjournment would serve no purpose.  The Appellant had  not
             engaged with the reasons for the refusal of  her  application,
             there  was  no  prospect  of  any  further  information  being
             forthcoming from ETS and she was represented  at  the  hearing
             before me. If it was correct that she was unfit to attend  the
             hearing, which I did not accept, there was  no  indication  of
             when she might be able to do so  or  when  she  would  give  a
             statement to her solicitors.  I was of the opinion the  appeal
             could be fairly and justly determined  on  the  basis  of  the
             evidence before  me  and  by  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
             parties.  I had regard to the general undesirability of  delay
             and  the  scarce  resources  of  both  the  Tribunal  and  the
             Respondent.


         19.   After  I  announced  my  decision  on  the  question  of  the
             adjournment to another date, I readily acceded to the  request
             by Mr Mussa that this appeal be taken at the end of my list. I
             so adjourned and resumed the  hearing  approximately  one  and
             three quarter hours later.  He informed me that the  Appellant
             continued to be on antidepressant medication, her daughter was
             at school and she would not be attending with the hearing.

13.  In relation to the ETS the judge concluded:

         "37. The Appellant has known of the problems she  faces  concerning
             this English language test certificate for many years and  the
             precise reasons for refusing her most recent application since
             early June 2018. In the intervening seven months she  has  not
             provided a witness statement and  she  has  not  attended  the
             hearing before me to give evidence.  She seeks  to  rely  upon
             the test taken on 9th August 2014 and marked as  being  passed
             some eleven days later. I do not find that this is relevant to
             the question of  whether  some  sixteen  or  seventeen  months
             earlier she used a proxy to take the test  year  undertook  at
             Queensway College.


         38.  On the evidence available to me  I  conclude  that  the  first
             Appellant has not discharged the burden upon her to provide an
             innocent explanation for taking of the test by another person.
              The Appellant was entitled to refuse the first  Appellant  on
             suitability grounds."

14.  The judge then went on to consider Article 8 and stated:

         "44. It was put on her  behalf  that  India  is  a  male  dominated
             country and that she would suffer greatly because of this  and
             that her life would be ruined if she had to return.  I do not
             accept that.  On the face of it she is a person who has  shown
             herself over time to be adaptable. Having lived for more  than
             three quarters of her life in India she may be presumed  fully
             to understand the culture and to retain good language  skills.
             Nothing has been put for me that I have seen  that  she  would
             have any more significant difficulty than any other no  single
             mother returning to live in India.  She has not chosen to give
             any evidence concerning her family circumstances in India.


         45.  The best interests of her young daughter are  to  remain  with
             her mother. It is not suggested that her father plays any part
             in her life wherever he may be. The relatively recent decision
             of the Supreme Court in KO Nigeria v The  Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 sets  out  that  regard
             must be had to the realities of life. The first Appellant  the
             mother has no right to be within the United  Kingdom  and  has
             sought to remain here by deception.  She must return.   It  is
             entirely reasonable to expect her young daughter to  accompany
             her and  to  live  in  the  country  of  her  nationality  and
             heritage. At the age of 4 there is good reason to believe that
             she will adjust well to life in  India  although  it  will  be
             different in some respects to the life she has begun to  enjoy
             in this country."

Conclusions and reasons

15.  I find that the refusal of an adjournment was  not  unfair.  The  judge
    considered whether the Appellant had been unable  to  properly  prepare
    for the hearing, because  of  the  late  service  of  the  bundle,  and
    concluded that was not material to the lack  of  preparation.   It  was
    apparent that the Appellant had failed to engage with  her  solicitors.
    She knew by June 2018 at the latest that there was a problem  with  her
    English language test and yet she failed to provide a statement for the
    appeal hearing and  put  forward  an  innocent  explanation.  The  late
    service of the bundle did not give rise to any unfairness  because  the
    Appellant had ample opportunity to prepare. The Appellant received  the
    ETS bundle on 15 January  2019  and  there  was  no  dispute  that  the
    Appellant's voice was not that on the voice recording.

16.  There was no statement from the Appellant and  there  was  insufficient
    medical evidence to show that she was unfit to attend the  hearing.  It
    was clear from the adjournment request refused by the Duty Judge on  22
    January 2019 that the Appellant's inability to attend was not a  reason
    to grant an adjournment.  She was well aware that her attendance at the
    hearing was necessary. I am not  satisfied  that  the  refusal  of  the
    adjournment has caused unfairness in this case.

17.  In any event, this is a human rights appeal and, even if the judge  had
    found in the Appellant's favour in relation to the ETS point such  that
    the  Respondent  was  not  entitled  to  refuse  the   application   on
    suitability grounds, the fact remains  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the other requirements of the Immigration Rules. She could  not
    succeed as a partner or as a parent.  The  second  Appellant  was  four
    years old and was not a qualifying child. The judge considered her best
    interests and his conclusions at 44 and 45 were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him. He properly applied KO Nigeria. The best interests
    of the second Appellant were to remain with her mother  and  return  to
    India. Taking the Appellants' claim at its highest, this  appeal  could
    not succeed on Article 8 grounds on its facts. There was nothing before
    me in the Appellant's further evidence, served at  the  start  of  this
    hearing, that could possibly lead to a different conclusion.

18.  The refusal of the adjournment was not arguably unfair  and  there  was
    no material error of law in the  judge's  decision  promulgated  on  18
    February 2019. Accordingly, I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 22 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 22 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

