

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13324/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 1 August 2017                         |on 3 August 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

            Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 A A BUSARI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr K Katani, of Katani & Co, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The SSHD appeals  against  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farrelly, promulgated on 15 November 2016, allowing Mr Busari's  appeal
    under article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The first ground of appeal to the UT alleges procedural unfairness.

 3. The presenting officer in the FtT  withdrew,  on  the  basis  that  his
    position was compromised by living close to  the  appellant's  address.
    It was not a question for the FtT,  and  is  not  a  question  for  us,
    whether that was a good enough reason to withdraw.

 4. The presenting officer did take part in the proceedings to  the  extent
    of asking for an adjournment.  The case had been  on  a  "float  list".
    The adjournment application was based  on  lack  of  time  for  another
    presenting officer to be found and to prepare the case.

 5. The SSHD has considerable resources  available.   Nevertheless,  it  is
    common practice to leave some hearing lists, including but not  limited
    to float lists, to proceed without  any  presenting  officer  or  other
    representative.  If this was thought to be a case in which to  field  a
    presenting officer, and there was any difficulty in providing one,  the
    time to apply to the FtT was when the lists were intimated  (which,  we
    understand, takes place at least two days ahead).   Alternatively,  the
    matter might have been raised at the beginning of the hearing  day.  As
    it was not, the case must be regarded as one  in  which  the  SSHD  was
    prepared to take the risk of no  presenting  officer  being  available.
    The matter was not one which ought to have been  left  until  the  case
    came on for  hearing.   The  appellant  and  his  representatives  were
    entitled to expect that the case would go ahead, if and  when  a  Judge
    became available.   We  see  no  procedural  unfairness  in  the  Judge
    deciding to proceed.

 6. The substantive conclusion reached was open to the Judge.   We  see  no
    more than disagreement in  the  further  grounds  of  appeal,  alleging
    inadequacy of reasoning and misdirection in law.

 7. The child expected by the appellant and his partner at the time of  the
    FtT hearing has since been born.  If the decision were to be remade, or
    if Mr Busari were to make a further application to the  SSHD,  all  the
    indications are that he would succeed.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            1 August 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




