
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/13310/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 November 2019                     | On 26 November 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       mr gurshinder deol (aka singh)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T D C Jowett, Counsel, instructed by N C Brothers
&
     Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued  on  23  August  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockerill which allowed the appeal of Mr Deol
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds in the context of deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to Mr Deol as  the  appellant
    and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  as  the
    respondent, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Mr Deol is a citizen of India, born on 16 November 1963.

 4. Mr Deol came to the UK on 18 April  1987  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse.  He was granted further leave to remain until 10 September 1988
    and on 13 December 1988 he  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    (ILR).

 5. Mainly because of his alcoholism, Mr Deol has an extensive  history  of
    offending.  The offences led, in the main, although not exclusively, to
    non-custodial sentences.  The most serious offence was one for which on
    22 August 2008 he was sentenced to a term of eight months' imprisonment
    for harassment and breach of a civil injunction  against  his  ex-wife.
    These offences led to previous deportation  proceedings  in  which  the
    appellant was successful, his appeal being allowed on 26 February 2009.



 6. Mr Deol continued to offend notwithstanding those previous  deportation
    proceedings.  Again, the offences were relatively minor and led to non-
    custodial sentences or suspended custodial sentences.  However,  on  15
    November 2017 he was convicted of putting a person in fear of  violence
    and was sentenced to two years in imprisonment. He was  also  convicted
    of assault by beating and sentenced to a six  months'  imprisonment  to
    run concurrently with the sentence of two years.   A  very  distressing
    aspect of the offences was that they were committed against his elderly
    and frail mother with whom he was living. The sentencing judge remarked
    on the appellant's "appalling behaviour" towards  his  mother  who  was
    nearly 80 years old.

 7. A deportation order was made against the appellant on 29 May  2018  and
    in a letter of the same date the respondent refused  his  human  rights
    claim, giving full  reasons  for  so  doing.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The hearing before Judge Cockerill took place on  7  August  2019.  The
    First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant, his cousin,  his
    mother and his two sons.  A summary of their evidence is  contained  in
    paragraphs 15 to 25 of the decision.

 9. In paragraphs 31 to 33 of the decision the judge sets out the  relevant
    provisions of the Immigration  Rules  and  identified  that  where  the
    appellant had a sentence of 2 years, an assessment had  to  be  carried
    out in line with the provisions of paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, there being no relationship with a partner or child  that  could
    qualify for consideration under paragraph 399.

10. The judge found that the appellant had lived in  the  UK  lawfully  for
    more than half of  his  life,  that  he  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated and  that  he  would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration in India. He found that the appeal had to be allowed  where
    the provisions of paragraph 399A were met  and  outweighed  the  public
    interest.  The judge's reasons are set out in paragraphs 33  to  36  of
    the decision:

         "33. ... I make it clear that the first element,  namely  that  the
             person has been lawfully resident in this country for most  of
             his life, has plainly been made out by the Appellant,  he  has
             been here for over 30 years.  As regards the  second  element,
             as to  whether  he  is  socially  and  culturally  integrated,
             although that was queried by the Respondent  it  seems  to  me
             that it is clear that the Appellant is precisely that,  namely
             socially and culturally integrated.  He is Sikh.  He has had a
             serious problem with alcohol and that has  affected  his  life
             dramatically.  However, as I have already  indicated,  he  was
             married, he has two  adult  sons  with  whom  he  maintains  a
             relationship.  He has had a close relationship with his mother
             and sadly, because of his abuse of alcohol and some strain  in
             their relationship, he committed criminal acts towards her for
             which he has been punished.  I do not see that it  can  really
             be said that he is not  socially  and  culturally  integrated,
             notwithstanding the fact that he has committed offences.

         34.  The acid test is really whether  there  are  very  significant
             obstacles to his integration.  Miss Khan is right to say  that
             there is no evidence that the Appellant would be  unemployable
             in India.  He has not worked for some appreciable time in this
             country  really  because   he   has   some   physical   health
             difficulties that  have  been  documented  and,  perhaps  most
             importantly, he has had a serious drink problem.  He  declares
             he has been sober for some two years now and is determined  to
             turn over the proverbial new leaf.  In analysing whether  that
             particular test is met, I note that  the  Appellant  does  not
             have close family members in India.  By contrast,  of  course,
             his sons are in the United Kingdom and are working actively in
             a restaurant business.  They are ready and willing to  support
             the Appellant by providing him with employment.  That  picture
             could not be mirrored in India where there is no-one  to  help
             him.  He has no capital.  He is indeed part of a  minority  in
             India by being Sikh.  He would not have the day-to-day contact
             with immediate family which of course can exist  here.   Given
             his health difficulties, and taking account  of  his  previous
             problems when he has turned to alcohol, it  does  seem  to  be
             perfectly  arguable  that  there  would  be  more  than  major
             obstacles for this particular Appellant and what could rightly
             be described as very significant obstacles to his integration.



         35.  He would be someone who would be expected to live on his  own.
             It is plain that his marriage broke down and  that  led  to  a
             host of problems for the Appellant.  He has run  into  serious
             difficulties with his mother and that, of course, led  to  the
             imposition  of  the  two  year  prison  sentence.   In  India,
             however, there is no support network available to  him  and  I
             would be very  concerned  as  to  what  would  happen  to  the
             Appellant, given his vulnerabilities, if he were sent there.

         36.  I conclude, therefore although it is not  by  any  significant
             margin, that the Appellant succeeds in relation to  the  Rules
             by showing 'very significant obstacles to integration ..."

11.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  then  proceeded  to  consider   the   "very
    significant obstacles  test"  in  the  event  that  his  assessment  of
    paragraph 399A was incorrect:

             "36. ... However, if  for  any  reason  I  am  wrong  in  that
             analysis, and held to be so, then I take full account  of  all
             the evidence  which  I  have  heard  from  the  witnesses  who
             attended Taylor House on 7 August 2019.  They  were  perfectly
             straightforward and reliable in the way  in  which  they  gave
             their evidence to me.  What is striking about this appeal, and
             this has particular relevance for consideration of the  matter
             outside the framework of the Rules and on Article  8  grounds,
             is  that  the  very  victim  of  this  criminal  conduct,  the
             Appellant's mother, is really the first person to be coming to
             the Tribunal and saying that she wants her son to be permitted
             to remain here so that he can provide  care  and  support  for
             her.   He  is  her  only  son.   Culturally  it  is  extremely
             important  that  the  Appellant  plays  a  practical  role  in
             relation to this mother, caring for her and looking after her.
              He has the capacity to do that and so  it  is  arguable  what
             real  public  interest  would  be  served  by  removing   this
             Appellant and thereby depriving his mother of  not  only  love
             and affection from her son, but also practical support.

         37.  I have noted already how Counsel put the matter to me that the
             Appellant's mother had indeed come to this country as an adult
             dependent relative and so indeed it would be a  most  peculiar
             twist of fate if she, having gained permission to stay in this
             country because of her son, should find that by  her  actions,
             or indirectly by her actions, that her son is now removed.   I
             also give very significant weight to the length of  time  that
             the Appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom.   That  really
             cannot be downplayed.  He has  been  here  for  more  than  30
             years.  He does not know India in any meaningful sense because
             he has, for all practical  purposes,  made  this  country  his
             home.  I recognise, of course, that he can speak the  language
             and he is  of  course  very  familiar  with  Sikh  custom  and
             practice, however, there is a  wealth  of  difference  between
             speaking the language and really being part of Indian culture.



         39.  I am mindful also that the Appellant has a  number  of  health
             needs.  None is of sufficient gravity in  and  of  itself,  or
             indeed collectively, to prevent his removal  but  they  are  a
             factor that needs to be given some weight,  the  Appellant  is
             not in the best of health.  Patently, he  has  had  a  serious
             drink problem in the past.

         40.  I am mindful, of course, of the provisions of Section  117  to
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended,
             particularly  at  Section  117C  which   requires   additional
             consideration in cases involving foreign criminals.

         41.  It is trite perhaps to say that the more serious  the  offence
             committed by the foreign criminal the greater  is  the  public
             interest in the deportation of that criminal.  This  Appellant
             did receive a sentence of two  years'  imprisonment  and  that
             does mark the gravity of the matter.   However,  and  I  think
             this is important  to  stress,  the  victim  of  that  set  of
             offences was his mother and of course she came to Taylor House
             to speak strongly in favour of mercy being shown so  that  the
             Appellant could be permitted to remain in this country  to  be
             reunited with her.

         42.  The way in which Section 117C is drafted  is  that  it  really
             mirrors the provisions of paragraphs 399A and so again I  look
             at very significant obstacles to integration.  I can repeat my
             reasoning that as I find that the Appellant  would  face  such
             very  significant  obstacles,  given  his  own  history,   his
             personality and character and the fact that he will be removed
             from the only close and loving relatives that he  has,  namely
             his sons and his mother.  In my overall assessment in judgment
             that decision to remove the Appellant by deportation would  be
             a disproportionate one.  It would be placing him far too great
             a  distance  from  his  immediate  family  and  in   all   the
             circumstances, in my judgment, it is  not  warranted.   Public
             interest, when looked at in a broad  way,  is  not  served  by
             removing the Appellant from the life of his mother.  When  one
             hears that his sons can offer him employment  that  is  highly
             positive action that may well settle the Appellant in life and
             enable him to act in a constructive and helpful manner towards
             his mother in the future.  In that sense and  in  my  judgment
             the public interest is truly served.

         43.  The Appellant, in my judgment, has  succeeded  in  his  appeal
             based upon Section 33 to the 2007  Act  by  showing  that  his
             deportation would result in a breach of  his  protected  human
             rights under Article 8."

12. The respondent's grounds of appeal  challenge  the  findings  that  the
    appellant was socially and culturally integrated into the UK  and  that
    he would face very significant obstacles to integration in India.

13. The respondent maintained that the extent of the  appellant's  criminal
    history showed "scant regard" for social norms and meant that he  could
    not be found to be socially and culturally  integrated,  with  reliance
    being placed on the cases of Bossade (ss.117A-D interrelationship  with
    Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 and on Binbuga v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 551.

14.  The  grounds  also  challenged  the  finding  that  there  were   very
    significant obstacles where there was no evidence  that  the  appellant
    would be unemployable in India, his history showed that he had  been  a
    talented chef and he would have no  language  difficulties  as  he  was
    fluent in Punjabi.  The respondent maintained that the  judge  took  an
    incorrect approach in comparing the appellant's life in India with  the
    life he would have in the UK, in particular comparing the daily contact
    he has with family here to having no family in  India.  The  respondent
    contended that it was the norm for someone who is deported to  have  to
    live on their  own  and  that  this  was  an  expected  consequence  of
    deportation.  The judge also speculated in finding that  the  appellant
    might return to alcohol given that he had been abstinent for two years.
     The respondent maintained that  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not show a lawful  approach  to  the  assessment  of  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration, relying on the case of  SSHD  v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 which states at paragraph 14:

         "The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and the capacity to participate in it, so  as
         to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to  be  able
         to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

15. In my view the  respondent's  grounds  can  best  be  characterised  as
    arguing that the First-tier Tribunal took an irrational approach to the
    evidence  concerning  social  and   cultural   integration   and   very
    significant  obstacles  to  reintegration.  The  grounds  are   really,
    therefore, maintaining that the judge reached a decision  that  on  the
    evidence that was before him was not one  that  a  reasonable  decision
    maker could reach.

16. It is not my conclusion that the decision shows that the judge took  an
    irrational approach in the assessment of  either  social  and  cultural
    integration or very significant obstacles to reintegration in India.

17. It is clear from the decision that the judge placed significant  weight
    on the evidence of the appellant, his cousin, his mother  and  his  two
    sons. Their evidence was that the appellant was socially and culturally
    integrated and that the appellant deeply regretted  his  offending  and
    had addressed his  alcohol  problem  that  lay  behind  it.  They  also
    considered that he would face very significant difficulties on his  own
    in India. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to place weight on their
    evidence and take it at its highest. In paragraph 33  the  judge  shows
    that he considered the respondent's position  on  social  and  cultural
    integration, having already set  out  the  respondent's  case  in  more
    detail in paragraphs 8 to 10 and 26. The judge refers  specifically  at
    the end of paragraph 33 to  the  appellant's  offences  as  a  relevant
    factor when considering social and  cultural  integration.  It  is  not
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to have proper  regard  to
    the extent and seriousness of the offending  as  his  understanding  of
    this is set out in various  parts  of  the  decision,  for  example  in
    paragraphs 4 to 8. The FTTJ provides a number of  rational  reasons  in
    paragraph 33 for finding that the appellant was socially and culturally
    integrated, in particular his very long residence, having  married  and
    had a family in the UK and his ongoing and close relationships with his
    adult sons and his mother. The case of Binbuga does not indicate that a
    criminal history has to break  integrative  ties  and  the  appellant's
    profile here was very different to that of Mr Binbuga who was a  member
    of a criminal gang with a much  shorter  period  of  residence.  Albeit
    another judge might have reached  a  different  conclusion,  there  was
    material here which allowed this judge to reach the  decision  he  did,
    notwithstanding the criminal offending and  the  grounds  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the conclusion reached rather than showing  an  error
    of law in this part of the assessment.

18. My conclusion is also that the judge's  findings  on  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration in India are sound for very similar reasons.
     The judge acknowledges that there was no specific  evidence  that  the
    appellant would be unemployed in India. He  was  entitled  to  reach  a
    conclusion that the appellant would not be able to find work, reasoning
    that he had a limited employment history in the UK, would  be  isolated
    in India with no funds, had health problems and that  his  difficulties
    there would make a relapse into alcoholism more likely. It  is  correct
    that the assessment of very significant obstacles to  reintegration  is
    not one of comparison with a private life in the UK but my  reading  is
    that all that the judge does in  paragraph  34  is  to  find  that  the
    appellant would struggle additionally in India because of the  distress
    of separation from his family in the UK and together with his isolation
    there he would experience "more than major" obstacles.  The  assessment
    appears to me to be  in  line  with  the  "broad  evaluative  judgment"
    required by the guidance in Kamara and is a sufficiently clear and well-
    reasoned finding that this appellant will not be "enough of an insider"
    and would not be able to re-establish himself. Again, it is not my view
    that the grounds show that  the  assessment  contains  either  a  legal
    misdirection or irrationality.

19. It therefore follows, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    allow the appeal where paragraph 399A was met.

20. For all of these reasons, I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not disclose an error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  21   November
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


