
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
                                             HU/13283/2016


                                   HU/13292/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Determination Promulgated        |
|On 25th September 2018                   | On 1st October 2018              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   H K (1)
                                   J S (2)
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms C Bexson, of Counsel, instructed by Khans
Solicitors

    Introduction



    1. The claimants are citizens of India  and  are  a  husband  and  wife
       couple. They both arrived in the UK in 2014, the first claimant with
       leave to enter as a Tier 4 student migrant and the  second  claimant
       with leave as her dependent. This  leave  was  extended  until  18th
       February 2016, and on 17th February 2016 the  claimants  applied  to
       remain on the basis of their human rights. The  Secretary  of  State
       refused this application in a decision dated 10th  May  2016.  Their
       appeal against the decision was allowed on human rights  grounds  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Vernon in a determination  promulgated
       on the 28th November 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State  on  12th
       June 2018 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law in making irrational findings relating to the
       first claimant's medical treatment.

    3. I found that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  for  the
       reasons set out in my  decision  at  Annex  A,  and  set  aside  the
       decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  but  preserving  some  of  the
       findings. The matter now comes back to me to remake the appeal.  The
       claimants  provided  written  witness  statements  and   gave   oral
       evidence, and Dr Glover provided a report dated 11th September  2018
       and gave oral evidence. At the end  of  the  hearing,  having  heard
       submissions for both parties, I reserved my decision.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    4. The evidence of the first claimant is, in summary,  that  she  would
       have very significant obstacles to integration if returned to  India
       because if she were to return she would  suffer  trauma  and  stress
       that would put her at high risk of a psychotic relapse  which  would
       mean that she was not able to care for herself and her children, and
       that the second claimant, who only has  basic  secondary  education,
       would not be able to support her and their two children without  the
       help  of  one  of  the  families.  It  would  also   be   culturally
       unacceptable to relocate away from the families. The first  claimant
       explained that away from family and  friends,  and  without  the  UK
       treatment package and if her husband were at work, she would have no
       one to help her when she becomes unresponsive to her children or had
       a panic attack because of her mental health problems. She would  not
       be able to go to new neighbours as she would  not  trust  them,  and
       this would leave her very young children unprotected. In the UK they
       have a circle of friends and extended family who  assist  them.  She
       could not return to live with her family  in  India  as  they  would
       force her to see the faith healer who abused her.  She  cannot  tell
       them about the rape because of the  social  stigma  associated  with
       being a rape victim. She could not live with her  parents-in-law  as
       they are hostile to her and this would make her mental health worse,
       and this could lead to her  children  being  taken  away  from  her.
       Further, if returned to India,  she  would  lose  the  vital  mental
       health treatment she receives in the UK as there  is  no  equivalent
       psychotherapy service.

    5. The evidence of the second claimant is, in summary, that he has  not
       worked in India and has only basic  education.  That  it  would  not
       possible for him and the first claimant to live  together  in  India
       due to his parents' attitude to the first claimant. He has played  a
       key role in  caring  for  the  children,  looking  after  the  first
       claimant and caring for the home whilst they have lived in  the  UK.
       He does not believe that it would be possible for them to live apart
       from their parents for practical and cultural reasons. In the UK  he
       worked in a shop for about two and a half  years  between  2012  and
       2014 whilst he had work permission but this had then been withdrawn.
       He does not believe he would  obtain  work  in  India  as  he  lacks
       qualifications and experience, and it is hard  to  obtain  work.  He
       fears that return to India would not be safe  for  his  family,  and
       would cause the  first  claimant  to  have  a  major  mental  health
       breakdown. He also fears for his own mental health as  currently  he
       has the support of a father's group which enables him  to  care  for
       himself so he can  perform  his  role  as  a  carer  for  the  first
       claimant.

    6. The evidence of Dr Naomi  Glover,  principal  clinical  psychologist
       with the Redbridge Early Intervention in Psychosis team is that  she
       has been caring for the first claimant since July 2016.   The  first
       claimant has a working diagnosis of severe depressive  episode  with
       psychotic features. She also suffers post-traumatic stress  disorder
       as a result of the sexual assault from the faith healer in India  in
       2016. She suffers from visual, auditory and  tactile  hallucinations
       as well as persecutory delusions, and flashbacks and nightmares. She
       is  not  currently  actively  psychotic  but  is   struggling   with
       depression and anxiety.  In the UK the first claimant  has  a  small
       but helpful network of friends and extended family who help care for
       her and the family. She also has two teams supporting her: a medical
       psychological intervention team and a social support  team.  At  the
       present time the first claimant sees Dr Glover every two  weeks  and
       the care coordinator every two weeks. She sees  Kevin  Ball  in  the
       perinatal team every week, and her psychiatrist to review medication
       about once every three months. The second  claimant  has  a  monthly
       fathers' group and a weekly psychological service  support.  In  the
       UK, with this support, the claimants and their children live  as  an
       independent family unit with the  assistance  of  friends  and  some
       distant relatives who provide some childcare.

    7. If returned to India the first claimant would be  likely  to  suffer
       three sets of stressors, which in turn would be likely  to  cause  a
       psychotic relapse. Firstly, she would be retraumatised by  returning
       to the country where she was raped, and may be revictimized  as  she
       may return (for practical reasons) to her mother's  home  and  would
       have reduced capacity to make safe and appropriate decisions not  to
       see the faith healer. The first claimant has  not  told  her  family
       about the rape because of the social  stigma  and  cultural  shaming
       associated  with  being  a  rape  victim.  Secondly,  she   has   an
       acrimonious relationship with her in-laws as she is of a lower caste
       than they are, and they are critical and hostile to her, and  living
       with such attitudes would be likely to cause a re-emergence  of  the
       psychosis. This is a  process  called  "expressed  emotion"  whereby
       negative attitudes of family  members  affect  the  ability  of  the
       unwell person to stay well. Thirdly, there is stigma associated with
       having been raped, and having mental health difficulties  in  India.
       This would make it hard to reach out to health  services  in  India,
       and this stress could lead to a psychotic relapse.

    8. The evidence of Kevin Ball, perinatal psychotherapist,  set  out  in
       his letter of 12th September 2018, is that he has been treating  the
       first claimant since 2016. He sees her to help with her relationship
       with her children due to her having post-partum depression. He  also
       works with the second claimant, helping improve his parenting skills
       and with marital cohesion, as well as dealing with  his  own  mental
       health issues. He has looked at information from  the  World  Health
       Organisation and believes that there is no  perinatal  service  like
       the one he offers in India, particularly one which engages  fathers.
       He also believes that return to  India  would  be  a  major  trigger
       factor for the first claimant's post-traumatic stress disorder,  and
       he fears that this would  impact  on  the  children  as  this  would
       threaten their sense  of  safety  which  is  vital  for  the  proper
       development of the children. He also believes that return  to  India
       would separate the family for practical reasons due to the  problems
       the first claimant  has  with  her  in-laws,  and  that  this  would
       negatively impact on the children as she may go  to  live  with  her
       family without the second claimant.

    9. Mr Tarlow relied upon the reasons for refusal letter and  some  oral
       submissions. In summary it is argued that there would  not  be  very
       significant obstacles for the claimants in India as they lived there
       for the first 22/24 years of their lives,  and  have  family  there.
       There is medical treatment  in  India  which  might  not  be  of  an
       equivalent standard to that of the UK, but is sufficient as there is
       no exceptional case on  medical  grounds.  The  claimants'  families
       could assist with the care of  their  children.  It  would  also  be
       possible for the second claimant to obtain work, as he had  done  in
       the past in the UK, and for the claimants to live apart  from  their
       families as they are a cohesive family unit in  the  UK.  Mr  Tarlow
       also relied upon the COI request for information about psychiatry in
       India dated 10th October 2016. The information provided is extremely
       brief and is as follows: that there is a psychiatrist  available  in
       Delhi; that there are social workers employed in the  mental  health
       sector in India, and that mental health services are managed by  the
       state governments in India.  There is also  a  list  of  psychiatric
       medications available in India attached.

   10. Ms Bexson submitted that the appeal should be  allowed  due  to  the
       probable impact on the first claimant's health if she  were  removed
       which would mean that she was not be able to care for herself or her
       children. It would not be possible for the family to  relocate  away
       from their parents for practical and cultural reasons, and returning
       to live with them would  increase  the  likelihood  of  a  psychotic
       relapse for the first claimant. The second  claimant  would  not  be
       able to get employment if they were  to  relocate  away  from  their
       parents as  he  has  no  qualifications,  contacts  or  Indian  work
       experience. He would not be able to support two children and a  wife
       with mental health needs. It is clear  on  the  background  evidence
       that the support the claimants  receive  in  the  UK  from  the  two
       multidisciplinary teams would not be  available  in  India,  and  in
       particularly Mr Ball has identified that there  are  no  service  to
       fathers or the family support that he provides. The  best  interests
       of the two children would be harmed on return, with the  possibility
       of their being taken into care. Attention is drawn to two background
       articles on mental  health  services  in  India  in  the  claimants'
       country of origin bundle: India's millions of  mentally  ill  hidden
       behind taboo from the Dawn newspaper and  Mental  Illness:  shedding
       the stigma around India's big secret from the  Philosophy  for  Life
       organisation. The former indicates that many mental patients are  at
       the mercy of faith healers, some of whom subject  them  to  physical
       abuse, and a severe lack of  trained  mental  health  professionals.
       The latter sets out inter alia that a diagnosis  of  mental  illness
       can affect your ability to open a bank  account,  obtain  a  driving
       licence and maintain custody of your children.



Conclusions - Remaking

   11. The question to be determined is whether return of the claimants and
       their children to India would be a breach of  Article  8  ECHR.  The
       first reference for considering this issue is the Immigration  Rules
       at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which states that the  claimants  qualify
       to remain on Article 8 ECHR private life grounds if there  would  be
       very significant obstacles to their integration on return to  India.
       The best interests of the two children of the claimants  must  be  a
       primary consideration in the consideration of this appeal. They  are
       aged  2  years  and  six  months'  so  their  best   interests   are
       intrinsically and solely linked to the well-being of their  parents,
       and thus, I find, in turn with the ability of the claimants  to  re-
       integrate in India without very significant obstacles.

   12. I preserved the findings of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 28
       to 44 of  the  decision.  In  summary  these  are  as  follows.  The
       claimants are citizens of India who are  a  married  couple  with  a
       child, the first claimant then  being  pregnant  with  the  couple's
       second child. (This child has now been born.) The first claimant  is
       a well-educated  microbiologist  with  a  post-graduate  diploma  in
       business management. The claimants have developed a private life  in
       the UK which includes  good  friendships.  The  first  claimant  has
       mental health problems which have developed  since  2014  and  which
       include post-traumatic stress disorder, severe depressive  disorder,
       emerging  psychosis  and  fibromyalgia.   She   takes   psychotropic
       medication. Her trauma has been escalated by a  visit  to  India  in
       2015 during which she visited her family and they took her to see  a
       faith healer  who  sexually  abused  her.  She  found  it  initially
       difficult to share this with the second claimant, and has  not  been
       able to tell her family in India. In  September  2017  her  symptoms
       were in remission, but it was the opinion of  medical  experts  that
       return to India would be a trigger factor for her psychosis  getting
       worse as this is exacerbated by stress, and she may also be  a  risk
       of her hallucinations and delusional thinking  being  increased  and
       thus  return  could  affect  her  ability  to  function.  The  first
       claimant's parents are both physically unwell. They understand  that
       the first claimant has mental health problems  and  believe  that  a
       faith healer is the answer to these and not medication.  The  second
       claimant's parents are not supportive of their marriage and  do  not
       like the first claimant. There is treatment for  those  with  mental
       illness in India, but it is limited in availability and quality.

   13. I am satisfied that all of the witness before me gave  credible  and
       honesty testimony. Dr Glover was very careful to keep  her  evidence
       to matters within her expertise, and not to express  an  opinion  on
       available  mental  health  services  in  India  for  instance.   All
       witnesses answered the questions put to them  fully  and  carefully,
       and their testimony was consistent with  their  written  statements,
       with each other and with  the  documentary  evidence  provided.  The
       first claimant presented as a very unwell woman who made little  eye
       contact, shook physically with fear and was  clearly  very  stressed
       when appearing before the Tribunal despite her intellectual  ability
       to answer the questions put to her. There was no submission for  the
       respondent that I should not find them credible, although Mr  Tarlow
       did challenge the conclusion of the second claimant  that  he  would
       not be able to find work. Whilst I accept that the  second  claimant
       has genuine fears that this would be the case he has not shown  that
       he would not be able to obtain unskilled work in India, particularly
       as he was able to do this in the UK, and I make my decision  on  the
       basis that on the balance of  probabilities  he  would  be  able  to
       obtain unskilled low paid work in India. I also give weight  to  the
       letter form Mr Kevin Ball, which was not challenged in any way by Mr
       Tarlow, and  given  that  Dr  Glover  provided  evidence  about  the
       treatment provided by Mr Ball to the claimants.

   14. My conclusion, based on all of the  evidence  before  me,  that  the
       claimants would have very significant obstacles  to  integration  if
       returned to India. This is for the following reasons. I find for the
       three reasons articulated by Dr Glover return to India would, on the
       balance of probabilities cause a major deterioration  in  the  first
       claimant's  mental  health  including  a  psychotic  relapse  and  a
       worsening of her post-traumatic stress  disorder.  I  find  that  in
       these circumstances it would not be possible for the second claimant
       both to care for his two very young children and the second claimant
       and work in a low paid  unskilled  job  to  support  the  family  as
       separate unit in a location away from his or her parents, even  with
       the help of some basic mental health services as provided  in  India
       as the stress of return to the place where the  first  claimant  was
       sexually abused and where mental health problems  carry  significant
       social  stigma  would  induce  a  probable  psychotic  relapse   and
       increased  post-traumatic  stress   disorder   symptoms.   This   is
       particularly the case as on the evidence of Mr Ball I accept that it
       has been shown to the required standard of proof that these services
       would not include any help or support for the second claimant  which
       he has required to perform his supportive family role in the UK.  It
       is notable that the second claimant has not worked in the UK for the
       time whilst the period  since  2014,  when  the  preserved  findings
       record her severe mental health problems as having onset.

   15.  I accept the evidence of the claimants, as set out above and in the
       preserved findings, that there are reasons  why  it  would  cause  a
       severe worsening in the first claimant's mental health to live  with
       either set of parents; and that in addition it would  be  likely  to
       cause the first and second claimants not to be able to live together
       if they had to rely upon this support, which would also endanger the
       children as they would  be  highly  likely  to  be  with  the  first
       claimant, who would be severely unwell and living with her aged  and
       unwell parents. I find that the best  interests  of  the  claimants'
       children are to remain in the UK as on return to India they will, on
       the balance of probabilities, be left  for  significant  periods  of
       time in the precarious sole care of the first claimant (whether  she
       were to relocate away from family with the second claimant or return
       to live with her parents) who would  be  likely  to  be  in  a  non-
       responsive state due to a mental health relapse and therefore unable
       to meet their basic needs. It is also probable that they  would  not
       have the care of both parents which  is  in  their  best  interests,
       particularly given the first claimant's severe  ill-health.  I  find
       that it can properly be concluded therefore  that  the  family,  who
       would also suffer from the social stigma  of  the  first  claimant's
       history of  mental  health  problems  which  are  indicated  by  her
       physical presentation as well as  behaviour  when  unwell,  and  who
       potentially would also suffer stigma due  to  the  first  claimant's
       history of sexual abuse, would have very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration on return to India.

   16. In these circumstances, as  I  find  that  the  claimants  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  I
       find therefore that there is no public interest in their removal  as
       they can meet the requirements of the system of immigration control.
       I am satisfied that they both speak  English  to  a  good  standard,
       which is a neutral matter;  that  they  cannot  financially  support
       themselves financially at the current time which weighs against; and
       that they have extensive private life ties with friends and extended
       family in the UK and through the network of therapists  and  medical
       practitioners supporting them in this country to which some,  albeit
       little, weight can be given due to these  ties  having  been  formed
       whilst they have been precariously present. However as there  is  no
       public  interest  in  their  removal  due  to  their   meeting   the
       Immigration Rules I find that the interference with  the  claimants'
       private life  ties,  and  the  consequent  interference  with  their
       children' right to respect for family life  with  their  parents  as
       indicated in the best  interests  discussion,  which  removal  would
       represent would be disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  the  findings
      at paragraphs 45 to 63, but preserved those at paragraphs 28 to 44.

   3. I remake the appeal by allowing it on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original claimant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the first claimant given her serious  mental
    health problems.


Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   26th  September
2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Annex A: Error of Law Decision


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



     1. The claimants are citizens of India and  are  a  husband  and  wife
        couple. They both arrived in the UK in  2014,  the  first  claimant
        with leave to enter as a Tier 4  student  migrant  and  the  second
        claimant with leave as her dependent. This leave was extended until
        18th February 2016, and on 17th February 2016 the claimants applied
        to remain on the basis of their  human  rights.  The  Secretary  of
        State refused this application in a decision dated 10th  May  2016.
        Their appeal against the  decision  was  allowed  on  human  rights
        grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Vernon in a  determination
        promulgated on the 28th November 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State  on  12th
       June 2018 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law in making irrational findings relating to the
       first claimant's medical treatment.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  are  as  follows.  The
       appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  that  it
       was found that the first claimant would face a risk of being sent to
       a faith healer by her parents and abused due to  her  mental  health
       problems if returned to India. However, the claimants are adults and
       could make their own arrangements for the first claimant's treatment
       for her mental health problems  in  a  place  away  from  the  first
       claimant's family. Further s.117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 is not dealt with in sufficient detail,  and  it
       was perverse to allow the appeal in the  context  of  the  claimants
       being well educated students who had only ever had precarious status
       in the UK.

    5. Ms Bexson argued that in fact there were three matters which led  to
       the appeal being allowed on the  basis  that  there  would  be  very
       significant  obstacles  to  integration  on  return  for  the  first
       claimant: firstly there was the  finding  that  return  alone  would
       trigger a deterioration in the first claimant's mental health so she
       would suffer hallucinations and delusional  thinking;  secondly  she
       would once again be at risk of being taken to the faith  healer  who
       had abused her  by  her  parents;  and  thirdly  the  mental  health
       services of India would not provide her with such good treatment  as
       she received in the UK. Ms Bexson argued that therefore the decision
       was sound as it was not just  based  on  the  fact  that  the  first
       claimant's parents would subject her to abuse via the faith  healer,
       and so any error in not  considering  whether  the  claimants  could
       avoid this risk by locating away from the first  claimant's  parents
       was not material.

    6. I informed the parties that I found that the First-tier Tribunal had
       erred in law for the reasons I now set out below. I  set  aside  the
       decision and the findings at paragraphs  45  to  63,  but  preserved
       those at paragraphs 28 to 44  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. Both parties argued that the remaking  hearing  should  be
       adjourned as there was a need for up-to-date medical evidence on the
       first and second claimants  (the  second  claimant  having  recently
       become depressed). I accepted that this was needed in the  interests
       of justice, and suggested also that  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  be
       greatly assisted by updating witness statements particularly dealing
       in detail with the situation on return to India for  both  claimants
       and their two children in the  context  of  their  work  skills  and
       likely  mental  health  problems  and  available  treatment  in  the
       proposed place of return.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The First-tier Tribunal errs in law by failing to  consider  whether
       the claimants could relocate away from the first claimant's parents,
       and away from the faith healer who abused her in 2015. These parents
       are said to be in poor health and are not contended to have any real
       influence. It is found that the second claimant's parents would  not
       be supportive but it is not explained why the claimants  would  need
       family support at all on return to India. Whilst the first  claimant
       is clearly unwell and will  have  two  small  children,  it  is  not
       explained why she cannot use the regular treatment that is found  to
       exist for those with mental health problems in India at paragraph 44
       of the decision, and why the second claimant could not  support  his
       family with perhaps some paid  child  care  support  for  the  first
       claimant as at  the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal it was not contended the second claimant was unwell in  any
       way. Failure to take into account these obviously  material  matters
       in to consideration in relation to one of the three key issues which
       leads the First-tier Tribunal to find in  favour  of  the  claimants
       makes the decision that there would be very significant obstacles to
       integration on return to India for the claimants, and thus that they
       can  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
       Immigration Rules, unsound. The decision is also unlawful  deficient
       as there is insufficient reasoning in the  decision  explaining  why
       there would be very significant obstacles to  the  first  claimant's
       integration in India because the regular treatment for mental health
       conditions in India is not of the same standard as is found  in  the
       UK.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  the  findings
      at paragraphs 45 to 63, but preserve those at paragraphs 28 to 44.

   3. I adjourned the remaking hearing to the 25th September 2018.

Directions:

   1.  Any further evidence relied upon by either party is to be  served  on
      the other party and filed with the Upper Tribunal 10 days prior to the
      hearing date on 25th September 2018.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original claimant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the first claimant given her serious  mental
    health problems.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  14th August 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






