
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13243/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 21 June 2019                      |On 18 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Trevelyan, instructed by TMC solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1970 and is a citizen  of  Jamaica.
    He claims to have entered the United Kingdom illegally in October 1994.
    He was removed to Jamaica in  April  1996.  He  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom in May 1996 using a fraudulently obtained British passport  and
    was arrested in August  1997  on  suspicion  of  drug  offences.  On  2
    February 1998, he  was  convicted  of  two  offences  of  possessing  a
    controlled drug and recommended for deportation.  He  left  the  United
    Kingdom voluntarily in June 1998 but re-entered the country  later  the
    same month, again using a false passport  and  identity.  He  was  next
    encountered in October 1998 and deported to Jamaica later  that  month.
    He returned the United Kingdom unlawfully in  September  1999.  He  was
    convicted in 2005 of seven offences, including possession of a  firearm
    and ammunition and was sentenced 2 years and 6 months imprisonment.  He
    was apprehended in July 2010 but absconded and failed  to  report  from
    November 2016. On 20 February 2017, a decision was taken to deport  the
    appellant to Jamaica. A decision was taken to refuse his  human  rights
    claim on 12 October 2017. The appellant  appealed  against  the  latter
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    30 April 2018, allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant has two sons, JR, who was born in September 1999  and  JM
    who was born in October 2001. He assists in the care  of  the  children
    although he has been separated from their mother (AS)  since  2006.  AS
    supports both children financially. She works part-time at a Children's
    Mental Health Unit. AS has another child, a girl JD, who  was  born  in
    August 2009. Although she is  not  his  natural  child,  JD  has  close
    relationship  with  the  appellant.  All  three  children  are  British
    citizens.

 3. I shall deal first with the final ground of appeal.  The  Secretary  of
    State criticises the decision of the judge on the basis that  she  made
    no clear findings regarding the appellant's ability to reintegrate into
    Jamaican society. At [94], the judge wrote:

         "I take into account other factors which are relevant to the  issue
         of whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to  be
         separated from his children. I accept the appellant's evidence that
         he has no ties to Jamaica. His mother is deceased  and  he  has  no
         relationship with his sister. He is now  48  is  been  absent  from
         Jamaica for the best part 24 years. I find that  and  is  returning
         have no accommodation and no income and  that  given  his  age  and
         absence of not be easy for him to find  work.  I  find  it  in  the
         circumstances will be  difficult  for  him  to  even  have  regular
         telephone Internet contact with his children in the UK. I find that
         [AS] is on a very low income and will not be able to afford for all
         of the children to visit their father in Jamaica regularly. I  find
         it appellant deportation would represent  a  complete  severing  of
         family ties which would be synced a  significant  contrast  to  the
         present situation."

 4. This paragraph is problematic. The judge appears to be mixing  together
    different considerations including the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
    reintegrate into Jamaican society (see Exception 1, section 117C(4)  of
    the 2002 Act) and whether the effect of separation  from  his  children
    would be unduly harsh upon the appellant, a  consideration  which  does
    not appear in section 117 or in any other provision. I agree  with  the
    Secretary of State that there is no evidence  at  all  to  support  the
    judge's finding that the appellant would be so impecunious  in  Jamaica
    that he would not even be able to  contact  children  by  telephone  or
    internet. I agree also with the Secretary of State that the  judge  has
    not made any clear findings regarding reintegration, if that was indeed
    what she was intending to do, in this paragraph. If she was seeking  to
    apply Exception 1, the judge has made no finding that the appellant has
    been lawfully resident the United Kingdom for  most  of  his  life  (as
    required by Exception  1;  see  sub-paragraph  4(a)).  The  appellant's
    immigration  history  is  appalling  by  any  standard.  He  was  first
    apprehended in 1996  when  he  claimed  to  have  been  using  a  false
    passport. He  has  used  a  number  of  false  identities  on  numerous
    occasions to deceive the immigration authorities and, despite the  fact
    that he appears to have lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  number  of
    years, he has made an application to regularise his immigration  status
    only once, in October 2015 and then unsuccessfully. If,  as  is  by  no
    means clear, the judge  considered  that  the  appellant  falls  within
    Exception 1, then plainly she erred in law by so finding.

 5. The first ground of appeal  concerns  the  test  which  the  judge  had
    applied to the facts she found them. As recorded above,  the  appellant
    was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of more than  12  months  but
    less than 4 years. The grounds of appeal, therefore, are in  error  [2]
    where they suggest that section 117C(6) should apply in the case of the
    appellant invoking a test of 'very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.' What the  grounds  appear
    to be driving at is that  the  judge  was  required  to  apply  a  more
    stringent test than 'undue harshness' because the appellant fell within
    the provisions of paragraph 399D:

         'Where a foreign criminal has been deported and entered the  United
         Kingdom in  breach  of  a  deportation  order  enforcement  of  the
         deportation order it in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances.'

 6. The wording here is not the same as that contained in section  117C(6);
    'very compelling circumstances' are not the same as  'very  exceptional
    circumstances.'  It  is  clear,  however,  is  that  a  more  stringent
    requirement is provided for in paragraph 399D, as the Court  of  Appeal
    determined in SU [2017] EWCA Civ 1069. At [44-45] the Court held:

         "Mr Yeo submitted that, while the wrong paragraphs  may  have  been
         applied, there was little difference in the substance of the  tests
         laid down by them. Paragraph 398 provides  that,  where  paragraphs
         399 or 399A do not apply (as is common ground that they did not  in
         this case), "the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
         outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
         399A". The requirement of "very compelling circumstances"  is  not,
         submitted Mr Yeo, in substance different from the "very exceptional
         circumstances" required by paragraph 399D.

         I am unable to  accept  this  submission.  The  difference  in  the
         language of paragraphs 398 and 399D, suggesting  a  more  stringent
         requirement under paragraph 399D, reflects a real difference in the
         circumstances covered by each paragraph.  Paragraph  398  addresses
         the question whether a deportation order  should  be  made,  or  an
         existing order maintained, against a  person  who  has  yet  to  be
         deported, whereas paragraph 399D addresses the very different  case
         of a person who has been deported and then re-enters illegally  and
         in breach of the order. In the latter case,  any  Article  8  claim
         that was raised by the deportee  before  his  original  deportation
         will, ex hypothesi, have been decided against him.  It  is  readily
         understandable that in the cases  covered  by  paragraph  399D  the
         Secretary of State should have formed the  view  that  there  is  a
         particularly strong public interest in maintaining the integrity of
         the deportation system as it applies to foreign criminals."

 7. Section 177C of the 2002 Act provides:

         'Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.'

 8. Section 117 and paragraph 339D came into force on the same day, 28 July
    2014. The case law which developed immediately after  the  coming  into
    force of those provisions rendered the application of  section  117  of
    the 2002 Act (as amended) to the facts of  any  given  case  relatively
    straightforward. In MM (Uganda) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617, it was held to be correct to take  into
    account all the circumstances of the case, including the seriousness of
    the offending of an appellant and the views of the Secretary  of  State
    as expressed through the Immigration Rules,  when  determining  whether
    the effects of deportation of a parent upon a  child  would  be  unduly
    harsh. By reference to the jurisprudence, an appellant might be able to
    show that, whilst the effects of his deportation  on  his  child  might
    otherwise be accurately described as unduly harsh, he would  be  unable
    to  resist  removal  because  there  existed   no   'very   exceptional
    circumstances.'

 9. Subsequent developments in the jurisprudence have now, however, led  to
    a tension between the statutory provisions and paragraph  399D.  In  KO
    (Nigeria) 2018 UKSC 53, the Supreme Court held that:

         "32. Laws LJ's approach [in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA  Civ  450]  has
         the advantage of giving full weight to  the  emphasis  on  relative
         seriousness in section 117C(2). However, on closer  examination  of
         the language of the two exceptions, and of the relationship of  the
         section with section 117B, as discussed above, I respectfully  take
         a different view. Once one accepts, as the Department did  at  that
         stage (rightly in my view),  that  the  issue  of  "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6) is focussed on the position of the child,  it
         would be odd to find a different approach  in  section  117C(5)  at
         least without a much clearer indication of what  is  intended  than
         one finds in section 117C(2). It is also difficult to reconcile the
         approach of Judge Southern or Laws LJ with the purpose of  reducing
         the scope for judicial evaluation (see para 15 above). The examples
         given by Judge Southern illustrate the  point.  On  his  view,  the
         tribunal is asked to decide whether consequences which  are  deemed
         unduly  harsh  for  the  son  of  an  insurance  fraudster  may  be
         acceptably harsh for the son of a drug-dealer. Quite apart from the
         difficulty of reaching a rational judicial  conclusion  on  such  a
         question, it seems to  me  in  direct  conflict  with  the  Zoumbas
         principle that the child should not be  held  responsible  for  the
         conduct of the parent."

10. The Secretary of State has not taken any steps to amend paragraph  399D
    following KO (Nigeria). As a consequence, the force  of  paragraph  399
    has, to use the expression employed by Mr Mills, who appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State before the Upper Tribunal, 'largely  evaporated.'  A
    Tribunal is required to apply section 117C(5) when  the appellant has a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child or
    a qualifying partner. The test is  that  of  undue  harshness  and  the
    focus, following KO, solely upon the effect upon the child; that  those
    circumstances include the fact that the  parent  has  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order or that  the  offending
    of the appellant may be particularly serious will not  be  relevant  to
    the analysis. Following KO (Nigeria), it is difficult to  see  how  the
    absence of 'very exceptional circumstances' will defeat an appeal which
    meets the requirements of Exception 2

11. In the present appeal, the judge reached the same conclusion, albeit by
    a rather different route. At [46], she wrote that,  'having  considered
    all the circumstances, I  find  the  paragraph  399D  applies  to  this
    appellant and on this basis there is no need for  me  to  consider  the
    exceptions and paragraph 399 (a) and (b).' It is not clear  to  me  why
    she reached that particular conclusion but in the subsequent  paragraph
    she  found  that  she   was   'nevertheless'   required   to   consider
    proportionality and that the  Immigration  Rules  'do  not  necessarily
    represent a complete code in respect of deportation and  there  may  be
    other very compelling circumstances factors (sic) which would warrant a
    departure from the rules.' She then writes, 'I additionally  take  into
    account that section 117C applies and does not  preclude  consideration
    of whether deportation would be unduly harsh for a child remain in  the
    UK without its parent  in  circumstances  where  the  parent  has  been
    subject to a  previous  deportation  order.  Section  117C  is  primary
    legislation and states explicitly that exceptions may  apply  to  those
    foreign criminals who  have  been  convicted  of  offences  which  have
    attracted prison sentences of less than four years.' She then proceeded
    to apply the 'undue harshness' test to the facts. In the light of  what
    I have said above, I do not consider that she was wrong in  law  to  do
    so.  Whether  or  not  there  exist  in  this  case  'very  exceptional
    circumstances' the judge was still obliged to apply section 117C and to
    consider, without reference to paragraph 399D, whether the  effects  of
    the appellant's deportation upon the qualifying child would  be  unduly
    harsh. The grounds of appeal, therefore, fail  to  establish  that  the
    judge has erred in this part of her analysis.

12. The second ground of appeal proceeds on the assumption that the test of
    undue harshness did apply in this case. At [7] the ground state:

         "There is no suggestion in  the  determination  that  the  children
         would not be adequately cared for by social services  if  necessary
         if  the  appellant  was  deported  or  there  exist   any   special
         circumstances  such  as  illness  that  require   the   appellant's
         continual presence in the UK to secure their well-being.  The  only
         factor identified [88-93] is that the father cares for the children
         as any father would; this is in turn normal expected behaviour  and
         fails to reach the high threshold of being  and  duly  harsh,  much
         less the even higher threshold required in  this  instance.  It  is
         generally accepted that it is in the best interests of children  to
         remain in contact with their  biological  interests  (sic)  but  in
         deportation  context  the  splitting  of  families   is   generally
         proportionate,  notwithstanding  the  interests  of  the  child  or
         children."

13. I have already dealt above with the 'even higher threshold required  in
    this instance.' At [88-93], the judge observed that the absence of  the
    appellant would significantly impact upon the education of the child JM
    'because his father is so supportive of him and  he  is  at  a  crucial
    stage in his education.' She found that the absence  of  the  appellant
    would 'also represent a loss' in the life of the child, JD.  The  judge
    found that the appellant assisted the child's mother with child care in
    the holidays and when she is working at  the  weekends.  At  [91],  the
    judge criticised the cramped living arrangements for  the  children  at
    their mother's home. She noted that if the  appellant  is  deported  AS
    would be unlikely to be able to maintain the mortgage and that the home
    which has been part of JM's life 12 years will no longer be  available.
    At [92], she expressed concerns regarding JM's welfare noting  that  he
    is 'just about to undertake important exams [GCSEs].'  She  found  that
    'the prospects for JM, in particular, do not just involve difficult  or
    inconvenient   circumstances   but   were   have   excessively   severe
    consequences for him in terms of his emotional, educational and  future
    development as well as in terms of his daily living circumstances.'

14. Mr Mills submitted that there was no evidence  at  all  for  that  last
    finding. I note that the judge did accept in full  the  conclusions  of
    the social work report of Mrs Prempeh [86] but her conclusions are more
    tentative than the more trenchant finding  of  the  judge.  The  expert
    regarded the separation of the appellant from the children is likely to
    be a 'significant loss' and considered that 'any further disruption  is
    unlikely  to  be  conducive  to  JM's   educational   achievement   and
    attainment. I am of the view that if [the appellant] remains in the UK,
    it would help promote consistency stability  and  emotional  well-being
    for J, JM and JD.' These conclusions are  both  generalised  and,  with
    respect, bland. The presence of a parent is  likely  to  'promote'  the
    'consistency, stability and emotional well-being'  of  any  child;  the
    question which the expert fails to address is whether  JM  will  suffer
    unduly harsh consequences if his 'consistency, stability and  emotional
    well-being' are not promoted by his father. I  find  that  the  judge's
    finding which I have quoted at [13]  above  is  not  supported  by  the
    evidence.

15. Mr Mills also submitted that the judge had placed excessive weight upon
    the fact that the First-tier Tribunal hearing in April 2018 was  taking
    place a month or so before  JM  undertook  his  GCSE  examinations.  He
    submitted that  determining  whether  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
    deportation on JM would be  unduly  harsh  necessarily  involved  going
    beyond circumstances peculiar to the date of the Tribunal hearing;  the
    test involved an assessment of what the effects of deportation  may  be
    in the foreseeable future.

16. In his submissions, Mr Trevelyan told me that the decision of the judge
    had been 'possibly generous, but not outside the margin of  generosity'
    within which the Tribunal  was  required  to  operate.  The  judge  had
    considered all the relevant  circumstances  and  reached  a  conclusion
    which was available to her.

17. I have considered all the evidence  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal very carefully. I agree with Mr Mills that the  social  worker
    report does not support the finding of the judge at [92]. The judge was
    required to consider the facts as they  existed  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing but I consider there is force in Mr Mills's submission that the
    judge has given excess weight to the fact that the hearing  was  taking
    place whilst JM was  revising  and  preparing  for  his  GCSEs.  In  my
    opinion, a proper application of the test involved looking further than
    the next 4 to 6 weeks after the hearing. The impact of deportation upon
    a child's education, including the effect  on  his/her  performance  in
    forthcoming examinations, is a relevant consideration but it cannot  be
    right that an appeal might succeed if it is heard in April, immediately
    before the examinations take place, whereas it might not succeed had it
    taken place in December or February. I also agree with Mr  Mills  that,
    notwithstanding the closeness of the relationship between the  children
    and their father, the fact remains that he is not their primary  carer.
    The assistance which he provides to AS is not different  in  kind  from
    that which any separated father might provide.

18. I do not criticise the judge for allowing her analysis to be tainted by
    her undoubted sympathy for these children  but  I  admit  that  I  have
    struggled to identify any  circumstance  in  this  appeal  which  might
    establish that the effects of the appellant's  deportation  would  have
    unduly harsh consequences for JM. In KO (Nigeria) at [23], the  Supreme
    Court held that: '...  the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
    intended to introduce a higher hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"
    under section 117B(6), taking account of the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies  an
    element of comparison. It assumes  that  there  is  a  "due"  level  of
    "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable  in
    the relevant context. "Unduly"  implies  something  going  beyond  that
    level.' My view, all of the  likely  effects  of  deportation  in  this
    appeal as indicated by the evidence fall firmly into  the  category  of
    likely or 'due' hardship. The Secretary  of  State  contends  that  the
    judge, on the facts, has reached a conclusion which was  not  available
    to her had she applied the test correctly. I agree. It follows that the
    judge erred in law and I set aside her decision. Neither representative
    indicated to me that, should I find an  error  of  law  set  aside  the
    decision, it would be necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to  receive  fresh
    evidence before re-making the decision. The family's circumstances  are
    not controversial. I do so because I  find  that  the  effects  of  the
    appellant's deportation upon the children would not be unduly harsh.  I
    dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I have remade  the
    decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 12 October 2017 is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 16 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




















