
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13541/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 April 2019                             |On 2 May 2019                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             PHANANKOSI SIBINDI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Kalanda, Counsel, of JK Immigration Legal
                    Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  against  the
        decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Herbert  OBE  (the
        judge), promulgated on 9 November 2018, allowing the appeal  of  Mr
        Phanankosi Sibindi (hereafter claimant) against the ECO's decision,
        dated 3 October 2017, refusing his application for entry  clearance
        to the UK, which was considered as a human rights claim.


   Background


     2. The claimant is a national of Zimbabwe, born in  1999.  He  was  17
        years old at the date of his entry clearance application and at the
        date of the ECO's decision. He applied for entry clearance pursuant
        to paragraph 301 of the immigration rules  (HC  395)  to  join  his
        mother, Ms Sikangezele Sibindi (the sponsor), who  resides  in  the
        UK. The sponsor is a Zimbabwean national who has been living in the
        UK since 23 December 2000. The sponsor  was  granted  Discretionary
        Leave (DL) on 30 June 2016 following the Secretary of State for the
        Home Department's exercise of discretion  outside  the  immigration
        rules. The grant of DL was for 30 months. In a  statement  prepared
        for the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the sponsor  did  not
        explain the basis for her grant of DL.


     3. In refusing the application for entry clearance the ECO noted  that
        the sponsor had not been granted leave to remain under  Part  8  of
        the immigration rules and that she did not have  limited  leave  to
        remain with a view to settlement. The ECO noted  that  the  sponsor
        left Zimbabwe 5 days after the claimant's first birthday.  The  ECO
        was not satisfied there was evidence that the sponsor and  claimant
        had met since she left Zimbabwe and believed, with reference to the
        timing of the application,  that  the  statements  as  to  why  the
        claimant could no longer be cared for in  Zimbabwe  were  "devices"
        created  with  the  intention  of  allowing  his  application   for
        settlement prior to his 18th birthday "as opposed to being  genuine
        accounts regarding the  welfare  of  a  child."  The  ECO  was  not
        satisfied the sponsor had sole responsibility for the claimant,  or
        that  there  were  any  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
        considerations making the claimant's exclusion undesirable. The ECO
        also considered the application under Article 8 ECHR but  concluded
        there was no breach  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.  The  ECO's
        decision attracted a right of appeal as it was a refusal of a human
        rights claim. The claimant exercised his right of appeal.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     4. At the appeal hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  3  October  2018  the
        claimant was represented by Ms Kalanba and the ECO was  represented
        by Ms S Sreeraman, a Home Office  Presenting  Officer  (HOPO).  The
        judge considered a 102-page bundle of documents produced on  behalf
        of the claimant which included statements from  both  the  claimant
        and his sponsor. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor and
        considered a letter from the claimant's school  via  the  sponsor's
        phone.

     5. In  the  section  of  his  decision  containing  his  findings  and
        conclusions the judge said (at [28]) there was  clear  evidence  in
        the decision granting the sponsor DL that the claimant  could  make
        an  application  for  family  reunion  if  there  were  "compelling
        compassionate circumstances" prior to  the  sponsor  being  granted
        settlement. According to the judge the "key question" was  "whether
        there are compelling compassionate  circumstances  that  apply  and
        that  the  [claimant's]  further  exclusion  would  be  undesirable
        because  of  the  family  or  other  circumstances  and  that   the
        [claimant] sponsor [sic] mother has had sole responsibility for him
        for a significant period of time."

     6. At [29] the judge found the claimant and his mother to be  credible
        witnesses and that their evidence  was  internally  and  externally
        consistent. The judge found that "culturally" the sponsor  did  not
        abandon the claimant to other family members but monitored his well-
        being, his education and his progress, and that  she  was  able  to
        recently provide him with financial  support.  At  [31]  the  judge
        referred  to  the  decision  of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):   "sole
        responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049  and  found  that  the
        sponsor made all decisions concerning the claimant  with  reference
        to her contact with him and the money she  remitted.  At  [32]  the
        judge found there was "overwhelming evidence" that the sponsor  was
        solely responsible for the claimant. The judge rejected  the  ECO's
        assertion that the application was a deliberate  attempt  to  abuse
        the immigration rules. At [33] the judge  found  there  was  "ample
        evidence" that the claimant's progress in school had "diminished in
        recent  years  and  that  he  has  clearly  struggled  without  the
        direction and emotional  support  of  his  mother."  Based  on  the
        sponsor's visits and the regular social contact on social media the
        judge  found  there  was  a  'deeper  meaning'  to  the  claimant's
        relationship with his sponsor [35].


     7. At [36] the judge stated,

             I  am  satisfied   that   therefore   there   are   compelling
             compassionate circumstances which means the [claimant]  should
             be reunited with his  mother  and  I  do  not  find  there  is
             anything save for speculation in the opinion expressed by  the
             entry clearance entry officer that this is anything other than
             a genuine attempt by the mother to be reunited with  her  son.
             She has clearly satisfied all the relevant criteria under  the
             immigration rules and therefore I do not  need  to  go  on  to
             consider his rights under article 8 of the  ECHR.  If  I  have
             been called to do so, I would have clearly found applying  the
             principle in the case of ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  that
             the balancing exercise in  terms  of  proportionality  clearly
             falls in the favour of the [claimant] and not in the favour of
             maintain [sic] immigration control on the facts of this case.

     8. Under the 'Notice of Decision' the judge stated:


                 . I allow this appeal under the immigration rules.

The grounds of appeal, the grant  of  permission  and  the  'error  of  law'
hearing

     9.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  contend  that  the  judge  acted  in   a
        procedurally  unfair  manner  by  restricting  the  HOPO's   cross-
        examination and asking  questions  of  the  sponsor  in  a  leading
        manner. The curtailing of the HOPO's cross-examination  meant  that
        she was unable to elicit information in respect of crucial  matters
        relating to sole responsibility.  Relevant  matters  could  not  be
        properly considered and the ECO was unable to make  its  case.  The
        judge was said to have shown bias in  favour  of  the  claimant  by
        asking leading questions designed to show that the sponsor had made
        important decisions for the claimant. A proforma spreadsheet  dated
        3 October 2018 and referred  to  in  the  Grounds  as  the  "Appeal
        Hearing minute" was attached to the Grounds.


    10. The grounds additionally contend that the judge failed  to  specify
        the "overwhelming evidence" relating to sole responsibility.  There
        were said to  be  no  clear  reasons  to  support  the  finding  of
        'compelling  compassionate  circumstances'.  The  grounds   further
        contend that the appeal was not a family reunion case and that  the
        judge fundamentally misunderstood the nature of the appeal.

    11. Permission was granted on all grounds.

    12. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing  Ms  Jones  provided  a
        copy  of  the  HOPO's  contemporaneous  hearing  notes.   I   heard
        submissions from both Jones and Ms Kalanda. Having  considered  the
        parties submissions I indicated that I was not satisfied  that  the
        allegations of bias and procedural unfairness were  made  out,  but
        that I was satisfied that the judge failed to give adequate reasons
        for his decision, that the judge failed to make  material  findings
        of fact, and that the  judge  erred  in  law  concluding  that  the
        requirements of the immigration rules were met and  by  failing  to
        undertake a full Article 8 assessment.

Discussion

    13. The Grounds make serious allegations against the judge relating  to
        the fairness of the proceedings. Allegations of bias cannot be made
        lightly and need to be supported by accurate, cogent evidence.  The
        correct approach to an allegation of actual or  perceived  bias  is
        set out in Alubankudi (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 00542  (IAC)
        and Sivapatham (Appearance of Bias) [2017] UKUT 00293 (IAC). I must
        consider whether a fair-minded observer properly  informed  of  all
        the relevant facts and circumstances would conclude that there  was
        a real possibility that the judge was biased.


    14. The ECO relies on a document that is described in  the  Grounds  as
        the HOPO's 'Appeal Hearing minute'. This is not  a  contemporaneous
        note of the proceedings. It is apparent from the structure  of  the
        document that it is a pro forma document and that it was  completed
        after the hearing on 3 October 2018. The general assertion  in  the
        'minute' that the judge impeded and took over  the  questioning  of
        the witness is not particularised. No detail is  provided  of  what
        particular questions were allegedly hijacked by judge or what areas
        of questioning he prevented the HOPO from investigating. There is a
        general allegation that the judge led the witness (wrongly referred
        to as 'appellant') but there  is  no  description  of  the  leading
        questions said to have been asked. The 'minute' sets out in  bullet
        form the submissions that were actually made by the HOPO.

    15. The contemporaneous hearing record provided  by  Ms  Jones  on  the
        morning of the 'error of law'  hearing  first  sets  out  questions
        asked in examination in chief and then questions  asked  in  cross-
        examination.  The  contemporaneous  note  identified   just   three
        instances where the judge interjected in the cross-examination.  In
        the first instance the judge asked two questions. In respect of the
        other two instances the judge briefly commented on  the  particular
        question asked by the HOPO. Although it is not entirely clear  from
        the contemporaneous note when the judge's  questions  finished  and
        the cross-examination resumed, given that the two  questions  asked
        by the judge were recorded on single lines without any spacing, and
        all the other questions were recorded with a space between them,  I
        find it more likely than not that the HOPO asked  the  majority  of
        questions contained in her contemporaneous record.  The  other  two
        interruptions recorded related to directions given by the judge  to
        the HOPO to consider cultural norms, and  his  comment  that  there
        would be little research involved in choosing schools in a  village
        in Zimbabwe. The contemporaneous note does not support the  serious
        allegation that the HOPO was inhibited from  carrying  out  a  full
        cross-examination, or that the judge asked questions in  a  leading
        manner with a view to obtaining  answers  in  order  to  allow  the
        appeal. I additionally note the absence of any statement in support
        from the HOPO. Nor was there any indication, either in  the  HOPO's
        contemporaneous notes, or the judge's notes or the  hearing  record
        provided by the claimant for the 'error of law' hearing,  that  the
        HOPO raised with the  judge  any  concerns  she  had  that  he  was
        behaving in an  inappropriate  manner  (see  headnote  2(4)  in  PA
        (protection claim: respondent's enquiries; bias) Bangladesh  [2018]
        UKUT 0337 (IAC).


    16. I am entirely unpersuaded that  the  ECO  has  produced  sufficient
        evidence  indicating  that  the  judge  acted  in   a   biased   or
        procedurally unfair manner.

    17. I do however have concerns that the judge erred in law in  allowing
        the appeal "under the immigration rules" and in concluding that the
        requirements of the immigration rules were  met.  The  sponsor  was
        granted DL on 30 June 2016. A grant of DL is not a grant of limited
        leave "with a view to settlement", as required by paragraph 301  of
        the immigration rules. This was a point clearly made  by  the  ECO.
        This point was specifically considered by Mr Justice Gibbs in Acan,
        R (on the application of) v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2004] EWHC
        297 (Admin), a decision also concerned with the  interpretation  of
        paragraph 301 of the immigration rules.

    18. The term "with  a  view  to  settlement"  is  used  within  certain
        categories of the immigration rules where, from the outset  of  the
        initial application, there is an expectation that  compliance  with
        the rules will lead  to  settlement.  Within  these  categories  an
        individual may be granted an initial temporary period of leave, but
        the grant  of  temporary  leave  is  along  a  planned  pathway  to
        settlement. An example of  this  category  includes  paragraph  298
        (applications for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the  child  of
        parents present and settled in the UK).  This  must  be  contrasted
        with other categories within the immigration rules that do not lead
        from the outset along a path towards settlement  (such  as  Tier  4
        applicants), and with grants of leave outside the immigration rules
        such as DL.

    19. A grant of DLR may lead to settlement (for example,  in  compliance
        with  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  on  DL  in  respect   of
        applications prior to 09 July 2012) but the grants are not 'with  a
        view to settlement'. DL may be  issued  to  individuals  who  would
        otherwise qualify for asylum or humanitarian protection,  or  where
        removal would lead to a breach of Article 3 on medical grounds.  DL
        can also,  for  example,  be  granted  in  respect  of  victims  of
        trafficking. In each case the duration of the grant of DL  will  be
        determined by the particular facts of the case.  Support  for  this
        analysis can be found in Acan. Mr  Justice  Gibbs  found  that  the
        requirement of  paragraph  301  were  intended  to  refer  back  to
        previous rules in which the use of the  expression  "limited  leave
        with a view to settlement" occurred. "It had a purpose intended  to
        be secondary to those earlier rules so as to permit a  child  of  a
        person within the categories earlier referred to  to  have  limited
        leave to enter or remain" (para 83). Mr  Justice  Gibbs  concluded,
        "... the provisions in rule 301 and following, relating  to  leave,
        constitute part of a carefully constructed scheme intended,  in  my
        judgment, to flow from the particular  situations  contemplated  by
        the earlier rules, 281 and 282, 295A and 295B" (para 85).


    20. The  sponsor  was  not  granted  limited  leave  "with  a  view  to
        settlement" and the claimant could not meet the requirements of the
        immigration rules. The judge was wrong in concluding  otherwise  at
        [36].

    21. The extent to which the claimant's circumstances  fell  within  the
        terms of the DL policy relating to family reunion and the existence
        of 'compelling compassionate circumstances' was a relevant  factor,
        but only in the context of an  Article  8  assessment  outside  the
        immigration rules. The judge did not undertake any such assessment.
        Although the judge referred to the Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  approach
        at [36]  of  his  decision,  no  detailed  balancing  exercise  was
        actually undertaken.

    22. I additionally have difficulty  in  identifying  the  'overwhelming
        evidence' referred to by the judge in support of his  finding  that
        the sponsor was solely responsible for the claimant. While there is
        certainly some evidence that the sponsor  remitted  funds  for  the
        claimant's benefit since she became entitled to work, and that  she
        has visited him in 2017 and that they communicate with  each  other
        via WhatsApp, there was in fact relatively limited evidence,  other
        than the sponsor's own word, that she was  solely  responsible  for
        the claimant. The letter issued by the claimant's school  dated  19
        May  2017  briefly  described  how   the   school's   Director   of
        Communication became aware  that  the  sponsor's  uncle  "could  no
        longer look after" the claimant because of "old age, ill health and
        lack of oncome." The assertions contained in the  letter  were  not
        otherwise supported by any other evidence. The inquiries undertaken
        by the school occurred in November 2015, which calls into  question
        the circumstances and manner of the claimant's support  since  that
        time. There was no statement from  the  claimant's  uncle,  and  no
        medical evidence  that  he  was  incapable  of  looking  after  the
        claimant. There was no evidence from the school  that  the  sponsor
        was the one who made any of the important decisions  regarding  the
        claimant's education. There was no evidence that the  sponsor  paid
        any school fees.


    23. The judge has also failed to identify the 'compelling compassionate
        circumstances' that he found existed and which, in his  view,  were
        sufficient to meet the requirements of the Secretary of State's  DL
        Policy. There was no evidence that the  claimant  had  any  medical
        issues or that he had any other particular vulnerability. The  fact
        that there was a deterioration in his  schoolwork  cannot,  on  any
        rational  view,  itself  amount  to  a  'compelling   compassionate
        circumstance'. The judge found there was a 'deeper meaning' to  the
        claimant's relationship with his sponsor  based  on  the  sponsor's
        visits and their regular social contact on social media but  failed
        to explain what that 'deeper meaning' was and  failed  to  identify
        any of the social media messages that supported  this  finding.  It
        therefore  remains  unclear  whether  there  were  any  'compelling
        compassionate circumstances' sufficient to render  disproportionate
        the refusal of entry clearance. Nor has there been  any  assessment
        as to why the sponsor could not relocate to Zimbabwe  in  order  to
        maintain her relationship with the claimant.

    24. For all these reasons I am satisfied  that  the  decision  contains
        errors on points of law and must be set aside. Given the absence of
        adequate findings in relation to the claimant's  circumstances  and
        the failure to undertake any lawful  Article  8  assessment  it  is
        appropriate for this matter to be remitted back to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
        Herbert.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law.
The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing
before a judge other than Judge Herbert.


[pic]                               29 April 2019
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


