
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/13912/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 21 April 2017                    |On 10 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mrs shabnam AKHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Maqsood of Counsel, MA Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, the Secretary of State, has been granted  permission  to
    appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mulholland  allowing
    the respondent's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The respondent is a citizen of the Russian Federation.   She  was  born
    on 27 August 1992.  She entered the United Kingdom on 15 July 2015 on a
    six months multientry business visa valid  from  29  June  2015  to  29
    December 2015.  On 29 December 2015 she applied for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom under the 10-year partner route.  She asserted  that
    she was pregnant.  The application was considered under Appendix FM and
    paragraphs 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, and outside  the  Rules  on
    the basis of exceptional circumstances.  The application was refused on
    4 April 2016 for reasons set out in the refusal letter.  She was  given
    notice under Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

3.   The respondent opted for a determination of her appeal on  the  papers.



4.   The respondent gave birth to a  son,  [O]  on  [  ]  2016.   The  judge
    considered the appeal on the papers at Glasgow on 26 July 2016.

5.   In assessing the credibility  of  the  respondent's  claim,  the  judge
    noted that the respondent was a 23 year old woman who had lived in  the
    UK for a period of twelve months.  She  met  her  partner/husband  soon
    after her arrival in the UK and they entered into a  whirlwind  romance
    that culminated in the birth of [O] on [ ] 2016.  She  noted  that  the
    respondent had decided to enter into a relationship with Mansour  Osman
    and have a child after such a  short  period  of  time  and  it  seemed
    unlikely that they were unaware of the fact that her visa  was  due  to
    expire.  The judge held at paragraph 22 that  she  was  satisfied  that
    their infant son was a British citizen or entitled to it as his  father
    was Mansour Osman, a British national.

6.   The judge was satisfied that the Secretary  of  State's  decision  that
    the respondent could not succeed under the partner route as she had not
    been living with her partner for at least two years prior to  the  date
    of application was correct.

7.   The judge went on to  make  several  adverse  credibility  findings  at
    paragraphs 24, 25 and 26.  She found that the respondent had failed  to
    provide evidence that Mr Osman was in the United  Kingdom.   She  noted
    the respondent's assertion in her application form  and  her  statement
    that they lived together at [ ], Hayes, Middlesex.  For the reasons set
    out at paragraph 25 the judge was not satisfied that the respondent was
    living with her partner at  this  address,  or  that  her  partner  was
    present in the United Kingdom,  or  that  she  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with him.

8.   At paragraph 26 the judge held as follows:

         "Mr Osman is named on the child's birth certificate and  there  are
         references to him in the appellant's medical records in relation to
         her pregnancy where he has been  described  there  as  the  child's
         father  and  appellant's  second  cousin.   Despite   the   adverse
         credibility findings, the fact that no statement has been lodged by
         him, that I cannot be satisfied that he is present  in  the  United
         Kingdom and that the appellant chose not to attend the hearing with
         him, I am  satisfied  that  a  sufficiency  of  evidence  has  been
         presented to prove on the balance of probabilities that Mr Osman is
         indeed the child's father."

9.   Mr Wilding challenged  this  finding.   He  submitted  a  copy  of  the
    British Nationality (Proof of Paternity) (amendment)  Regulations  2015
    which provides that for birth certificates issued  after  20  September
    2015, being named as the father on the birth certificate is  no  longer
    sufficient proof of paternity.  He further argued that in light of  the
    series of negative credibility findings made  against  the  respondent,
    including the fact that there was no statement from  Mr  Osman  and  no
    evidence that they were in a relationship, the  judge  nevertheless  at
    paragraph 26 concluded that Mr Osman was  the  father  because  on  the
    respondent's medical records in  relation  to  her  pregnancy,  he  was
    described as the child's father and the  respondent's  second  son  and
    that he was named on the birth certificate.  Mr Wilding submitted  that
    this finding was perverse  given  the  litany  of  adverse  credibility
    findings made by the judge.  He submitted that no judge could  come  to
    that conclusion on that  reasoning  coupled  with  the  fact  that  the
    finding at paragraph 22 had been unreasoned.

10.  On this issue I am  in  agreement  with  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Maqsood.  His submission was that the judge's finding that Mr Osman was
    the child's father was not entirely based on the fact that his name was
    on the child's birth certificate.  At paragraph 24 the judge noted that
    the medical records showed that Mr Osman attended only occasionally  at
    hospital with the respondent.  At 26 the medical records in relation to
    her pregnancy  described  Mr  Osman  as  the  child's  father  and  the
    respondent's second cousin.

11.  As it turned out, towards the end of the hearing, Mr Osman, who was  in
    court with  the  respondent  and  their  child,  produced  his  British
    passport and a British passport for the child.  Copies of the passports
    were at pages 89 and 90 of the respondent's bundle.  For  the  sake  of
    clarity, the respondent's bundle was not before the judge. Mr Osman was
    issued with a British passport on 7 October 2015 to expire on  7  April
    2026.  The child, [O] was issued with a British passport on 13 December
    2016 to expire on  13  December  2021.   This  evidence  supported  the
    judge's decision that Mr Osman was British  and  his  son  was  also  a
    British national.  Consequently, I find that the judge's decision  that
    the child was British was not perverse or irrational.

12.   Mr  Wilding's  second  argument  was  that  the  birth  of  the  child
    constituted a new matter for the purposes of Section 85(6) of the  2002
    Act as amended.  It was not an issue decided by the Secretary of  State
    as the decision was made before the child was born.

13.  I was not persuaded by this argument.  When  the  respondent  made  her
    application, the Secretary of State was aware that  she  was  pregnant;
    indeed, this was recorded in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter.   In  the
    circumstances, I find that it was foreseeable that the respondent would
    give birth to a child.  The judge  was  considering  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  and  consequently  did  not  err  in  law  in
    considering the evidence that was available at the date of the hearing.
     By the time the judge heard the appeal on the  papers  the  respondent
    had given birth to the child.  That evidence was before the judge and I
    find she  was  entitled  to  consider  it  in  her  assessment  of  the
    respondent's appeal under Article 8.

14.  The next issue the judge considered was the reasonableness  test  which
    is set out in paragraph EX.1 and paragraph 276ADE(iv),  now  echoed  in
    Section 117B(6), which is intended to be a proportionality exercise.

15.  The judge found that it was clearly in the  child's  best  interest  to
    remain with his mother.  His  long-term  best  interests  would  be  to
    remain in the UK where he would be able to benefit from his rights as a
    British citizen.  Up to this point I find that the judge did not err in
    law, having found that because the child is British and therefore is  a
    qualifying child, his best interests clearly remained with his  mother.
    Indeed as at today's date, the child is only 9 months old.   Given  his
    tender age, the judge's decision was one that she was entitled to  make
    and disclosed no error of law.

16.  I find that the judge  erred  in  law  in  relying  on  Chikwamba  when
    deciding whether the respondent could return  to  Russia  and  make  an
    entry clearance application. Chikwamba was not relevant to this case.

17.  However, for the reasons given above, I find that  the  judge  did  not
    err in finding that Mr Osman was the father  of  the  child,  that  the
    child was a British national by birth and that it would clearly  be  in
    the child's best interest at his tender age to remain with  his  mother
    in the UK.

18.  As I have found no error of law,  the  judge's  decision  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal shall stand.

19.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date:  9 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

