
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/14526/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 27th November 2018  On 2nd January 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                   ALI [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant: Mr S Salam (Solicitor, S A Salam)
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant applied for LTR to remain in the UK on the basis of his
    private and family life with his wife and British Citizen child.
    Following the refusal of the application the Appellant's appeal was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup who dismissed the appeal in a
    decision promulgated on the 14th of March 2018. The Judge found that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in
    Pakistan and that removal would not contravene section 117B(6) in line
    with the decision under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the Upper
    Tribunal on the 2nd of October 2014. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
    observed that it was arguable that the Judge had not adequately
    considered section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and had not applied the test
    of reasonableness.

 3. The submissions from the representatives are set out in the Record of
    Proceedings. In summary both maintained their stated positions Mr Salam
    submitting that it was not reasonable to expect a British Citizen child
    to leave the UK. In the course of submissions Mr Diwnicz referred to a
    Scottish case promulgated after KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC and provided a
    reference to that case. At the end of the hearing Mr Salam was given
    the opportunity to provide further written submissions. Those were
    received on the 11th of December 2018 at Field House and forwarded to
    me in Birmingham. I have considered those in addition to the previous
    written and oral submissions that had been made.

 4. Mr Salam's observation that neither KO nor the Scottish case concerned
    British Citizen children and so were not directly relevant has some
    merit in the sense that neither case saw the underlying principles
    applies to circumstances such as these. However there are 2 parts of
    the decision in KO that are relevant to the decision that was made in
    this appeal. Paragraph 44 of KO repeats the earlier withdrawal of a
    concession that had been made in Sanade (British children-Zambrano-
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48 and subsequently withdrawn that meant that
    British Citizen children can be expected to relocate outside the UK and
    confirms that in applying the concession in the appeal under
    consideration the First-tier Tribunal had erred.

 5. The second aspect of KO that is relevant is in paragraph 19 where  Lord
    Carnworth observed that "There is nothing in  the  section  to  suggest
    that "reasonableness" is to be considered otherwise in the  real  world
    in which the children find themselves." That takes me back  to  Sanade,
    from headnote 6 Blake J had observed within the Judgment "Where in  the
    context of Article 8 one parent ("the remaining parent") of  a  British
    citizen child is also a British citizen (or  cannot  be  removed  as  a
    family member or in their own right), the removal of the  other  parent
    does not mean that either the child or the  remaining  parent  will  be
    required to leave, thereby infringing the Zambrano  principle,  see  C-
    256/11 Murat Dereci. The critical question  is  whether  the  child  is
    dependent on the parent being removed for the  exercise  of  his  Union
    right of residence and whether removal of that parent will deprive  the
    child of the effective exercise of residence in the United  Kingdom  or
    elsewhere in the Union." Although given in the context of a deportation
    case the discussion is not limited to those cases  but  is  of  general
    application.

 6. That observation in Sanade is supported by that in KO, that the
    position has to be assessed in the reality of the position that the
    child finds themself in. The removal of the Appellant in this case does
    not require the child to leave the UK as the child is not dependent on
    the Appellant for their ability to remain in the UK. By clear
    implication the Judge found that the Appellant's presence was not
    required for the child's best interests or that the best interests were
    not such that the public interest in the enforcement of immigration
    control was outweighed.

 7. Judge Pickup approached the decision in this appeal in 2 stages, the
    first was assessing whether the child would have to leave the UK if the
    Appellant and found that the child would not have to. That was an
    assessment of the facts as they stood at the date of the hearing at
    which the Judge assessed the evidence. It was also a reflection of the
    basic fact that the Appellant did not have an independent right under
    the Immigration Rules or statutes to remain in the UK. Secondly the
    Judge considered whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave. In this part of the decision the Judge's findings placed the
    choice on the Appellant and his spouse and found that family could
    reasonably be enjoyed in Pakistan.

 8. A comparison can be made with the case of Jeunesse [2014] ECHR 1036. In
    that case the ECtHR found that in the absence of exceptional
    circumstances it would be proportionate and reasonable to expect the
    Appellant's family who were Dutch nationals to leave the Netherlands if
    they wished to continue family life together. The Appellant succeeded
    as the court identified exceptional features including the attempts
    over many years by the Appellant to regularise her position with no
    attempt to enforce removal and the Appellant had at one time herself
    been a Dutch national but that had been lost through a change in the
    substantive law (not through her personal conduct).

 9. Some of the observations of the Judge in the course of his reasoning
    have been overtaken by the reasoning in KO but that has not affected
    the overall nature of the decision which now has to be read in the
    light of the law as it has been clarified. Following the observations
    in KO and the need to assess the circumstances as they really are and
    the legal effect of the situation that the Appellant and his wife had
    created by entering into a relationship in the circumstances that the
    Judge described the decision was open to the Judge for the reasons
    given. The Judge gave significant weight to the best interests of the
    child as he was obliged to do but the reality of the situation is that
    the Appellant and his wife have a choice. One of them will have to live
    outside the country of their nationality. Appendix FM has been upheld
    as being compliant with article 8 and there is a discretion where there
    may be circumstances not addressed by the rules. In finding that there
    were no circumstances justifying a grant outside the rules the Judge
    was entitled to make that finding.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 15th December 2018
