
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14026/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)      |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 14 April 2021                     |On 29 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                ABDUL SUBHAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Georget instructed by Sabz Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Herwald ('the Judge') promulgated on 20 January  2020,
       in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.





Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  16  April  1982  who
       applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
       grounds.
    3. Having considered not only the documentary evidence but also the oral
       evidence given at the hearing, which enabled the  Judge  to  consider
       the weight that should  be  given  to  the  various  aspects  of  the
       evidence, the Judge sets out  findings  of  fact  from  [16]  of  the
       decision under appeal. The Judge  concludes  the  appellant  had  not
       established that he was able to succeed under the  Immigration  Rules
       or that the appellant had established very significant  obstacles  to
       integration into Pakistan. The Judge considers article 8 ECHR outside
       the rules from [19] finding there will be no  interference  with  any
       right to private life. The Judge finds the family  life  with  a  UK-
       based sibling and  his  wife  goes  beyond  the  normal  elements  of
       dependency. In relation to whether any interference with such  family
       life is proportionate the Judge writes:

    22.  Even if the refusal prejudice is private or  family  life  of  the
         Appellant and others in a manner sufficiently serious to amount  to
         a breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8, I am also
         satisfied that the interference  is  in  accordance  with  the  law
         because the Appellant has no other right to remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom in the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of  the
         decision. Furthermore I concluded that given that the state  has  a
         right under international law to control the entry of non-nationals
         to  its  territory,  in  this  case  on  performing  the  necessary
         balancing exercise, any interference would not be  disproportionate
         to achieving the maintenance of a fair and just immigration  policy
         which  it  is  necessary  for  the  United  Kingdom  government  to
         maintain.

    4. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
       another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  15  April  2020,  the
       operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

    3.   The grounds in the application for permission to appeal argue that
         the judge erred by failing to take into  account  all  the  medical
         evidence that was submitted with the Appellant's appeal  which  was
         relevant to the assessment of proportionality under  Article  8  of
         the ECHR. It is submitted that a letter from the GP dated  1  March
         2019 noted that the Appellant is unfit to travel on his  own  hence
         unfit for an interview at the moment. It is also  argued  that  the
         Immigration Judge failed to place adequate  weight  on  the  expert
         opinion of Dr Samia Latif who  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
         established a close psychological and emotional bond and  he  would
         find it very difficult to receive  support  from  anyone  else.  He
         suffers  from  speech  difficulties  and  experiences  problems  in
         communicating  and  as  a  result  he  would  not  only  experience
         difficulty  in  communicating  his  needs  but  his  mental  health
         difficulties caused him to suffer self esteem and confidence issues
         and he would not be able to request his care needs  to  be  met  by
         anyone else and therefore being returned to Italy or Pakistan would
         not allow him to gain the support and help he requires.

    4.   The judge found that the Appellant's case is put on the basis that
         the Appellant's mental health and current state are such  as  would
         militate against such integration. The judge found that there  were
         other relatives living in  Pakistan  and  found  that  the  witness
         sought to obfuscate the court by suggesting that there was  no  one
         in Pakistan whatsoever who could help the Appellant  when  in  fact
         when push came  to  shove  they  would  next  have  to  revise  his
         evidence. The judge noted that no relatives in  Pakistan  had  been
         approached to see if they might assist. With regards to  Article  8
         outside the Rules the judge found that he  is  not  persuaded  that
         there is interference with the right to respect  for  private  life
         and found that he does not find that there are  such  circumstances
         as required him to go on to consider Article 8  proper.  The  judge
         found that  any  interference  will  be  proportionate,  given  his
         findings above.

    5.   I find that there is an arguable error of law with regards to  the
         judge's decision. Initially, the judge found that the circumstances
         were such he was not required to  go  on  and  consider  Article  8
         proper but then went on to state that the Appellant has a degree of
         family life with his siblings and he proceeds on the basis that the
         relationship perhaps goes beyond the normal elements of  dependency
         given the description of the witness as to their assistance to  the
         Appellant  at  the  present.  This  in  itself  has  some  inherent
         contradiction. If the judge  accepts  that  the  relationship  goes
         beyond the normal elements of dependency then it is incumbent  upon
         the judge to give more weight to the expert  opinion  of  Dr  Samia
         Latif which is "I find that there  is  a  close  psychological  and
         emotional bond and the Appellant would find it  very  difficult  to
         receive support from anyone else". In view of the expert opinion of
         Dr Samia Latif I find that the judge has not engaged properly  with
         all the relevant factors in resolving the issue of proportionality.
         Although it is unclear whether the GP letter  dated  1  March  2019
         relates particularly to the asylum appeal which had been previously
         refused I find that it may somehow  be  relevant  with  regards  to
         removing the Appellant from the United Kingdom if  in  fact  he  is
         still unfit to travel.

    5. The Secretary of State in a Rule 24 response  dated  23rd  June  2020
       opposes the application, submitting:

           (b)    The first ground argues that  the  FTT  judge  failed  to
                consider or give sufficient weight to the  medical  evidence
                submitted in this case. It is clear from the  decision  that
                the FTT Judge did consider the GPs report  from  March  2019
                and the supplementary report from Dr  Latif  and  records  a
                summary  of  Dr  Latif's  evidence  at   13   (i)   of   the
                determination. The FTT Judge did not need  to  set  out  the
                report in its entirety. The medical evidence also needed  to
                be considered set next to the contradictions  and  omissions
                in the sponsor's evidence about  which  family  members  the
                appellant still had in Pakistan [see the FTT Judges detailed
                findings at paragraph 17(f) to (m)  of  the  determination].
                Even if Dr Latif's  report  had  been  corrected  about  the
                whereabouts of the appellant's father, it is submitted  this
                is not material given the FTT  Judge's  findings  about  the
                availability of other family members to whom  the  appellant
                could turn.


           (c)    The second ground of appeal argues  that  the  FTT  Judge
                acted  procedurally  unfairly  in  failing  to  adjourn  the
                hearing (at the request of the Respondent, who was unable to
                provide a Presenting Officer on that date). It is  submitted
                that the lack of a Presenting Officer  could  not  make  the
                hearing unfair for the appellant.


           (d)    The ground further argues that it was not clear  on  what
                basis the appellant's protection claim had been refused.  It
                is  submitted  this  is  not  material  as  the  FTT   Judge
                considered the Human  Rights  claim  on  the  basis  of  the
                Immigration Rules and there was no Protection  claim  before
                him.  For  completeness  the  Respondent  would  notify  the
                Tribunal that the appellant's asylum claim had been  refused
                on 8 February 2019 on 3rd Country grounds and certified with
                no in country right of appeal; the  appellant's  application
                to remain on  Private  Life  grounds  [the  subject  of  the
                appeal] was made on 4 April 2019.


           (e)    The respondent submits that the grounds do not  establish
                any material errors of law.

    6. The Judge's findings at [17 (a) - (o)] are of importance and  are  in
       the following terms:

           "17.   It is appropriate to consider at this stage,  whether  or
                not the Appellant may  have  met  the  requirements  of  the
                Immigration Rules


                (a)    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, albeit he has
                    been granted limited  leave  to  remain  in  Italy.  The
                    proposal  here  was  that  he  should  be  returned   to
                    Pakistan, and the Respondent insisted that there were no
                    "very significant  obstacles"  to  integration  in  that
                    country.


                (b)    The Appellant's case is put on  the  basis  that  his
                    mental health  and  current  state  are  such  as  would
                    militate against such integration. The onus is on him to
                    show this.


                (c)    The Appellant has a brother living in this country. I
                    do not doubt the sincerity of the brother  in  terms  of
                    his wish to look after the Appellant, who,  it  must  be
                    said, evinces present mental health  difficulties  which
                    are, to an extent, being addressed by medication.


                (d)    What  became  quickly  apparent  here,  is  that  the
                    Appellant had in the  past  been  able  to  adapt  to  a
                    lifestyle in Italy, a  country  far  removed  culturally
                    from his homeland, and it appears  from  the  background
                    information that he left that country only  because  his
                    leave to remain expired. He  then  chose  to  enter  the
                    United Kingdom illegally, and made a claim for asylum.


                (e)    The Respondent was  not  present,  and  I  could  not
                    access the documents relating to the asylum claim. There
                    was no suggestion on the  Appellant's  behalf  that  the
                    hearing should be adjourned to enable this to  occur.  I
                    proceed on the basis, therefore, that the  asylum  claim
                    was rejected, and no appeal against this followed.


                (f)    The evidence, such as it was, put  before  me  on  an
                    objective basis, fails to persuade me that any treatment
                    required by the Appellant,  could  not  be  accessed  in
                    Pakistan. There  is  no  evidence  to  the  effect  that
                    antidepressant medication might not  be  available,  and
                    nothing to persuade  me  to  the  effect  that  suitable
                    medical  treatment  would  not  be  available   in   the
                    Appellant's home country. The fact that the standard  of
                    medical  facilities  in  that  country  might   not   be
                    comparable  with  that  here,  does  not   entitle   the
                    Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom of itself.


                (g)    While  the  attention  provided  by  the  Appellant's
                    brother and sister-in-law are no doubt admirable, I  did
                    not find them to be credible witnesses in terms of  what
                    might be available to the Appellant were he to  have  to
                    return to Pakistan.


                (h)    The witness Mr  Khaliq  was  asked  what  family  the
                    Appellant now has in Pakistan. His answer was clear:-


                        "There is no one, just my old father, aged 72,  and
                        he lives in a mosque because he does not  have  any
                        money".


                    I was therefore left with the impression that  the  only
                    person who might be of assistance to  the  Appellant  in
                    his homeland, would be his "elderly" father, aged 72.


                (i)    In fact, the wife of Mr Khaliq gave the lie to  this,
                    claiming that there is only the elderly  father  who  is
                    "in his 80s,". I was not therefore  sure  what  age  the
                    "elderly" gentleman might be.


                (j)    Minutes later, in his evidence, Mr Khaliq  was  asked
                    if the Appellant (and he) did not have any siblings? The
                    witness remembered that there  were  siblings,  but  his
                    immediate reply was that "they are all  married,  living
                    too far, somewhere I do  not  know".  He  was  asked  to
                    clarify. It turned out that there are four brothers, one
                    of whom is in Saudi Arabia. There is therefore a brother
                    still living in Pakistan, and I am not persuaded to  the
                    effect  that  he  might  be   unavailable   to   provide
                    assistance. I am persuaded that the  witness  sought  to
                    obfuscate the court, by suggesting that there was no one
                    in Pakistan whatsoever who  could  help  the  Appellant,
                    when in fact, when "push came to shove," witness had  to
                    revise his evidence. He then revealed that he  has  four
                    sisters in Pakistan whose husbands presently  reside  in
                    Dubai. The witness could give  no  reason,  which  would
                    satisfy the court, as to why it might not be  that  such
                    persons might assist the Appellant on his return


                (k)    Both witnesses made it clear that they give financial
                    support  to  the  Appellant.  I  found  it  particularly
                    telling, as to why this might not continue in  Pakistan.
                    He was asked as follows:-


                        "If your brother was sent to  Pakistan.  Would  you
                        send the money to family to assist him?"


                    His answer was to the effect that "he would  die,  there
                    are  no  male  relatives".  That  hardly  answered   the
                    questions, as I had already found that there  were  male
                    relatives who might be of assistance. The  witness  then
                    went on to say that although "we  can  do  it  here,  he
                    would not have the understanding to look  after  himself
                    in Pakistan."; that avoids answering the  question.  The
                    fact is, that it seems to me feasible and probable  that
                    were the Appellant returned to  Pakistan,  this  family,
                    who had dug deep into their own pockets, could  continue
                    to  do  so,  and  support  the  Appellant  living   with
                    relatives in that country,  or,  alternatively,  in  the
                    form of semi-independence with care provided.


                (l)    It later transpired that there are in fact cousins in
                    Pakistan, some of whom live in major  cities,  according
                    to  the  male  witness  (although  the  female   witness
                    contradicted this and said that they live in a dangerous
                    area in the north-west).


                (m)    It transpired that no relatives in Pakistan had  been
                    approached to see if they might  assist.  It  transpired
                    that no enquiries had been made in Pakistan of what care
                    might be available outwith the family.


                (n)    The psychologist seems to have been misled,  for  she
                    opined that the Appellant's father lives in  the  United
                    Kingdom (paragraph 2.6 of  her  report).  She  does  not
                    address the  issues  of  what  might  or  might  not  be
                    available in Pakistan, but I note that although  it  was
                    suggested before me that  the  Appellant  did  not  have
                    capacity  at  present,  he  had  been  able  to  give  a
                    reasonable account of himself to the psychologist, which
                    suggests that might also be possible, on his  return  to
                    Pakistan, and would assist him to gain the help he needs
                    there.


                (o)    On this basis, I do not  find  that  there  are  very
                    significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan.


Discussion

    7. The appellant's case is based upon  the  medical  evidence  that  was
       before  the  Judge  in  relation  to  his  mental  health  needs  and
       dependency on his brother and sister-in-law as the first  issue,  and
       secondly an assertion  that  the  Judge  erred  in  relation  to  the
       appellant's protection claim and committed  a  procedural  unfairness
       when all the information relating to the  protection  claim  was  not
       available to the Judge.
    8. Reference was made by Mr Georget to the reports from Dr Latif and the
       GP letter which it was submitted contain a diagnosis of  severe  PTSD
       and depression and to communication difficulties that  the  appellant
       has. It was submitted that the appellant will not  feed  himself  and
       his food is put in front of  him  and  that  he  is  unable  to  live
       independently at this time and that the UK-based sponsor, his brother
       and sister-in-law, had given evidence that they  did  not  leave  him
       alone and that they cared for him in tandem.
    9. It was accepted by Mr McVeety that the Judge's decision  was  not  as
       detailed as others may have been and did not examine within the  body
       of the determination the level of care received by the  appellant  in
       the United Kingdom, but I find that does not mean that  the  evidence
       relied upon by  the  appellant  in  support  of  his  claim  was  not
       considered with the required degree of anxious scrutiny by the Judge.
       A reading of the decision as a whole shows  that  all  the  material,
       including the medical reports, was properly considered.
   10. The Judge was aware of the appellant's arguments regarding the degree
       of care it was claimed he  needed  and  specifically  refers  in  the
       decision to the discussion  concerning  the  care  available  to  the
       appellant in Pakistan.  It  is  not  made  out  this  was  the  Judge
       considering an abstract issue, but rather a matter that  specifically
       relates to the appellant's evidence relied upon before the Judge.
   11. It is not made out any  medication  the  appellant  requires  is  not
       available in Pakistan. This is not  an  Article  3  case  based  upon
       medical needs of the appellant, but if it was the required test would
       not be satisfied  on  the  evidence.  Whilst  it  was  suggested  the
       appellant's condition and presentation would allow  it  to  be  found
       there are very significant obstacle to his integration into Pakistan,
       the finding of the Judge at [17 (d)] that the appellant  had  in  the
       past been able to adapt to a lifestyle in Italy (where  the  UK-based
       family were not available to assist) is a finding that has  not  been
       shown to be outside the range of those available to the Judge on  the
       evidence, especially as Mr McVeety noted in his submissions, there is
       no evidence of any medical need in Italy and  the  appellant  claimed
       PTSD as a result of issues in Pakistan not events  that  occurred  in
       Italy. No legal error  has  been  shown  in  the  Judge  finding  the
       appellant lived without issue when he must have had the condition  he
       later raised with the medical professionals in  the  UK,  before  his
       grant of residence ran out and rather than apply for a further period
       he came to the United Kingdom.
   12. The difficulty for the appellant is that  the  witnesses  before  the
       Judge did not tell the truth in  relation  to  who  is  available  in
       Pakistan within the family who could take on a caring role or  assist
       the appellant. The Judge referred to the  evidence  in  the  findings
       above and  the  conclusion  regarding  lack  of  credibility  of  the
       witnesses and the finding they deliberately attempted to  mislead  or
       prevent the Judge from  gaining  an  honest  picture  of  the  family
       situation is a finding within the range of  those  available  to  the
       Judge on the evidence. If a party deliberately withholds  information
       and fails to tell the truth, a Judge is left having to make  findings
       upon the evidence upon which appropriate weight can  be  placed.  The
       Judge's finding it had not been shown the appellant could not  return
       to Pakistan, could not access medical treatment, and that there  were
       no family members who could assist him to gain the help he needs, are
       findings within the range of those available  to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence. The Judges finding of no very significant obstacles and the
       proportionality is based upon this finding in part. It was  not  made
       out the appellant would be intentionally deprived  of  the  necessary
       mental health care if sent back to Pakistan or that  if  professional
       assistance was required it was not available or that those who engage
       with the appellant would not be to facilitate effective communication
       with him or work out a regime that ensured his care needs were met.
   13. In relation to the Judge's findings concerning article  8  ECHR,  the
       Judge sets out the relevant legal self-direction at [19] and [20] and
       the conclusion there was no interference with the  right  to  respect
       for private life  and  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
       requirements under the Immigration Rules relating  to  the  same,  as
       there was little evidence in relation to the nature  of  his  private
       life, or to show any interference was not proportionate is a  finding
       within the range of those available to the Judge.
   14. The Judge at [21] finds there was no circumstances requiring  him  to
       consider article 8 proper although the Judge  does  consider  whether
       the appellant could succeed on the basis of family  life  within  the
       Immigration Rules but finds no such entitlement exists.  Having  made
       that statement, the Judge does go on to consider the issue of  family
       life outside the  Rules  within  the  same  paragraph  which,  whilst
       contradictory, is not material as both elements were considered.
   15. The Judge finds a degree of family life between the appellant and his
       siblings, which is the nature  of  the  relationship  that  had  been
       relied upon in support of the medical  aspects  and  the  submissions
       regarding the existence of very significant obstacles which the Judge
       did not need to repeat again in the later sections of  the  decision.
       The Judge clearly finds that family  life  recognised  by  article  8
       exists and proceeded on the basis that there was more than  a  normal
       element of dependency. The Judge identifies that the nature  of  that
       family life and the element of dependency is  as  per  the  evidence,
       then goes  on  to  consider  the  remaining  aspects  of  the  Razgar
       questions.
   16. The Judge finds that the public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
       immigration  control  relied  upon   by   the   respondent   is   the
       determinative factor. The appellant could not satisfy the immigration
       rules, his status in the UK had always been unlawful and  precarious,
       and the Judge clearly weighed in the balance the evidence relied upon
       by the appellant. There is no challenge in the grounds to the adverse
       credibility findings made and the lack of clarity in the  appellant's
       case also undermines the challenge to the Judges assessment.
   17. Much was made by Mr Georget in  his  submissions  of  the  protection
       issues. The documents  before  the  Judge  included  a  copy  of  the
       appellant's Italian ID card and Italian Residence Permit valid from 3
       October 2013 to 30 September 2016,  and  evidence  of  the  appellant
       being granted subsidiary protection by the authorities in Italy as  a
       result of the situation in his home area in Pakistan. It is not clear
       from such documents whether the question of  internal  relocation  in
       Pakistan was considered on the limited information available.
   18. The EU Directive sets minimum standards for the grant of  'subsidiary
       protection' with a view to supplementing the international protection
       afforded by the Geneva Convention. A person who does not qualify as a
       refugee but who, if returned to his country of origin, faces  a  risk
       of serious harm such as the death  penalty,  torture  or  inhuman  or
       degrading  treatment  or  punishment,  is  eligible  for   subsidiary
       protection. A person granted subsidiary protection is issued  with  a
       residence permit of limited duration.
   19. The appellant claimed to fear on return to Pakistan at the  hands  of
       the Taliban, which was  accepted  by  the  Italian  authorities,  but
       unless there was evidence to show that the appellant continued be  at
       risk of such treatment if he returned to Pakistan, the original grant
       is in itself not sufficient justification for  the  appellant  to  be
       eligible for  a  further  grant  of  subsidiary  protection.  As  the
       appellant failed to make any further application or evidence that any
       application made had been successful in Italy, the Judge has not been
       shown to have erred in law in relation to this aspect of the  appeal.
       The appellant failed to establish on the  evidence  that  substantial
       grounds could be shown for believing  that  if  he  was  returned  to
       Pakistan he would face such a risk.  It  was  not  made  out  on  the
       evidence before the Judge that there were good reasons for  believing
       that the risk of serious harm  previously  accepted  by  the  Italian
       authorities will be repeated or continues.
   20. Mr Georget submitted the Judge was wrong not to adjourn  the  hearing
       due to the asylum point as the Judge proceeded on the  basis  of  the
       appellant's asylum claim made when he entered the United Kingdom  had
       been rejected without being sure of  the  basis  on  which  this  had
       occurred. It was submitted the evidence in the Rule 24  response  now
       informs that the claim was rejected on  third  country  grounds,  not
       because it was a claim without  merit.  It  was  argued  the  Judge's
       failure to agree to adjourn and  to  proceed  without  obtaining  the
       necessary  information  concerning  the  asylum  claim  amounted   to
       procedural unfairness.
   21. The Judge refers at [5]  to  the  adjournment  request  where  it  is
       written:

           "5.    The Respondent was not represented, due to a shortage  of
                Home Office Presenting Officers, and I resolved  to  proceed
                under the guidelines laid down in the case of Surendran. The
                Appellant's representative agreed to  this  proposal.  There
                was a formal application for  an  adjournment  by  the  Home
                Office. I did not consider it in the interests of justice to
                adjourn the matter, and even if I did so, it was  not  clear
                that a Home Office presenting Officer might be available  in
                the  future.  Thus  there  was  no   submission   from   the
                Respondent."

   22. No procedural unfairness is  made  out  in  the  Judge  refusing  the
       respondent's request for the reasons claimed. The Judge was  arguably
       correct to note that the appellant's asylum claim had  been  rejected
       by the Secretary of State, albeit that the  Judge  was  unaware  that
       this  was  on  third  country  grounds.  Even  though  there  was  no
       Presenting Officer present that does not explain why  the  appellant,
       who would have received the third country decision and certification,
       did not himself provide that evidence if he was seeking to rely  upon
       it. The submission on the appellant's behalf that  the  Judge  should
       have  of  own  motion  adjourned  the  proceedings  to   obtain   the
       information relating to the asylum claim fails to  explain  why  this
       should be so when proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
       adversarial by nature and not inquisitorial.
   23. The other point, as noted by Mr McVeety, is that the Judge records at
       [5] that the appellant's representative before the  Judge,  Mr  Holt,
       agreed to proceed in the manner proposed as set out above. There  was
       no application made by the appellant's representative that the  Judge
       was required to consider whether the  proceedings  should  have  been
       adjourned to obtain any missing documents.
   24. It is also relevant to note this is a human rights appeal and  not  a
       protection appeal and that there is no evidence before the Judge of a
       successful challenge to the third country decision and  certification
       by way of judicial review.
   25. It is settled law that a person need not make an asylum claim to be
       able to rely upon evidence supporting a real risk of harm. The Upper
       Tribunal in the recently reported decision of JA (human rights claim:
       serious harm) Nigeria [2021] UKUT 0097 (IAC) found, with specific
       reference to headnote (2):

           "(1)    Where a human rights claim  is  made,  in  circumstances
                where the Secretary of State considers the nature of what is
                being alleged is such that the claim could also constitute a
                protection claim, it is appropriate for her to draw this  to
                the attention of the person concerned, pointing out they may
                wish to make a protection  claim.   Indeed,  so  much  would
                appear to be required, in the  light  of  the  Secretary  of
                State's international  obligations  regarding  refugees  and
                those in need of humanitarian protection.


           (2)    There is no  obligation  on  such  a  person  to  make  a
                protection claim.  The person concerned may decide to  raise
                an alleged risk of serious harm, potentially falling  within
                Article 3 of the ECHR, solely for the purpose of  making  an
                application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  that
                is centred on the private life aspects of Article 8, whether
                by reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  or  outside  the
                immigration rules.  If so, the "serious harm" element of the
                claim falls to be considered in that context.


           (3)    This is not to say, however, that the failure of a person
                to make a protection claim, when the possibility of doing so
                is drawn to their attention by the Secretary of State,  will
                never be relevant to the assessment by her and,  on  appeal,
                by the First-tier Tribunal of the "serious harm" element  of
                a   purely   human   rights   appeal.   Depending   on   the
                circumstances, the assessment may  well  be  informed  by  a
                person's refusal to subject  themselves  to  the  procedures
                that are inherent in the consideration of a claim to refugee
                or humanitarian protection status. Such a person may have to
                accept that the Secretary of  State  and  the  Tribunal  are
                entitled to approach this element of  the  claim  with  some
                scepticism, particularly if it is advanced only late in  the
                day. That is so, whether or not the  element  constitutes  a
                "new matter" for  the  purposes  of  section  85(5)  of  the
                Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


           (4)    On appeal against the refusal of a human rights claim,  a
                person who has not made a protection claim will not be  able
                to rely on the grounds set out in section 84(1) of the  2002
                Act, but only on the ground specified in section 84(2)."

   26. The difficulty for the appellant is that  insufficient  evidence  was
       led before the Judge, or submissions made upon the same, to establish
       there was any merit in a claim that the appellant faced a  real  risk
       sufficient to entitle him to a grant of leave  to  remain  in  United
       Kingdom on any basis, including protection related issues.
   27. The Judge clearly dealt with the material  that  was  made  available
       relevant to the basis on which the case before him had been  brought.
       It is not made out the Judge failed to understand the nature  of  the
       appellant's case, failed to consider the evidence with  the  required
       degree of anxious scrutiny, gave undue  or  rational  weight  to  the
       evidence upon which the  Judge  considered  weight  could  be  given,
       failed to provide adequate  reasons  in  support  of  findings  made,
       misdirected himself in law, or made findings  outside  the  range  of
       those which are reasonably available to the judge on the evidence.
   28. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the Judges decision  and  clearly
       wishes to remain in the United Kingdom with his brother and sister-in-
       law, article 8 does not entitle a person to choose where they wish to
       live, and it is not made out the Judges decision is infected by error
       of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal  sufficient  to
       warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any  further  in  relation  to
       this appeal. It has not been made  out  there  is  anything  arguably
       irrational or unfair about the Judges decision to dismiss the  appeal
       on all grounds.

Decision

       There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

       The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 22 April 2021
