
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/14464/2018 [A]


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Telephone       |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|hearing                              |On 22 July 2020                      |
|On 1 July 2020                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                          Israel oluwasegun shotayo
                            (no ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representatives
For the appellant:     Mr Ihieonyehi Joseph  Okaigbe,  solicitor  with  A  C
Gilead Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr David Clarke,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a Nigerian citizen, appeals with permission to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
   appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse him leave to remain in
   the United Kingdom on human rights grounds, as the spouse  of  a  British
   citizen of Nigerian origin.

2. The decision of the First-tier Judge was set aside on 3 March 2020,  with
   no findings of fact or credibility preserved.  Following COVID-19  triage
   directions sent to the parties on 27 May 2020, the appeal was listed  for
   a case management review hearing on  1  July  2020  to  make  appropriate
   directions for a hearing to remake the decision.

3.  The  triage  decision  recorded  that  there  was  a  new   matter   for
   consideration, as the appellant's British citizen wife was pregnant  with
   their first child.  The Secretary of State had not had an opportunity  to
   consider this factual matrix. At the hearing on 1 July 2020,  Mr  Okaigbe
   for the appellant confirmed that the appellant's wife had given birth  on
   3 June 2020 to a son, Josiah Iyanoluwa Shotayo.

4. For the respondent, Mr Clarke acknowledged that  following  the  decision
   handed  down  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  26  February  2020  in  Birch
   (Precariousness and mistake; new matters : Jamaica) [2020] UKUT 86 (IAC),
   the prohibition on considering  new  matters  under  section  85  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended)  was  not
   applicable to the Upper  Tribunal  when  remaking  a  decision  and  that
   accordingly, weight could be given to the existence of the child  and  to
   section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

5. Mr Clarke undertook to consider new evidence about  the  child  submitted
   on the  appellant's  behalf.   The  appellant  initially  disclosed  only
   photographs of the baby,  which  was  not  sufficient.   At  Mr  Clarke's
   request, I extended time on the undertaking,  to  allow  for  appropriate
   documents to be obtained and for the respondent to take a  view  thereon.
   In an emailed letter of 13 July 2020, Mr Clarke said this:

         "The Secretary of State writes further  to  her  correspondence  of
         2/7/20 and her undertaking to  consider  further  evidence  of  the
         birth of the Appellant's British child.

         In the light of this new NHS evidence confirming  the  birth  of  a
         baby  boy  to  Gbemisola  Salami  on  3/6/20,  the  presumption  of
         paternity that arises through the Appellant's marriage to Ms Salami
         and given that family life is not disputed, the Secretary of  State
         accepts that the Appellant is the father of a British child.

         As  a  consequence  of  this  concession  the  Secretary  of  State
         respectfully  invites  the  Tribunal  to  remake  and   allow   the
         Appellant's HR appeal pursuant to 117B(6)."

6. The respondent having conceded  the  appeal,  this  appeal  falls  to  be
   allowed.

DECISION

7. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeal.

Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     13 July 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
