
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14050/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2017                            |On 12 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          miss Crystal Gay Mcintosh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Maku-Kemi, Solicitor, Jesuis Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen  of  Jamaica  aged
    31.  She  has  permission  to  challenge  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckwell sent on 3 April 2017 allowing  her  appeal  on
    human  rights  grounds  against  a  decision  made  by  the   appellant
    (hereafter the Secretary of State or SSHD) on 30 November 2015 refusing
    her leave to remain in the UK.  The claimant entered  the  UK  in  June
    1999 as a visitor and overstayed. However, on 5  August  2010  she  was
    granted an EEA residence permit on the basis of her relationship with a
    Polish national.  This was granted until 5 August  2015.   She  applied
    for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules on 26 June 2015.

2.   The SSHD's grounds have two interrelated limbs.  It is first  submitted
    that the judge failed to view the claimant's  Article  8  circumstances
    through the prism of the Immigration  Rules  and  instead  conducted  a
    "freewheeling" Article 8 analysis.  Secondly  it  is  argued  that  the
    judge failed to make any finding on whether there were very significant
    obstacles to integration and the failure to  weigh  the  lack  of  such
    obstacles vitiated the judge's  analysis  since  it  resulted  in  such
    factors not being factored into the proportionality assessment.

3.   I heard succinct submissions from Mr Nath and Mr Maku-Kemi.

4.   I consider that the SSHD's first ground has particular  force.   It  is
    settled law that when considering Article 8 outside the Rules  a  judge
    must have regard to the extent to which a claimant is able  to  satisfy
    the Rules.  That is necessary because the  Rules  broadly  reflect  the
    view of the SSHD as regards the  relevant  public  interest:  see  e.g.
    Agyarko [2017] UKHL 11.

5.   It is apparent that the judge wholly failed to consider the  claimant's
    situation in relation to the requirements of the Rules, despite  noting
    that the SSHD had found that the requirements of  the  Rules  were  not
    met. Indeed the judge went further in paragraph 56 in expressly stating
    that "no contrary view in that respect was advanced on  behalf  of  the
    [claimant]".

6.   Mr Maku-Kemi initially  submitted  that  although  the  judge  did  not
    expressly  address  the  claimant's  position  under  the  Rules,   his
    assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules amounted in substance to  the
    view that the claimant had shown that there would be  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration into Jamaican society.  In light  of  what
    was stated in paragraph 56, he retracted that submission,  but  therein
    lies his difficulty.  Given that there was no challenge at the  hearing
    to  the  SSHD's  assessment  that  the  claimant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Rules, the  judge's  substantive  findings  on  the
    claimant's  Article  8  circumstances  outside  the  Rules  could   not
    demonstrate to the contrary.

7.   I also consider the second ground to be made out.  A clear  example  of
    the judge failing to deal adequately  with  the  issue  of  significant
    obstacles to integration arises in  paragraph  71,  wherein  the  judge
    states:

    "71.     I therefore find that the actions of the  Appellant's  mother,
         in sending  the  Appellant  to  this  country  and  apparently  not
         requiring her return, clearly support the  view  expressed  by  the
         Appellant in general terms that she does  not  enjoy  any  form  of
         current close relationship  with  her  mother.   Of  course  it  is
         entirely understandable that the Appellant and Ms Mead  would  have
         met the Appellant's mother when they travelled on a  brief  holiday
         visit to Jamaica, but I accept the Appellant's evidence as  to  the
         current lack of any  effective  relationship  with  her  mother  or
         indeed with other relatives in  Jamaica.   Considering  matters  in
         that light, I do not find there to be any  meaningful  conflict  in
         the detail of the evidence given as between the  Appellant  and  Ms
         Mead.  The evidence of the second  supporting  witness,  Claudette,
         does not run counter to that finding."

8.   If the judge had considered the  issue  of  the  claimant's  ties  with
    Jamaica in the context of whether there were significant  obstacles  to
    her integration there, he would have had to consider a  wide  range  of
    factors so as to make a broad evaluative judgment, including the extent
    to which  she  had  social,  cultural  and  linguistic  ties,  her  job
    prospects and her family circumstances in terms of whether  any  family
    there would be able to provide support or assistance.  The judge  would
    also have had to consider not just whether family ties existed  in  the
    present but whether they could be rekindled.  To the contrary the judge
    appears to have reduced the  consideration  of  the  claimant's  likely
    circumstances in Jamaica to whether there was a "current  lack  of  any
    effective relationship with her mother or indeed with  other  relatives
    in Jamaica".  Further, in the next  paragraph  the  judge  appeared  to
    consider that prior residence in the first twelve years of  a  person's
    life is irrelevant to whether he or she can re-establish life  in  that
    country.

9.    For  the  above  reasons  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law and that his decision must be set aside.

10.  Both representatives at the hearing indicated that if  I  were  to  set
    aside the judge's decision the case could  be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  That is also my view.

11.  I first considered whether it was necessary to hold a further  hearing,
    taking into account that the claimant and one of her  witnesses  voiced
    at the end their concern that no decision  should  be  re-made  without
    hearing more about the particular circumstances.

12.  Whilst I understand that concern, I am not persuaded a further  hearing
    is necessary.  The SSHD's challenge to the FtT decision was confined to
    issues of law.  That entails that the claimant is entitled to  rely  on
    all the findings of fact made by the FtT  judge  about  the  claimant's
    circumstances.  The claimant's representatives  were  sent  a  Rule  15
    notice requiring them to identify further evidence if they wished it to
    be considered.  None has been forthcoming.

13.  Considering first the claimant's position under the Immigration  Rules,
    it is not in dispute that she did not meet the requirements;  but  even
    if it were I am unable to conclude that she meets  those  requirements.
    She has no partner or child and no family life; hence her only possible
    route of success under the Rules was paragraph 276ADE(v) which required
    her to show  "there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  [her]
    integration into [Jamaica]".

14.  On the judge's findings of fact, the claimant had not lived in  Jamaica
    since she was 12 and her  mother  had  effectively  abandoned  parental
    responsibility for her by sending her to the UK.  The claimant  had  no
    effective relationship with her mother or other relatives  in  Jamaica.
    On the other hand, it is clear that  the  claimant  still  has  social,
    cultural and linguistic ties with Jamaica and that she also has  family
    members there.  Whether or not she has a current effective relationship
    with them, it has not been shown that she could not look  to  them  for
    some level of support at least while she finds her feet and has time to
    look for a job.

15.  As regards her job prospects, the judge  described  her  as  a  decent,
    hardworking person who has a strong ambition to be a nurse  and  wishes
    to contribute positively to society.  When  able  to  work  during  her
    period of EEA residence, she worked and paid  taxes.   I  consider  she
    would be able  to  put  those  qualities  to  use  in  her  country  of
    nationality  as  well.   The  claimant  is  able-bodied  and   has   no
    significant health problems.

16.  Having concluded that the claimant is not able  to  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular has not shown that there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to her integration into Jamaican society,  I
    turn to consider whether she can  nevertheless  succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds outside the Rules.

17.  As regards her circumstances in Jamaica, I do not find  that  returning
    her there would have unjustifiably harsh consequences.

18.  In relation to her situation in the UK, there are a number  of  factors
    that weigh in her favour.  She has been here for most  of  her  teenage
    and adult life and her period of residence  (barring  a  few  weeks  of
    holiday) dates back to 1999 - some eighteen years.   The  FtT  Judge's
    evaluation that "[a]ll her meaningful  life  has  been  spent  in  this
    country" goes too far; but clearly much of it has.

19.  She has shown during the periods when she was  lawfully  able  to  work
    that she is hardworking and able to pay taxes and contribute positively
    to society. She speaks fluent English. She identifies as British and is
    patriotic in her attitude to the UK.  Although she has had  significant
    periods during which she has been here unlawfully, she had five  years'
    lawful residence as an EEA partner in a durable relationship,  and  the
    application which led to the refusal decision appealed against was made
    whilst she still had the equivalent of limited leave.  It is also  fair
    to say that since she came at the age of 12 it  was  not  her  personal
    fault that she remained unlawfully, at least until she turned  18.   On
    the basis of her talent, qualifications and general  attitude,  she  is
    someone who is eminently employable and there are good  prospects  that
    if allowed to stay she will seek to train as a nurse  in  a  profession
    where there is a national shortage.

20.  Weighed against these facts, however, the claimant came to the UK as  a
    visitor and continued to be an overstayer for some eleven years.  It is
    reasonable to assume  she  was  made  aware  in  August  2002  that  an
    application for her to remain as a dependent child  was  refused.   Yet
    she remained.  Furthermore, when her relationship with her EEA  partner
    broke down, she failed to notify the  Home  Office  of  her  change  of
    circumstances. She is someone whose immigration status in  the  UK  has
    always been precarious.

21.  The claimant has no family life ties in the UK within  the  meaning  of
    Article 8. She is not presently financially independent.

22.  Given that the private  life  factors  counting  for  and  against  the
    claimant relating to her circumstances in the UK are finely balanced, I
    consider that the lack of significant obstacles  to  her  reintegrating
    into Jamaican society to  point  strongly  to  a  conclusion  that  the
    decision appealed against was a proportionate one.  I do have  sympathy
    with the claimant's situation given her hopes for a nursing career, but
    in my view it would not be consonant with  higher  court  authority  to
    find a breach of Article 8 in the circumstances of her case.  It  would
    be open to her to apply from Jamaica to train and work in the UK  as  a
    nurse.

23.  Accordingly, the decision I re-make is to dismiss the appeal.

24.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date:10 January 2017

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal








