
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14798/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2019                    |On 05th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 Azkar Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam of Counsel, instructed by Sheratons
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and he appeals the  decision  of
    the respondent taken on 5th July 2018, to refuse  to  grant  him  leave
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  his  Article  8  rights,
    namely his family life with his  claimed  British  partner  [RP].   The
    respondent  refused  the  application  considering  that  the   claimed
    relationship was not genuine, since the parties were involved in a sham
    marriage.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies at Manchester
    Piccadilly.  At paragraph 5 of his determination the judge said this:-

         "The burden of proof rests on the appellant.  He must satisfy me on
         the balance of probability that he can meet the requirements of the
         Immigration Rules.  In this marriage the respondent  contends  that
         the appellant entered into a sham marriage with his  sponsor.   The
         initial burden of proof rests on the  respondent  to  satisfy  that
         that is the case.  If they raise evidence to suggest on the balance
         of probability that that is the case the burden then shifts to  the
         appellant to satisfy me to the same standard that his  marriage  to
         his claimed wife and sponsor is genuine and subsisting  and  not  a
         sham marriage."

     Unfortunately, having set out the evidence  and  cross-examination  and
    the submissions of the representatives the judge then, at paragraph 34,
    makes his findings the very first finding he makes is as follows, "I am
    satisfied that the appellants cannot discharge the burden of proof upon
    them and satisfy me that they have ever or are currently in  a  genuine
    subsisting relationship namely between a husband and wife."

2.   Then in  paragraph  35,  he  goes  on  to  suggest  that  the  evidence
    emanating from an interview conducted by the respondent indicates  that
    the appellant and the sponsor had entered into a sham  marriage.   With
    very great respect to him, he should have applied the test in  the  way
    he set out in paragraph  5  of  his  determination.   There  are  other
    matters in  the  determination  which  suggests  that  the  finding  at
    paragraph 35 may be difficult to sustain  but,  I  concluded  that  the
    determination cannot stand in any event and despite submissions  to  me
    to the contrary by Mr Tan, I  have  concluded  that  the  determination
    should be set aside and the matter remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be heard afresh by a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davies.

 No anonymity direction is made

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                  Direction

The respondent is directed within fourteen days of the date of  delivery  of
these reasons to file with the First-tier  Tribunal  and  to  serve  on  the
appellant's solicitors, Sheratons Solicitors Limited of  86  Easton  Street,
High Wycombe, Bucks HP11 1LT,  a  complete  copy  of  the  typed  record  of
interview conducted with the appellant and the sponsor.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 02 July 2019

