
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14160/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 March 2019                              |On 26 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     PAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Appiah of Counsel instructed by Omnis Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 5 July 2002.   She  applied
    to join her mother, Ms [S], the sponsor, in the United Kingdom in  July
    2017.  The application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 13
    October  2017.   Initially  a  point  was  taken  on  the   appellant's
    relationship with the  sponsor  but  following  the  reception  of  DNA
    evidence that matter was resolved in favour of the appellant and is  no
    longer a matter  in  contention.   However,  it  was  argued  that  the
    financial requirements had still not been met.  The appellant's  appeal
    came before a First-tier Judge on 23 November 2018.  At the hearing  Mr
    Colley, for the Entry Clearance Officer, sought to raise an  additional
    issue (sole responsibility)  but  the  First-tier  Judge  rejected  the
    application of which no notice had been given and  that  conclusion  is
    not in issue in this appeal.  On the relevant Rules in respect  of  the
    financial requirement the representatives were in  agreement  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had erred as appears from the following extract
    of the determination:

         "10. Both Mr Colley and Ms Appiah submitted that the  ECO  had  not
             applied the correct provision of the  Immigration  Rules.   As
             the parent of the Appellant has limited leave to remain  as  a
             parent under Appendix FM, paragraph E-LTRC.2.3A provides that:


                  '... the applicant must provide evidence that  the  parent
                  is  able  to  maintain  and  accommodate  themselves,  the
                  applicant and any other dependents adequately  in  the  UK
                  without recourse to public funds.'


         11.  Mr Colley submitted that, as Ms [S] is in  receipt  of  public
             funds, the Appellant cannot satisfy this criteria.  Ms  Appiah
             submitted  that  "without  recourse  to  public  funds"  means
             without recourse to additional public funds".

    The First-tier Judge accepted the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent and there was no room for a gloss  on  the  meaning  of  the
    phrase "without recourse to public funds" and there was no ambiguity in
    the wording.  In the light of her conclusions that  the  appellant  did
    not meet the relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules, the  judge
    went on to consider the case on Article  8  grounds  and  although  she
    found that it was in the best interests of the appellant to be with her
    mother, and although the decision was  "finely  balanced",  the  public
    interest outweighed any interference with the appellant's  family  life
    with her mother.  Accordingly, the judge dismissed the appeal.

2.    In  the  grounds  of  appeal  it  was  argued  that  the  respondent's
    representative had submitted to the Tribunal a position  that  did  not
    follow the guidance to caseworkers on  the  consideration  of  adequate
    maintenance  and  reference  was  made  to  the  Home  Office  guidance
    published  in  August  2015  at  Annex  F  "Adequate  Maintenance   and
    Accommodation".  It was submitted that it was clear from  the  examples
    that adequate maintenance  allowed  for  the  calculation  of  benefits
    received by the sponsor which usually  would  be  in  addition  to  the
    income of the sponsor and that the purpose of the Rules was  to  ensure
    that "there is no further expectation or need to rely  on  benefits  by
    the appellant or  sponsor".   It  was  submitted  that  the  additional
    statement of the sponsor submitted at the court hearing clearly  showed
    the income was adequate for the purposes of the Rules.   Reference  was
    also made to Ahmed (benefits: proof of  receipt;  evidence)  Bangladesh
    [2013] UKUT 84 (IAC) where it was said that the  Tribunal  had  clearly
    considered the benefits of the sponsor received in the UK  as  part  of
    the assessment of adequate maintenance.

3.   Reference was made to  paragraph  297(i)(v)  which  stated   "can,  and
    will, be maintained adequately by the parent, parents or  relative  the
    child is seeking to join, without recourse to public funds"; and it was
    submitted that public funds was relevant "only insofar as the appellant
    cannot seek to  rely  on  maintenance  that  means  there  will  be  an
    additional recourse to public funds".

4.   There was an application for permission to appeal on  21  January  2019
    and it was found to be arguable that the judge had misdirected  herself
    as to the appropriate approach to be taken when considering  the  issue
    of adequate maintenance.  It was noted that the case of Ahmed  did  not
    appear to have been brought to the attention of the  First-tier  Judge.
    At the hearing before me Ms Pal accepted that the First-tier Judge  had
    erred in law on the question of the interpretation of "without recourse
    to public funds".

5.   It was submitted by Counsel that the  appellant  did  comply  with  the
    requirements of the Rules insofar as maintenance was concerned  and  he
    pointed out that the  figures  given  in  the  determination  had  been
    accepted by the judge.

6.   I put the matter back so that the appellant's statement and details  of
    her income could be made available.  The parties  went  carefully  into
    the figures and I am extremely grateful to Ms Pal for taking  the  time
    and trouble to analyse them.  There was one item which turned out to be
    child benefit but as Counsel explained, even if  these  figures  should
    not have been included in either table, it would make no difference  to
    the outcome and there would be no additional recourse to public  funds.
    Ms Pal was in agreement.

7.   It is agreed that there was a material error of law in the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Judge.   It  is  unfortunate  that  the   respondent's
    representative at the hearing before the First-tier Judge  put  forward
    an approach which is now accepted to be wrong.

8.    I am satisfied that the arrival of the appellant  will  not  cause  an
    extra burden on public funds.  I note that even  when  concluding  that
    the Immigration Rules were not satisfied, the judge had  said  that  it
    was  a  finely  balanced  decision  when  considering  Article  8   and
    proportionality.

9.   In the premises it is right to allow this appeal given the  consent  of
    both parties. Indeed, had the judge found as is now conceded  that  the
    appellant's submissions on the interpretation of  the  phrase  "without
    recourse to public funds" were correct, she would no doubt have allowed
    the appeal.


10.  For the reasons I have given the decision of the First-tier  Judge  was
    materially flawed in law.  By agreement I reverse that  decision.   The
    appeal is allowed.

Decision:

    Appeal allowed


Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made an anonymity order which I continue.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Fee Award

The First-tier Judge made no fee award as she had dismissed the appeal.   In
my judgment, it is appropriate in the circumstances of this case for a  full
fee award to be made to the appellant.


Signed                                  Date 22 March 2019

Judge Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal




