
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14226/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th January 2019                       |On 28th January 2019            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                              Ms NUSRAT HUSSAIN
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Salam, of Salam & Co Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First  tier
      Tribunal Herwald dated 18 September 2018, dismissing  the  appellant's
      appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  20  June  2018
      refusing her leave to remain and refusing her human rights claim.

2     The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and entered the United  Kingdom
      in November 2014 with entry clearance as a  visitor,  valid  until  27
      April 2015. Her husband, MMH, was a British citizen, and  was  present
      in United Kingdom with  the  appellant.  They  both  stayed  with  the
      appellant's adult daughter, and that daughter's husband and  daughter.
      The appellant's husband was suffering  from  dementia.  The  appellant
      applied for and obtained further leave to remain.  I  refer  below  to
      further information about the nature of that leave to remain. This was
      granted from August 2015 to 17 February 2018.

3     Regrettably, on 19 November  2017  the  appellant's  husband  died  of
      renal failure and vascular dementia. The appellant made an application
      for further leave to remain on  16  February  2018  on  form  FLR(FP).
      Representations dated 14 February 2018  accompanying  the  application
      asserted that the application was being made outside of the rules.  It
      was asserted that the appellant wished  to  remain  living  in  United
      Kingdom with her adult daughter and family, that the appellant herself
      was elderly and in poor health, and there was nobody available to look
      after her in Pakistan.

4     The application was refused in the decision dated 20 June 2018 on  the
      basis that the appellant did not qualify for  leave  to  remain  under
      appendix FM or on private life grounds under paragraph 276ADE(1),  and
      that there were no exceptional circumstances  warranting  a  grant  of
      leave to remain outside of the rules.

5     The appellant appealed, and the matter came before the judge.

6     At the appeal hearing, Ms Hulse, appearing for the  appellant,  sought
      to argue that the appellant satisfied the requirements  for  leave  to
      remain under Section BPILR, Indefinite leave to remain (settlement) as
      a bereaved partner under Appendix FM.  The judge required Ms Hulse  to
      set out her case in a skeleton argument, which she provided. The judge
      ultimately  appears  to  have  agreed  to  consider  the   appellant's
      potential satisfaction of BPILR  of  appendix  FM.  Although  Mr.  Tan
      suggested before me that the Presenting Officer before the  judge  had
      not given their consent for this 'new matter' to be considered by  the
      Tribunal, it seems to me, and on reflection Mr. Tan appeared to agree,
      that  the  judge  ruled  at  [6]  that   the   appellant's   potential
      satisfaction of this  rule  was  not  in  fact  a  'new  matter',  the
      respondent effectively being already aware of the factual matrix  that
      the appellant relied upon.

7     However, the judge  held  that  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
      requirements of Section BPILR on the grounds that she had not  made  a
      valid application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  that  basis
      [20(a)]. Further, although the judge appears to have found in the same
      paragraph that the appellant's last grant of limited leave  to  remain
      had been as the partner of  a  British  citizen,  the  judge  was  not
      satisfied that the requirements of the rules under BPILR that "each of
      the parties must have intended to live permanently with the  other  in
      the UK" was met [20(b)].

8     The judge also made the following findings:

      (i)   even if the appellant had some 'mobility' issues, she  was  able
           to walk and care for herself; the judge noted that the appellant
           had travelled independently to Pakistan  as  recently  as  early
           2018 to make arrangements for her husband's funeral [20(d)];


      (ii)  there were no "very significant obstacles"  to  the  appellant's
           integration in Pakistan [20(e)];


      (iii) the judge did not accept that it was the  case  that  there  was
           nobody that would be able or willing to care for  the  appellant
           in Pakistan; the appellant's brother now  lived  in  a  property
           that had been owned by their mother; the  appellant  had  stayed
           with  that  brother  recently;  the  appellant  had  savings  in
           Pakistan, and the appellant's daughter in  the  UK,  who  had  a
           respectable income, could financially support the  appellant  in
           Pakistan [20(f)];


      (iv)  there was extensive family in Pakistan [20(g)];


      (v)   in relation to the judge's findings on Article 8 ECHR  regarding
           the appellant's family and private life, I quote from  paragraph
           24 as follows:


                 "The appellant has what might be described as a  degree  of
                 family life, with adults in  this  country,  including  her
                 adult granddaughter who gave evidence. Bearing in mind  the
                 cases cited above, I am not persuaded in this case that the
                 relationships between adults acquire protection of  Article
                 8 without evidence of further elements of dependency  which
                 I found do not exist here. No evidence was put before me as
                 to private life over and above that which  would  naturally
                 have been obtained in a brief period in this country. There
                 was no evidence that the appellant  has  any  relationships
                 outwith her own immediate family here.  As I say, I am  not
                 persuaded that there is  interference  with  the  right  to
                 respect for private or family life. Had that been the case,
                 I am not persuaded that it would have been had consequences
                 of such gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8 but
                 it would have been in accordance with the law had done  so.
                 It would also have had the legitimate aim  (sic)  affording
                 the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, taking  into
                 account the appellant's reliance on the health  service  in
                 this country,  and  her  financial  dependence  on  others.
                 Furthermore, it would, I find, have been proportionate. The
                 Appellant had to give evidence through an interpreter,  she
                 is not financially independent, and her immigration  status
                 is precarious in that she  had  limited  leave  to  remain,
                 taking into account the issues I am referred to in  Section
                 117B, above."

9     The appeal was consequently dismissed.

10    The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  that  decision
      in grounds dated 2 October 2018, which argue that the judge  erred  in
      law, in summary, as follows:

      (i)   GEN.1.9(a) of Appendix FM did not require the appellant to  have
           made a valid application  for  leave  to  remain  under  section
           BPILR, given that the issue was raised in an appeal;


      (ii)  the judge's finding that the  couple  did  not  intend  to  live
           permanently with the  other  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  made
           without adequate regard to the appellant's and  other  witness's
           evidence;


      (iii) the appellant therefore  met  the  requirements  for  indefinite
           leave to remain under BPILR, which  would  have  been  a  highly
           material consideration in determining the proportionality of the
           decision challenged;


      (iv)  a challenge under the title  'Human  Rights  and  276ADE(1)(vi)'
           reads as follows:


                 "14.  While dealing with the human rights claim and 276ADE,
                 the IJ either  dismissed  or  gave  little  weight  to  the
                 evidence that at the age of 70  with  health  and  mobility
                 issues the Applicant had no reasonable prospect of survival
                 if her present care was withdrawn and placed at  the  mercy
                 of unable and unwilling family members in Pakistan.


                 15.   No weight was given to the claim of private  life  of
                 the appellant with her daughter and her family in the UK.


                 16.   The IJ brushed  aside  the  internet  evidence[20(i)]
                 that there were no care homes  in  Pakistan  and  the  ones
                 referred to were poor homes for shelter and  food  for  the
                 needy.


                 17.   The IJ also  did  not  accept  the  argument/evidence
                 about the impossibility of the elderly lady to live on  her
                 own Pakistan due to the crime situation.  The  Respondent's
                 COI report on Pakistan (7.5.1) openly  states  that  it  is
                 next to impossible for a lone woman to live in Pakistan and
                 they are vulnerable. The IJ did  not  give  weight  to  the
                 compelling   and   compassionate   circumstances   of   the
                 Appellant.


                 18.   If there was a Razgar  proportionality  exercise,  it
                 would be clear that the removal of this  elderly  applicant
                 would be disproportionate and unduly  harsh  in  breach  of
                 article 8 rights."

11    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mailer
      in a decision dated 22 October 2018 on the basis that the grounds were
      arguable.

12    I heard from Mr Salam for the  Appellant  and  from  Mr  Tan  for  the
      Respondent.

      Discussion

13    It is appropriate to set out the relevant requirements for  indefinite
      leave to remain under Section BPILR:

           "Section BPILR: Indefinite leave to  remain  (settlement)  as  a
           bereaved partner


           BPILR.1.1. The requirements to be met for  indefinite  leave  to
           remain in the UK as a bereaved partner are that-


           (a)   the applicant must be in the UK;


           (b)   the applicant must  have  made  a  valid  application  for
                 indefinite leave to remain as a bereaved partner;


           (c)   the applicant must not fall for refusal under any  of  the
                 grounds in Section S-ILR: Suitability-indefinite  leave  to
                 remain; and


           (d)   the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section
                 E-BPILR:


           Eligibility  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  bereaved
           partner.


           Section E-BPILR: Eligibility for indefinite leave to remain as a
           bereaved partner


           E-BPILR.1.1. To meet the eligibility requirements for indefinite
           leave to remain as a bereaved partner all of the requirements of
           paragraphs E-BPILR1.2. to 1.4. must be met.


           E-BPILR.1.2. The applicant's last grant of  limited  leave  must
           have been as-


           (a)   a partner  (other  than  a  fianc�(e)  or  proposed  civil
                 partner) of a British Citizen or a person  settled  in  the
                 UK; or


           (b)   a bereaved partner.


           E-BPILR.1.3. The person who was the applicant's partner  at  the
           time of the last grant of limited leave as a partner  must  have
           died.


           E-BPILR.1.4. At the time of the partner's death the relationship
           between the applicant and the partner must have been genuine and
           subsisting and each of the parties must have  intended  to  live
           permanently with the other in the UK."

14    Mr. Tan initially argued that on the proper construction of GEN.1  .9,
      the appellant could not meet the requirements of BPILR unless she  had
      made a valid application. However, upon further consideration  of  the
      provisions under GEN.1 .9, Mr. Tan accepted, that given that the judge
      had considered the appellant's potential satisfaction of BPILR  within
      the context of an  appeal,  that  she  need  not  have  made  a  valid
      application under BPILR.

15    However, Mr. Tan defended the judge's decision that the appellant  did
      not meet the requirements of E -BPILR1.4, on the grounds that  on  the
      evidence before the judge, it had been sustainable to  find  that  the
      appellant had not demonstrated that each of the  parties  intended  to
      live permanently with the other in the UK.

16    However, Mr Salam  referred  to  the  following  evidence  before  the
      judge, quoted within the grounds of appeal, to  demonstrate  that  the
      judge had erred in law in relation to this finding:

           "... It was my father's wishes before he  passed  away  that  my
           mother spends the rest of her life with me in my home where they
           lived as a husband to wife before he passed  away"  (appellant's
           daughter, paragraph six).


           "My grandfather was a British national and spent his  last  days
           here in the UK and all of his last memories are attached to  the
           UK, he also wished and requested us that  in  case  of  anything
           happens to him he would keep our grandmother and  will  continue
           to provide the care  which  she  was  getting...."  (appellant's
           granddaughter, paragraph six).

17    As is almost inevitable in a case such as the present,  there  was  no
      direct evidence from the appellant's husband (even in the form of some
      statement he made before he died) as to what  his  wishes  might  have
      been. However, the evidence quoted above appears to me to speak to the
      issue of what the appellant and  her  husband's  intentions  had  been
      whilst he was still  alive.  The  judge  suggested  that  the  written
      statements of the parties did not address this issue, but I find  that
      the above passages are relevant. In the light of such evidence,  which
      is not directly referred to by the  judge,  I  find  that  it  is  not
      sustainable for the judge to suggest  that  the  evidence  before  him
      'clearly' indicated that they did not have the intention of  remaining
      in the UK.

18    Further, I agree with the appellant's contention  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal that the judge's observation that "No evidence was given before
      me which would persuade me  other  than  the  fact  that  the  parties
      intended to  return  to  their  homeland,  subject  to  the  husband's
      recovery", was unsustainable. All the relevant  indicators  were  that
      the appellant's husband would not make any recovery,  and  there  does
      not appear to be any evidential basis to support the  suggestion  that
      the appellant's husband had intended  to  return  to  Pakistan  if  he
      recovered; he clearly wasn't going to recover.

19    Therefore, the reasons which the  judge  gave  for  finding  that  the
      appellant did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules under
      section BPILR do not appear to be sustainable.

20    However, I raised an issue with Mr Salam, which was whether the  judge
      was  correct  in  law  in  treating  the  appellant  as  meeting   the
      requirement of E-BP ILR.1.2 (a), that the applicant's  last  grant  of
      limited leave to remain had been as a partner of a British citizen  or
      a person settled in the UK. I heard submissions from both  parties  on
      this point.

21    Mr Salam argued that even if, as he accepted, the grant  of  leave  to
      remain to the  appellant  from  2015  to  2018  been  outside  of  the
      immigration rules, it had still been granted on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant was her husband's partner; if she were not his partner,  she
      would not have been granted such leave to  remain.  However,  Mr.  Tan
      argued that notwithstanding that E-BP ILR.1.2  does  not  specifically
      state that the leave to remain must  have  been  as  a  partner  under
      Appendix FM, the construction to be given to E-BPILR.1.2(a)  was  that
      leave to remain must have been  under  that  Appendix.  The  leave  to
      remain as a partner was to have been given as  partner  of  a  British
      citizen or person settled in the UK. He argued that this was  a  clear
      indication that the term 'partner' in this context meant partner under
      Appendix FM; although leave to  remain  as  a  partner  was  available
      elsewhere under the rules, for example as partner  of  a  PBS  migrant
      with limited leave to remain, that  leave  would  clearly  not  be  as
      partner of a British citizen or a person settled in the UK.

22    Notwithstanding that I have raised this issue  of  my  own  motion,  I
      have decided not to make a ruling in relation to it. The issue is  not
      necessarily a  Robinson  obvious  one,  and  was  not  raised  by  the
      respondent in any Rule 24 reply. I have decided, on  reflection,  that
      it would be procedurally unfair to take issue with this  part  of  the
      judge's decision.

23    However, whatever  errors  of  law  may  be  present  in  the  judge's
      decision about the appellant's satisfaction of  Section  BPILR,  I  am
      compelled to find that such errors are not material to the outcome  of
      the appeal. As is clear in authority, such as  Adjei  (visit  visas  -
      Article 8) (Rev 1) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC), in cases such as the present
      where the jurisdiction of  the  Tribunal  is  limited  to  determining
      whether refusal of a human rights claim is unlawful  under  section  6
      Human Rights Act 1998, then irrespective of whether an appellant meets
      immigration rules for leave to remain or entry  clearance,  an  appeal
      cannot succeed unless private  or  family  life  rights  are  actually
      engaged under Article 8(1) ECHR, and that any interference  with  such
      rights is disproportionate.

24    In the present case, although the judge found that the  appellant  had
      'what might be described as a degree of family life with adults in the
      United Kingdom, including her adult  granddaughter',  the  judge  held
      that this family life was not sufficient to amount to family life  for
      the purposes of Article 8 EC HR, as it lacked the further elements  of
      dependency which would need to be  established  between  adult  family
      members. The judge was also the view  that  the  evidence  as  to  the
      appellant's private life  in  the  United  Kingdom  was,  in  summary,
      sparse.

25    I find,  with  respect  to  the  authors  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
      paragraphs 14 - 18, that the grounds of  appeal  do  not  advance  any
      properly articulated challenge to the judge's findings in relation  to
      the appellant's private or family life.  Paragraphs  14  to  16  could
      properly be described as a mere summary  of  the  immigration  judge's
      findings. There is no  error  of  law  actually  argued  within  those
      paragraphs.

26    Paragraph 17 of the grounds of appeal suggest that the judge  did  not
      give weight to the compelling and compassionate circumstances  of  the
      appellant. This assertion is rather vague, and is not  made  out.  The
      judge sets out the nature of the evidence before  him,  including  the
      lack of any medical evidence suggesting that  the  appellant  had  any
      serious health  problems.  He  suggested  that  she  was  sufficiently
      mobile, and did not require personal care. The grounds  of  appeal  do
      not satisfactorily identify what evidence has been left out of account
      by the judge.

27    I do not therefore find any material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision.

28    Even if the decision were to be set  aside,  and  the  appeal  decided
      again, the appellant may potentially be able to demonstrate  that  she
      meets some elements of Section BPILR; the fact that she had not made a
      valid application would not appear be an obstacle to  satisfaction  of
      the rules; and the appellant may argue that she and her  late  husband
      had the requisite  intent,  prior  to  his  death,  to  remain  living
      together in the United Kingdom. The question about whether or not  the
      appellant met the requirement to have  had  leave  to  remain  as  her
      husband's partner would be more difficult to determine.

29    However, there is no need for these matters to be re-decided,  because
      however they are to be  decided,  the  appellant's  appeal  could  not
      succeed, on the basis that the judge has found that the appellant does
      not have a private or family life in the UK, and that finding has  not
      been successfully challenged.

      Decision

      The judge's decision did not involve the making of any material  error
      of law

      I do not set aside the judge's decision

      The appellant's appeal is dismissed


Signed:                                            Date: 16.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
