
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14416/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 May 2019                        |On 7 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                 Nageena [M]
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Patel, Solicitor of Highfields Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Pakistan,  date  of  birth  11  May  1991,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision,  dated  16  June  2018,  to
    refuse leave to remain.

2.   The appeal of the Appellant against that decision  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Hands  (the  Judge)  who,  on  30  January  2019,
    dismissed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Permission  to  appeal
    was given on20 February 2019.

3.   The judge set out significant elements of the evidence relied  upon  by
    the Appellant but in particular the existence of a child, with a  Dutch
    or German national father in the United Kingdom on 27 April 2013 ([ZA])
    who is a national of Pakistan.  The judge  was  also  informed  of  the
    addition to the Appellant's family in the UK of a child, [BY], date  of
    birth 27 May 2018.  The judge was told that the father of the child was
    a British national and that the child [BY] was a British  national  and
    in possession of a British national passport.

4.     The Appellant was acting  in  person  and  it  appears,  this  is  no
    criticism of  her  current  representatives,  that  her  case  was  ill
    prepared in producing a statement from the father of the  second  child
    and relevant  documentation  to  evidence  that  relationship  and  his
    involvement in the life of the second child.

5.     To some extent it appears, against that factual background, that  the
    Appellant's own evidence as recorded by the judge on the issue  of  the
    relationship with  the father  of  the  second  child  and  the  second
    child's nationality that the Appellant appears to have  given  somewhat
    contradictory evidence on the point as to whether or not she  was,  for
    reasons of the receipt of benefits and other entitlements, living  with
    her current partner.  Whether or  not  that  was  the  reality  of  the
    position or to that extent the matter was misstated, it is evident that
    the judge took that contradiction into account significantly  in  terms
    of the reliability of the Appellant's account.

6.    The judge noted (D26) that the Appellant  did  offer  to  produce  the
    daughter's birth certificate but this would not  have  established  the
    daughter's nationality and in that respect she was right, albeit  there
    was evidently, if thought had been given to it, other documentation  to
    demonstrate  the  relationship  and  nationality  which  had  not  been
    produced.

7.      I find this is a difficult case because in many respects  the  judge
    did the best she could with the material that she was provided but  the
    issue became more one of procedural fairness, in  the  sense  that  the
    Appellant whilst unrepresented had adduced aspects  of  evidence  which
    were pertinent to the Article 8 claim  which  the  judge  did  not,  in
    fairness, on the information she had, given  it  the  consideration  it
    probably deserved.

8.     I should emphasise  that  I  do  not  reach  any  conclusion  on  the
    respective merits of the Appellant's case, but it  seemed  to  me  that
    this was a case where the absence of evidence properly advanced  before
    the judge had given rise to an error of law in the proper consideration
    and weighing of the Article 8 claim. I bear in mind  it  was  a  family
    life issue being  raised  and  the  considerations  which  arise  under
    Sections 117A and 117B of the NIAA 2002, as amended.

9.     In the circumstances I concluded that the  judge,  whilst  doing  the
    best she could with the material she had, needed to have given at least
    consideration to giving the Appellant  an  opportunity  to  adduce  the
    claimed evidence.  Whether it would have made a material difference  to
    the outcome, at this stage it would be inappropriate to express a view.
    It seemed to me that in the consideration of the Article  8  claim  the
    matter did need to be more fully addressed.  In those circumstances  Mr
    Diwnycz  fairly  accepted  that  the  Presenting  Officer's   note   of
    submissions did indicate the real possibility that there may have  been
    a measure of procedural unfairness. In  the  light  of  the  overriding
    objective and the case of TK Burundi [2009] EWCA Civ. 40 the absence of
    relevant  evidence3  was  material  to  the  fair  assessment  of   the
    reliability  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.  In  the  circumstances  I
    conclude the Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter is  to  be  returned  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

DIRECTIONS

No findings of fact to stand.

Relist for hearing 2 hours.

Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands, or First-tier Tribunal  Judge  E
Simpson.

Urdu interpreter required.

Any further directions for the preparation  of  the  case  for  the  further
hearing to be made in the First-tier Tribunal.


ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was  sought  nor  in  the  circumstances  does  one  seem
necessary in the light of the Presidential Direction.


Signed                                  Date 24 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

