
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14320/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2020                  |On 19 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOUT


                                   Between

                                 INDRA LAMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nepal,  born  on  11  August  1979.  He
      applied for entry clearance on 10 March 2018, at the age of 38  years,
      to settle in the UK as the adult dependant relative of his father,  an
      ex-Gurkha soldier, who was issued with a settlement visa and  came  to
      the UK in 2009 followed by his wife and son,  the  appellant's  mother
      and brother, in 2011.

   2. The respondent refused the appellant's application for entry clearance
      on 5 June 2018 on the basis that he did not meet the  requirements  of
      the immigration rules, he did not meet the requirements  of  the  Home
      Office policy in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15, section 2A 13.2 and  it  was
      not accepted that Article 8 was engaged  on  family  or  private  life
      grounds. The respondent did not accept that the appellant  was  wholly
      financially dependent upon the sponsor and  noted,  furthermore,  that
      whilst he had made an application in 2009 to join his parents  in  the
      UK,  that  application  was  refused  because  he  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of the immigration rules and in  addition  it  was  found
      that he had submitted false documents in support of  his  application.
      The respondent considered that the effect of the 'historic  injustice'
      in relation to ex-Gurkhas was not such that he had been prevented from
      leading a normal life and concluded that the decision to refuse  entry
      clearance was not disproportionate.

   3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe on 13 May 2019 and dismissed in a
      decision promulgated  on  4  June  2019.  The  judge  heard  from  the
      appellant's father and brother and noted that the  only  issue  before
      her was Article 8, it having been accepted that  the  appellant  could
      not succeed under the immigration rules or the respondent's policy  in
      Annex K. The judge accepted the sponsor's evidence that the  appellant
      had been left on his own in Nepal and had not married, and that he had
      lived in the same house as at least one of his parents until 2011. She
      accepted that the  appellant  and  his  parents  enjoyed  family  life
      together before they were granted settlement  and  moved  to  the  UK.
      However, she did not accept that family life still existed. The  judge
      accepted that the sponsor sent the appellant 22,000 rupees a month but
      did not accept that he  was  wholly  financially  dependent  upon  his
      parents because his bank statements showed him to be in credit despite
      there being a gap of three months in those payments. The judge did not
      find it credible that the appellant had never found any work in  Nepal
      and, whilst she accepted that the sponsor had  returned  to  Nepal  to
      visit the appellant and that they spoke regularly on  Viber,  she  did
      not accept that there was real, effective and  committed  support  and
      did not accept that there was anything above the usual emotional  ties
      between adult children and their parents. She accordingly  found  that
      family life did not currently exist and she dismissed the appeal.

   4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
      basis of two different sets of grounds. Permission was granted and the
      matter then came before Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 7 January 2020
      to consider the error of law issue. UTJ Plimmer identified six grounds
      of appeal in total, namely:

   1) The FTT had misdirected itself in law in requiring the appellant to be
      "wholly" financially dependent on his parents;
   2) The FTT had erred in law in omitting to consider the  relevant  factor
      of historic injustice  from  an  assessment  of  whether  family  life
      existed for the purposes of Article 8(1);
   3) The FTT had erred in law in effectively requiring the  support  to  be
      real and committed and effective in contravention of the  guidance  in
      Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and  subsequent  authorities  which
      demanded simply that the support be real or committed or effective
   4) In determining whether or not family life constituted family life  for
      the purposes of Article 8(1), the FTT  left  important  considerations
      out of account;
   5) The FTT failed to  consider  all  the  relevant  factors  cumulatively
      before deciding that family life did not continue to exist as  at  the
      date of the hearing; and
   6) The FTT drew adverse inferences from the father's credibility  without
      giving or attaching any weight to his character  as  attested  by  his
      military service.

   5. UTJ Plimmer found that grounds 1 and 3 were not made out, but she  had
      concerns about grounds 2, 4 and 5, owing to  the  judge's  failure  to
      take into account and consider, alongside all the other factors,  that
      the appellant was part of a joint application with his family back  in
      2009, which she considered to be  linked  to  the  historic  injustice
      arguments. The fact that the appellant might have been  successful  in
      2009 if Annex K had applied  at  the  time  was  material  when  taken
      together with a number of other factors pointing in favour  of  family
      life, such as at least partial financial  dependence,  regular  visits
      back to Nepal, regular speaking contact between  the  family  members,
      the appellant not having formed an independent family unit of his  own
      and having continued to live in the  family  home.  UTJ  Plimmer  also
      found merit in ground 6, considering that  the  judge  had  failed  to
      provide adequate reasons for rejecting parts of the sponsor's evidence
      and, in addition, that the sponsor had not been given  an  opportunity
      to explain how the appellant maintained a credit in his  bank  account
      despite there being a gap of payments for a few months.

   6. In the circumstances UTJ Plimmer set aside the judge's  decision  with
      no findings preserved, save that there was  family  life  pursuant  to
      Article 8(1) in 2009 and that the appellant's parents had provided him
      with some financial support and had visited him since then.

   7.  The matter was  listed  for  hearing  but  for  various  reasons  was
      adjourned on two occasions, with directions made for the respondent to
      produce the refusal decision in  relation  to  the  appellant's  entry
      clearance application made in 2009, for the sponsor to produce a  copy
      of the entries in his passport and for  the  appellant  to  produce  a
      witness statement and evidence addressing:

   (a) the assertion that he had never been able  to  obtain  employment  or
   self-employment in Nepal;
   (b) the assertion that that was partly, or solely, due to the  fact  that
   the sponsor served in the British Army;
   (c) the assertion that he continued to live in the  rented  accommodation
   which he used to share with the sponsor and that the rent was paid for by
   remittances from the sponsor;
   (d) the need for objective  evidence  in  the  form  of  entries  in  the
   sponsor's passport to confirm his visits to Nepal;
   (e) that fact that it was now asserted by the respondent that she was not
   satisfied that the sponsor was visiting the appellant in Nepal; and
   (f) the weight  placed  by  the  respondent  on  the  submission  by  the
   appellant of false educational certificates in 2009.

   8. In response to the directions, the appellant  served  a  supplementary
      bundle with a further statement from the  sponsor  and  with  his  own
      witness statement, together  with  additional  bank  statements.   The
      respondent, having received the supplementary bundle,  maintained  her
      position that family life had not been established for the purposes of
      Article 8.

   9. The matter then came before us for a resumed hearing, to  re-make  the
      decision on the basis of the preserved findings. Ms Cunha produced the
      refusal decision, dated 2 July 2010, in relation  to  the  appellant's
      application for entry clearance made in 2009.

  10. The sponsor, the appellant's father,  gave  oral  evidence  before  us
      through an interpreter. He confirmed that his two statements were true
      and he adopted them as his evidence. He produced his passports to show
      the stamps for his visits to Nepal, between 2010 and February 2020, as
      well as his certificate of discharge from the Army  on  17  June  1982
      which confirmed his exemplary conduct in service. The  sponsor  stated
      that whenever he went to Nepal he stayed with  the  appellant  in  the
      rented house. It was not the  previously  rented  three-bedroom  house
      where the family had lived together, but a smaller one-bedroom  house.
      Prior to leaving Nepal he had lived with his wife  and  the  appellant
      and his other son Binod, until Binod left to  study  in  the  UK.  The
      sponsor said that money was transferred  every  month  from  his  bank
      account to the appellant's account, but  in  addition  he  would  send
      money through friends when they travelled to Nepal and would also give
      him money when he was in Nepal himself. His son  spent  the  money  on
      learning English and on his rent. If he was able to come to the UK, he
      would find a job and earn money.

  11. When cross-examined by Ms Cunha, the sponsor said that he had a  third
      son who had gone to India many years ago, and  with  whom  he  had  no
      contact. His son had had a problem with his mother, at a time when he,
      the sponsor, was working abroad after his discharge from the  army  in
      1982, and there had been no contact since that time. After he and  his
      wife left Nepal, he rented the one-bedroom house instead of the three-
      bedroom, for the appellant, and that was where they stayed  when  they
      went to visit.  The  sponsor  said  that  he  opened  the  appellant's
      Standard Chartered bank account in 2015, so  that  he  could  transfer
      money to him from his own account which he had opened in about 1999 or
      2000. His army pension went  into  his  own  Standard  Chartered  Bank
      account and the monthly transfers of 22,000 rupees were then made from
      there  into  the  appellant's  account.  The  sponsor  said  that  the
      appellant had made his entry clearance application  in  2009  together
      with his mother. His wife, the appellant's mother, was issued with the
      visa but his son was not. He had no idea that his  son  had  submitted
      false educational certificates with his application and would have put
      a stop to it if he  had  known.  His  two  daughters  (his  biological
      daughter and his brother's daughter) did not apply to come to  the  UK
      because they were older and were married. At the time he came  to  the
      UK they lived in the three-bedroom house, but they had since moved out
      and had their own families. The sponsor confirmed that he  opened  the
      bank account for the appellant in 2015 and accepted that there was  no
      evidence of the account prior to November 2017. The sponsor said  that
      the appellant could not find work in Nepal.

  12. We then  enquired  why  the  appellant  had  not  made  another  entry
      clearance application until March 2018 and the sponsor's response  was
      that he had not applied for him as a punishment, although he had  been
      supporting him financially. He could not explain why  the  application
      was made when it was. The rent for the house, 11,500 rupees  a  month,
      was paid by the appellant from the money he sent him. We enquired  why
      there was no evidence of the rent payments, particularly as  the  lack
      of such evidence had been raised by the previous Tribunal as a  matter
      of concern, and the sponsor replied that it was difficult as he  would
      have to contact the landlord. We  enquired  whether  the  sponsor  was
      aware  of  the  extra  30,000  rupees  which  had  been  paid  to  the
      consultancy for the appellant's application in  2009  with  the  false
      educational certificates, as mentioned in the  appellant's  statement,
      and the sponsor said that he was not aware of that as the  appellant's
      mother and brother had paid for that. His brother had sent  the  money
      from the UK. We asked the sponsor why his son's bank account  appeared
      to have had no balance on 1 November  2017  and  he  agreed  that  the
      account was opened at that time. Prior to that, money was sent through
      neighbours and when he went to visit him  in  Nepal.   To  Ms  Cunha's
      further questions, the sponsor said that he had sent money to his  son
      prior to November 2017 through friends, but  he  had  no  evidence  of
      that. The sponsor confirmed that  he  sent  money  through  Hundi,  he
      believed on one occasion, but he did not have  the  receipt.  He  sent
      money with his uncle as well.

  13. Both parties then made submissions before us.

  14. Ms Cunha asked us to give weight to the fact that the refusal decision
      of 2009, which referred  to  the  use  of  false  documents,  was  not
      appealed, and that there was an inconsistency as to who, and which  of
      his children, were living in the house at the time  the  sponsor  left
      Nepal. The sponsor's evidence about the money given to  the  appellant
      was inconsistent, as to the date he opened a bank account for his  son
      and as to the method  of  sending  money,  by  Hundi,  neighbours  and
      friends. It was not accepted  that  the  sponsor  was  supporting  the
      appellant as claimed. It was not plausible that the appellant, at  the
      age of 38 years, had never had a job. The whole claim was  lacking  in
      credibility. There was, in addition, no  evidence  of  emotional  ties
      going beyond the normal emotional  ties  between  adult  children  and
      their parents. It had therefore not been shown that  family  life  was
      established for the purposes of Article 8(1), but even  if  had  been,
      the deception exercised by the appellant in his  previous  application
      outweighed the historic injustice applying to ex-Gurkhas.

  15. Ms Jaja submitted that the matter of the false  educational  documents
      submitted with the 2009 application was a peripheral  matter  and  did
      not impact on the  relevant  questions  for  settlement  or  upon  the
      historic injustice question. The sponsor  had  not  been  inconsistent
      about the appellant having lived in the same household as his  parents
      in 2009, as that was accepted in the refusal decision of 2  July  2010
      and was in fact the main reason why the  application  was  refused  at
      that time. Whether or not the sponsor gave  differing  evidence  about
      the date the appellant's bank account  was  opened,  this  was  not  a
      memory test, particularly bearing in mind his age, and the nub of  the
      case was simply whether there was family life. The real heart  of  the
      matter of emotional support was the  evidence  of  regular  visits  to
      Nepal and the regular contact by telephone calls. It was  a  preserved
      finding that there was family life in  2009.  The  relevant  question,
      therefore, further to the case of Rai v Entry Clearance  Officer,  New
      Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320, was whether it had continued since then. Ms
      Jaja relied on the two tests set out in Kugathas v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  namely  that  of  Lady
      Justice Arden, "something more exists than normal emotional ties"  and
      dependency, and that of Lord Justice Sedley, "real" or "committed"  or
      "effective"..."support". Ms Jaja submitted that subsequent authorities
      had found that Kugathas was being interpreted too  restrictively.  The
      bank transfers were evidence of financial support, even if taken  from
      1 November 2017, and the consistent evidence was  that  the  appellant
      was 38 years of  age,  unemployed  and  entirely  dependent  upon  his
      father. The appellant  therefore  satisfied  the  relevant  tests  for
      dependency. The regular trips to Nepal,  the  fact  that  the  sponsor
      applied for his wife and son to join him when he came to the  UK,  and
      the bank  transfers  were  illustrations  of  committed  support.  The
      sponsor gave a proper explanation for having waited  so  long  to  re-
      apply for his son to join him, namely that he was  punishing  him  for
      having submitted false documents with his first  application.  All  of
      these matters, together with the  fact  that  the  appellant  remained
      living in the family home, showed that family life was  made  out  for
      the purposes of Article 8(1). The 'historic injustice', of the  family
      being denied the opportunity to settle in the  UK  in  1982  when  the
      sponsor was discharged from the army, when  the  appellant  was  three
      years of age, was not outweighed by any criminality. The decision  was
      disproportionate and the appeal should be allowed.

Consideration and findings

  16. The starting point in the re-making of the decision in  this  case  is
      the preserved finding of the First-tier Tribunal that there was family
      life pursuant to Article 8(1) in 2009. At that time, and prior to  the
      sponsor coming  to  the  UK,  other  than  the  sponsor's  periods  of
      employment overseas, the family lived together  as  one  household  in
      their three-bedroom rented house  in  Nepal.  That  is  not  disputed,
      although there has been some inconsistency in the evidence as  to  who
      else lived  in  the  house  in  terms  of  siblings.  It  is  also  of
      significance, when considering the  matter  of  'historic  injustice',
      that had the current rules and policy been in force  at  the  relevant
      time, the appellant would have been able to settle in the UK with  his
      father and the family as  a  unit,  when  his  father  was  honourably
      discharged from the army in 1982, at a time when he was three years of
      age. By the time his father, the sponsor, was able to apply  for,  and
      was granted, settlement, he was no longer a child but was a man of  30
      years of age and therefore could not qualify within the relevant rules
      or policy. Thus, the grounds for a successful  Article  8  claim  were
      laid, in accordance with the  recent  jurisprudence,  subject  to  two
      matters, namely whether there still  existed  an  extant  family  life
      which would engage  Article  8(1)  and,  if  there  was,  whether  the
      submission of false educational certificates with the application made
      in 2009 was  such  as  to  outweigh  the  historic  injustice  in  the
      proportionality assessment.

  17. The focus of this case has been on the first question, whether  family
      life was maintained, as the appeal was  previously  dismissed  on  the
      basis that it was not. As found in the case of Rai,  the  question  of
      whether   family   life   was   still   enjoyed   is   "highly   fact-
      sensitive"([19]) and the real issue is "whether, as a matter of  fact,
      the appellant had demonstrated that he had  a  family  life  with  his
      parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle in
      the United Kingdom and had endured beyond  it,  notwithstanding  their
      having left Nepal when  they  did"  ([39]),  as  reiterated  at  [42],
      "whether, even though the appellant's  parents  had  chosen  to  leave
      Nepal to settle in the United Kingdom when they did, his  family  life
      with them subsisted then, and was still subsisting at the time of  the
      Upper Tribunal's decision." In the case of Rai, it was found that  the
      Upper Tribunal had not properly addressed that question. That  is  the
      question we have to consider in this appeal.

  18. Turning to the facts of this case, we are entirely satisfied with  the
      account of the sponsor's regular visits to Nepal, having  seen  stamps
      in his passport confirming his annual (and on one  or  two  occasions,
      biannual) visits to Nepal and we accept that the sponsor  was  staying
      with the appellant for the majority of time during  those  visits.  We
      also accept that the appellant  maintains  regular  contact  with  his
      parents through  Viber.  We  accept  that  those  are  evidence  of  a
      continuing emotional connection between adult family members, but they
      are not in and of themselves evidence of  emotional  connection  going
      beyond that. It is commonplace for adult family members who  are  able
      to do so to remain in regular contact and to visit each other. We also
      accept that there has been some financial support from the sponsor and
      note that such a finding has been preserved from the previous decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal. However, for the reasons we set out below,
      we do not accept that those matters are  in  themselves,  and  without
      more, sufficient to meet the relevant tests for protected family  life
      under Article 8(1), as set out in Kugathas and in the subsequent cases
      including Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  [2012]  UKUT
      00160, Gurung & Ors, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Rai. We do not  consider
      that they demonstrate, in this particular case, anything more than the
      usual ties between adult children and their parents.

  19. When  considering  the  evidence  required  to  take  the  appellant's
      circumstances beyond those normal ties, we find there to be  a  number
      of concerns which lead us to conclude that we simply  do  not  have  a
      proper and reliable account of the appellant's circumstances in Nepal.
      Whilst we have every  respect  for  the  sponsor,  whom  we  note  was
      honourably discharged from  the  army  having  demonstrated  exemplary
      conduct during his service, we  have  some  difficulty  accepting  his
      evidence before us as sufficient, without more, as establishing  those
      circumstances, given the inconsistencies which arose in his account of
      how he had been supporting his son as well as  other  aspects  of  his
      evidence.

  20. We accept, from the documentary evidence before us,  namely  the  bank
      statements for the appellant and the sponsor,  that  the  sponsor  has
      been transferring, and continues to transfer, a sum of  money  to  the
      appellant every month from his Standard  Chartered  bank  account,  of
      22,000 rupees and increasing  to  30,000  rupees  in  September  2019.
      However, the first of such transactions shown in the  bank  statements
      before us (the appellant's Standard Chartered account at  page  14  of
      the initial bundle) is on 30 November 2017 and, as we pointed  out  at
      the hearing, the account does not appear to have had any funds  in  it
      prior to an unidentified deposit made on 29 November 2017. The sponsor
      agreed that he had started transferring funds through  bank  transfers
      at that time, although his evidence was previously that he had  opened
      the account and started transferring funds in 2015. His evidence as to
      how he transferred funds to his son prior to opening the bank  account
      was quite different as between his witness statement and what he  told
      us at different points in the hearing. There was simply no  consistent
      account of how he was supporting  him  prior  to  November  2017.  The
      sponsor's statement of 10 December  2020,  at  [7],  referred  to  the
      medium of transfers used in the past being through Hundi and that this
      was the best way of making transfers, yet his evidence before  us  was
      that he used Hundi only once. He also referred to friends,  neighbours
      and an uncle taking money to the appellant, but his account varied and
      he accepted that he had no evidence to support his claim. As such,  we
      were left with an inconsistent  and  unreliable  account  of  how  the
      appellant was supported financially in the  years  after  his  parents
      left Nepal and prior to November  2017  and  we  cannot  therefore  be
      satisfied that he has been reliant upon his father for his support.

  21. That period of time is also of some concern because the sponsor  could
      not offer a satisfactory reason  as  to  why  the  appellant  did  not
      attempt to join him in the UK again until March 2018, some eight years
      after  his  previous  unsuccessful  application.  Had  there  been  an
      enduring family life and a strength of ties to the extent  claimed  we
      consider that there would  be  some  reasonable  explanation  for  the
      delay, particularly considering the introduction of the  policies  and
      the developing caselaw which would have enabled the appellant to  make
      a viable application at a  much  earlier  stage.  The  sponsor's  only
      explanation was  that  he  was  punishing  the  appellant  for  having
      submitted false documents in his first application, but eight years is
      a very long time to wait if there is a genuine subsisting family life,
      and he could not explain why it was that he then agreed to support  an
      application at the time it was made. In short, we do  not  accept  his
      explanation for the delay in making a second application as a credible
      one. Both the delay, and the lack of an adequate explanation  for  it,
      tell against the subsistence of family life during this period. It  is
      significant that it was during that period that the  evidence  of  how
      the appellant was supported  financially  is  deficient,  as  we  have
      discussed above. The fact  that  the  evidence  of  financial  support
      commences only a few months prior to the application being made  tends
      to suggest that it was put in place with the application in mind.

  22. Added to that is the fact that there still remains no evidence,  other
      than  the  sponsor's  oral  evidence,  as  to  how  the  rent  on  the
      appellant's accommodation is paid, despite the concerns in the  First-
      tier Tribunal and the directions made in that respect. Further,  there
      remains no adequate explanation as  to  why  the  appellant  has  been
      unable to find any employment in the six  to  eight  years  since  his
      parents left Nepal, again a matter upon  which  directions  were  made
      further to the observations of the previous First-tier Tribunal but to
      which no proper response has been provided.

  23. In addition, we note the inconsistent evidence about what happened  in
      the application made in 2009, in which false documents were submitted.
      The evidence in the  appellant's  statement,  at  [2],  was  that  his
      parents had paid all the fees for the application and although in  his
      statement he made clear that his father had not known about the  false
      documents, he did not say that the additional 30,000 rupees for  those
      documents had come from anyone other than the sponsor.  However,  when
      we asked the sponsor why he had not questioned the appellant about the
      additional 30,000 rupees that had to be paid  to  the  consultancy  in
      relation to the false educational certificates, he said that he had no
      idea about that as the appellant's mother and  brother  had  paid  the
      fee, which he then changed to only the appellant's  brother.  We  note
      that the appellant's brother's statement gives no indication that that
      was the case.

  24. In the light of all these concerns, we are unable to conclude that  we
      have a reliable account of the appellant's circumstances in Nepal from
      the time his parents left and in  the  intervening  years  up  to  the
      current time. The evidence suggesting that he  has  been  consistently
      financially supported by his father is  unreliable  and  there  is  no
      evidence of emotional support over and above the normal emotional ties
      between adult family members. We give due weight to the fact that  the
      family was unable, due to the historic injustice, to settle in the  UK
      together and that had the sponsor  been  able  to  settle  here  after
      leaving the army he would have brought the appellant with him as  part
      of the family unit. However, that time has passed and the appellant is
      now a man of 41 years of age who has lived apart from his parents  for
      over nine years and we cannot  accept,  on  the  evidence  before  us,
      taking all matters into account both in  the  appellant's  favour  and
      against him, and even if he has remained unmarried, that he remains  a
      part of the family unit in accordance with  the  relevant  tests  such
      that there is an extant protected family  life  for  the  purposes  of
      Article 8(1). As such we conclude that Article 8 is  not  engaged  and
      the  question  of  proportionality  under  Article  8(2)   does   not,
      therefore, arise. We do not  consider  the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse entry clearance to be disproportionate.

DECISION

  25. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law  and  has  been  set  aside.  We  re-make  the
      decision by again dismissing the appeal.


Signed   S Kebede

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  21 December
2020

