
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14084/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 August 2017                     |On 8 September 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MRS FATHIMA SHAMILA ISHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Miszkiel, Counsel, instructed by Jein
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)   has
    permission to challenge the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge (FtT)
    Judge  Eban  allowing  on  human  rights  grounds  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant) against the decision  made  by  the
    SSHD on 15 December 2015 refusing  to  vary  the  claimant's  leave  to
    remain under the ten year partner route.  The SSHD  accepted  that  the
    claimant met all the requirements of  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules
    save for  that  concerned  with  suitability.   The  SSHD  deemed  that
    requirement not met because she was satisfied  that  the  claimant  had
    obtained a TOEIC certificate in 2011  by  fraudulent  means.   The  FtT
    Judge was not satisfied that the judge addressed the fraud  issue  with
    proper regard to the case law on ETS/TOEIC.

2.   The SSHD's first ground of challenge was that the judge had  failed  to
    assess correctly the burden of proof in line with SM and Qadir  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) and Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  It
    was submitted that the judge failed to give adequate reasoning why  the
    SSHD had not met the legal  burden  "nor  that  there  is  an  innocent
    explanation".

3.   Dealing first with the grounds generally, the author  gets  off  to  an
    unpromising start in referring more than once to  the  claimant's  test
    results as "invalid".   They  were  found  to  be  "questionable",  not
    invalid.

4.   As regards this first ground, it is true that in one passage the  judge
    appears to conclude that the generic evidence  was  not  sufficient  to
    discharge the evidential burden of proof.  At paragraph  17  the  judge
    stated:

         "17. All I have is generic evidence about voice  testing.   I  find
             that this alone is not sufficient to discharge the  burden  of
             proof on the respondent to show that  the  appellant  did  not
             take her English test herself but instead used a 'proxy'  test
             taker to take the speaking test  on  her  behalf  particularly
             where her test was categorised  as  questionable  rather  than
             invalid and where both she and her husband have been  able  to
             give me an account of her attending herself".

5.   However, whilst this paragraph contains arguable error, I  do  not  see
    that it was at all material.  First, the  judge  correctly  identified,
    both earlier (in paragraph 10) and later (in paragraph  19),  that  the
    legal burden of proving fraud rested on the SSHD.

6.   Second, it is clear that the judge properly  sought  to  weigh  in  the
    balance the fact that the SSHD's specific evidence (as opposed  to  the
    generic evidence) was particularly weak.  For one thing the TOEIC  test
    results had been analysed by ETS to be not invalid but  "questionable".
    As pointed out by the judge at 15:

         "15. As to ETS' findings the spread sheet at RB/C1  refers  to  the
             appellant by name and under the heading 'Inv/Quest' the  entry
             is 'Questionable'.  This is not therefore an  appellant  whose
             test has been categorised as 'Invalid'.  There is  no  further
             explanation from ETS as to how  or  why,  in  the  appellant's
             case, this finding was made.  There  is  no  evidence  of  the
             'batch analysis'  or  of  the  'human  verification'  process,
             described in Mr Peter Millington's statement at paragraphs  38
             and 41, in respect of this appellant".

7.   For another thing, the SSHD had not produced the  audio  material  from
    the claimant's tests.  Given that the ETS analysis was  that  the  test
    was "questionable", the judge was entitled to view the absence of  such
    evidence as adverse to the SSHD.  The SSHD's grounds  appear  to  argue
    that according to the generic evidence a finding of  "questionable"  is
    still a very negative finding, in light of what Rebecca  Collings  said
    at paragraph 29 of her witness statement, namely that those found to be
    questionable were  cancelled  on  the  basis  of  "test  administration
    irregularity".   Yet  Ms  Isherwood  accepted  that  in  this   context
    irregularity related simply to the bona fides of the test  centre,  not
    to any mala fides by test  takers.  If  this  finding  was  a  negative
    finding, it was a very weak negative.

8.   A third feature significantly weakening the  SSHD's  specific  evidence
    was that it relied in part on an interview  with  the  appellant  on  4
    December 2015.  The transcript of  the  interview  disclosed  that  the
    questions were all directed  at  a  test  taken  by  the  appellant  in
    September 2015.  Despite the claimant stating at this interview that he
    had taken another test in 2011 - the only one in respect of  which  the
    SSHD alleged fraud - the interviewer only  asked  questions  about  the
    2015  test.   Further,  the  interviewer  recorded  that  the  claimant
    demonstrated fluency in English and did not appear to be  coached.  The
    only adverse comments  made  by  the  interviewer  concerned  what  the
    appellant had said about taking the 2015 test.

9.   I am bound to say that even if the judge should  have  found  that  the
    generic evidence on its own discharged the evidential burden (a  matter
    which is not necessarily established given that  the  generic  evidence
    was not primarily  directed  at  'questionable'  results),  the  SSHD's
    generic and specific evidence taken together clearly did not.

10.  A further reason why I do not consider any error (if there was one)  at
    all material is because it is entirely clear from the decision that the
    judge was satisfied that the claimant was able to provide  an  innocent
    explanation for the test result.  At paragraph 18 the judge stated:

         "I note that the appellant gave  evidence  before  me  without  the
         assistance of an interpreter and that before  the  TOEIC  test  the
         appellant took an ESOL - Skills for Life  Entry  1  Level  test  in
         October 2010 [AB43-45], and after the TOEIC test she took a Trinity
         College London Grade 2 Spoken English Entry  Level  Certificate  in
         ESOL International (Speaking and Listening) (Entry 1) CEFR Level A1
         in which she obtained with Distinction in August 2015 [AB42].  This
         raises the question why she would have asked  someone  to  sit  the
         test for her".

11.  In this paragraph the judge identified several  factors  that  went  to
    the innocence of the claimant's explanation.   In  reply  to  questions
    from me, Ms Isherwood was not able to identify any other  factors  that
    the judge should have considered in this context but failed to.

12.  In the written text of ground 1, as  amplified  by  Ms  Isherwood,  the
    further point is made by reference to MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450 that
    judges must be alive to there being a  range  of  reasons  why  persons
    proficient in English may engage  in  TOEIC  fraud.   However,  as  the
    Tribunal observed in MA the range of possible reasons  were  stated  in
    the abstract. The Tribunal did not assert that they should  be  assumed
    to obtain in any particular case without some evidential basis.  I fail
    to see that there was any basis for the judge considering such  reasons
    (e.g. lack of confidence, fear of failure, lack of time and commitment,
    contempt for the immigration system) to arise in the claimant's case.

13.  The SSHD's second  ground  challenged  the  fact  that  the  judge  had
    allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  without  conducting  a
    proportionality   assessment.    That   contention   in   my   judgment
    mischaracterises what the judge in fact did.  At paragraphs 19  and  20
    the judge concluded:

         "19. Having considered all the evidence in the round, I  find  that
             the respondent has not discharged  the  burden  of  proof  and
             accordingly I find that S-LTR 1.6 does not apply.

         20.  The respondent raised no other issues under Appendix FM as  to
             why the appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Rules
             to  remain  under  the  10-year   partner   route.    In   the
             circumstances as the appellant meets the requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules, I find that refusal of her application  for
             further leave would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences
             for  the  appellant  and  her  family  and   would   interfere
             disproportionately with her article 8 rights,  with  reference
             to the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27,  Beoku-Betts  v
             SSHD [2008] UKHL 39, EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL  41  and  section
             117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002".

14.  The judge's assessment quite properly built on the  fact  that  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter the  only  reason  given  by  the  SSHD  for
    refusing the claimant under the ten year route was  suitability,  which
    in turn was only found to count against  her  because  of  the  alleged
    TOEIC fraud.  It was entirely open to the judge, therefore, to conclude
    that where on the judge's findings, the relevant  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were met (the ten-year Rule), there could  no  longer
    be said to be any public interest to outweigh the claimant's Article  8
    right to respect for private and family life.

15.  For the above reasons, the SSHD's grounds are not made  out.   The  FtT
    Judge did not materially err  in  law.   Accordingly  the  FtT  Judge's
    decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 7 September 2017
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

