
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14622/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2018                   |On 26 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                       MS sarojini devi sivaloganathan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Joseph Plowright, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow promulgated on 6 December 2017.  There is a  lengthy  procedural
    history to this case which can be taken relatively shortly.

2.   The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 12 March 1941.  She  was
    refused leave to remain by the Secretary of State dated  24  May  2016.
    An earlier judicial review action was compromised in August 2009 on the
    basis that the Secretary of State agreed to  the  terms  of  a  consent
    order which included reconsideration of the  appellant's  human  rights
    application. The matter was reconsidered: however, the refusal decision
    was not communicated until 24 May 2016.

3.   The grounds of appeal, seemingly settled  by  a  legal  representative,
    claim that the judge failed to give proper consideration to  the  issue
    of delay on the part of the Secretary  of  State.  There  is  a  letter
    running to five detailed paragraphs signed by the appellant and,  I  am
    told, drafted with the assistance of  her  son  which  deals  with  the
    background to this appeal.

4.   The letter refers to the fact that the appellant is  an  elderly  widow
    whose age  is  variously  stated  as  77  or  76.  It  deals  with  her
    immigration history and particularly the delay in  dealing  with  these
    matters by the Secretary of State.

5.   The issue of delay was expressly considered by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge. I have been taken to the respondent's  bundle  and  to  page  A1
    where a firm of solicitors called Wakes makes  reference  to  the  firm
    previously instructed namely the Phoenix  Partnership.  In  a  document
    headed Statement of Additional Grounds at pages B7 to B8 the  following
    appears

         "Please further note as explained in the attached  covering  letter
         the appellant's former legal  representatives  Phoenix  Partnership
         Solicitors have allegedly ceased practising  from  September  2013.
         Please therefore forward all future correspondence  either  to  our
         client directly or to us as her current legal representatives."

 6.  I was then taken  to  an  extract  of  a  summary  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history compiled by a caseworker within the Home Office and
    to a paragraph at page B2 of the respondent's bundle  which  refers  to
    the applicant being served with IS151A removal papers  placing  her  on
    monthly reporting.  I am told, and I have no reason to doubt, that  the
    reporting in due course went from once a month  to  three  monthly  and
    subsequently changed to six monthly.

7.   I have also  been  taken  to  a  witness  statement  from  Mrs  Mythily
    Murukathash,  a  solicitor  in  the  employ  of   Phoenix   Partnership
    Solicitors, which sets out the history of  that  firm  acting  for  the
    appellant.

8.   It is clear from looking at the decision that the issue  of  delay  was
    firmly in the judge's mind at the time it was made. I  am  told  by  Mr
    Plowright, who then acted for the appellant as he does before me,  that
    little if any of the oral evidence was directed to this issue of  delay
    and the change in representation.

9.   Paragraph 19 sets out the considerations which the judge  had  in  mind
    and makes reference to the case of the R (on the application  of  S)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWHC 51  (Admin)  and
    whether there were repeated reminders or requests  emanating  from  the
    solicitors.

10.  This narrow ground  of  appeal  is  advanced  in  the  basis  that  the
    appellant did not go underground but remained very  much  on  the  Home
    Office's radar by dint of the reporting conditions first  monthly  then
    three-monthly then  six-month.  In  addition,  she  believed  that  her
    solicitors were pursuing her application with vigour.

11.  There  is  precious  little  evidence  on  the  appellant's  subjective
    belief. There has been no application to adduce  fresh  evidence  today
    for the purposes of the disposal of this appeal.  It is said that  this
    was not merely a slow decision but one which breaches the terms of  the
    consent order whereby the Secretary of  State  undertook  to  give  the
    matter reconsideration.  To my mind nothing turns on that distinction.

12.  The appellant has always known that her  continued  residence  in  this
    country has been precarious.  The judge properly examined the issue  of
    delay.  I can see nothing in the factors  relating  to  the  change  of
    representation which might have affected the outcome. The  decision  to
    which the judge came cannot be criticised.

13.  There is no error of law in this decision.   Notwithstanding  the  able
    submissions of Mr Plowright, this appeal fails.



Notice of Decision

   1) Appeal dismissed.
   2) No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     19 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



