
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  HU/14982/2016
                                                               HU/14979/2016
                                                               HU/14975/2016
                                                               HU/14977/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 18th of December 2017       |On 26th of February 2018             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                           MR LUIZ CARLOS DE SOUZA
                          MS DIUZETE LOPES DE SOUZA
                          MR MARCUS LOPES DE SILVA
                         MR LEONARDO LOPES DE SOUZA
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr W Adams of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Brazil, the 1st and  2nd  Appellants
    are husband and wife and the 3rd and 4th Appellants are their children.
    The 1st Appellant was born on 6th of December 1961, the  2nd  Appellant
    was born on 20 of December 1962, the 3rd Appellant was born on 27th  of
    May 1998 and the 4th Appellant was born on 14th of  August  1996.  They
    appeal against decisions of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pacey
    sitting at Birmingham on 3rd of April 2017 who dismissed their  appeals
    against decisions of the Respondent  dated  25th  of  May  2016.  Those
    decisions were to refuse  the  Appellants'  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. The  Appellants  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 10th of February 2009 on visit visas  valid  for  6  months.
    When those visas expired on 10th of August 2009 they did not return  to
    Brazil but have remained here unlawfully ever since.

The Appellants' Case

 2. The Appellants applied on 3rd of March 2016 for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of their family and private life.  The  3rd
    Appellant was under the age of 18 when the application was made and was
    dependent upon his mother the 2nd Appellant. The family had not applied
    for leave to remain during the currency of their  visit  visas  because
    they had unsuccessfully attempted to research their European  ancestry.
    They had made their current application  when  the  3rd  Appellant  was
    assaulted and the 2nd Appellant had to go  to  the  police  station  to
    report the matter. The family had intended to return to Brazil and  had
    not applied for visa extensions because they were confident they  could
    soon become European citizens.

 3. The 1st Appellant suffered from depression and had done so  in  Brazil.
    He had a heart problem and panic attacks. The family could  not  return
    to Brazil because the children were young when they  came  in  and  had
    made friends in the United Kingdom. They had no house in Brazil  to  go
    to and there were neither jobs  nor  family  there.  The  1st  and  2nd
    Appellants had worked in the  United  Kingdom  from  time  to  time  as
    cleaners. They were aware they had been working without permission  and
    had no evidence of having paid tax or national insurance.  Counsel  for
    the Appellants in oral submissions stated that the  4th  Appellant  had
    achieved a great deal in the United Kingdom and  was  immersed  in  the
    culture here. Neither child had chosen to come to the United Kingdom.

The Decision at First Instance

 4. At [20] the Judge stated that all the Appellants were  now  adults  and
    she would deal with the appeals on that basis. None of  the  Appellants
    could bring themselves within the Immigration Rules and  therefore  she
    looked at the appeals outside the Rules under the terms of Article 8 of
    the Human Rights Convention (right to respect for  private  and  family
    life). The case turned on the balancing  exercise  between  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control and the private  and
    family lives of the Appellants when  determining  proportionality.  She
    acknowledged that the 3rd and 4th Appellants came as minors and had  no
    choice as to whether to overstay since they were under the  control  of
    their parents. None of the Appellants had engaged in criminal  activity
    apart from overstaying and breach of the Immigration Rules. The 3rd and
    4th Appellants had been successful in their studies and  had  developed
    friendships and ties with the community. The 1st Appellant was in  poor
    health which arguably might worsen if he were to return to Brazil.

 5. As against that the Appellants had overstayed for a period of 7 � years
    and the reason for the delay in seeking to regularise their status  was
    not a reasonable one. There was no evidence of any research carried out
    by the 2nd Appellant into the issue of European ancestry. At  [28]  the
    Judge considered it an open question as to whether  the  2nd  Appellant
    would have sought  to  regularise  the  family's  status  had  the  3rd
    Appellant not been assaulted. The parents had worked in breach of their
    visit visas. The children's education  had  taken  place  whilst  their
    presence in the United Kingdom was  precarious.  Even  though  the  1st
    Appellant was not in good health, medical treatment  was  available  in
    Brazil and his  health  problems  were  not  so  grave  or  potentially
    terminal as to engage either Article 3 or Article 8. At [33] the  Judge
    stated that the 3rd and 4th Appellants were not children at the date of
    decision because the 3rd Appellant was 18 on  27th  of  May  2016,  the
    decision occurring 2 days earlier. All the Appellants were  adults  and
    could return to Brazil as a family unit. Applications could be made  to
    return from there. The  refusals  were  not  disproportionate  and  the
    scales weighed more heavily on the side of  the  public  interest.  She
    dismissed the appeals.

The Onward Appeal

 6. The Appellants appealed against these decisions arguing that there  had
    been procedural unfairness during the hearing. The Respondent  had  not
    sent the Appellants her  bundle  by  3rd  of  April  2017  despite  the
    directions of the Tribunal that the bundle should be disclosed. Instead
    it had been received by the Appellants' representatives on 5th of April
    2017 after the appeal hearing on 3rd  of  April.  They  Appellants  had
    contacted the Respondent to have documents returned to  them  but  they
    had not been received.

 7. The 3rd Appellant was born  on  27th  of  May  1998  and  the  family's
    previous representatives had made application for leave  to  remain  on
    29th of December 2016. Thus the 3rd Appellant had continued  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without absence for over 7  years  prior  to  the
    application. He was thus a qualified child at the  time  that  the  2nd
    Appellant made an application on his behalf. To expel the 3rd Appellant
    from the United Kingdom would be detrimental to his mental health, well-
    being and personal  development.  He  was  still  receiving  education.
    Insufficient weight had been given to the assault on the 3rd  Appellant
    (described in the determination).

 8. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson on 19th of September  2017.
    In granting permission to appeal he  noted  that  the  Appellants  were
    represented at the hearing before the Judge but were now unrepresented.
    The grounds argued that the Judge had miscalculated the length of  time
    spent in the United Kingdom and failed to  consider  properly  that  at
    least one  of  the  Appellants  was  entitled  to  be  considered  with
    reference to EX.1(a) of Appendix FM and  paragraph  276  ADE  (1)  (iv)
    which the Judge had not considered. The  Judge  did  not  consider  the
    impact of removal upon the two younger  Appellants  with  reference  to
    their ongoing education and did not adequately consider their level  of
    integration. It was arguable that the Judge did not  give  satisfactory
    consideration to the potential application  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    with particular reference to the youngest Appellant  who  was  still  a
    minor at the date of application. The grounds disclosed arguable errors
    of law and permission was granted on all grounds.

 9. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  30th
    of October 2017 opposing the Appellants' appeals. The Respondent argued
    that the grounds merely disagreed with the Judge's findings. The  facts
    were relatively uncontentious and the difficulty the Appellants had was
    that they were a single family all of whom were adults at the  date  of
    decision and hearing and who had no  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It was arguably open for the Judge to  find  that  they  could
    return together as a family unit and  continue  their  family  life  in
    Brazil and that the public interest must prevail in this case.

The Hearing Before Me

10. At the hearing before me to decide whether there was a  material  error
    of law in the determination such that it should be set  aside  and  the
    matter reheard, counsel argued that there was such a material error  of
    law. The Judge had dealt with the appeals on the  basis  that  all  the
    Appellants were adults. That was wrong but once the foundation  of  her
    determination  was  wrong  her  conclusions  were  also  bound  to   be
    defective. Had the Judge accepted that the 3rd Appellant was a minor at
    the date of application she would have needed  to  consider  subsection
    (iv) of paragraph 276ADE. The question then would have been would it be
    reasonable for the 3rd Appellant to return to Brazil but the Judge  had
    not done that. She had failed to consider that the 3rd Appellant was  a
    qualifying child and thus came within section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act.
    It was not in the public interest to remove  the  parents  of  the  3rd
    Appellant as this was a non-deportation case. The  decision  should  be
    set aside and the matter remitted back to the First-tier to be  reheard
    as the determination had failed to look at the case within  the  rules.
    It was not important that the 3rd Appellant  was  18  at  the  date  of
    hearing it was the date of application that was relevant.

11. For the Respondent, it was argued that there was no material  error  of
    law in the decision. The refusal letter had acknowledged  that  one  of
    the Appellants was 17 at the date of application. Whilst the Judge  was
    referring to all of the Appellants as adults and that  was  perhaps  an
    error it was not material. The Appellants had come on visit  visas  but
    overstayed. They had worked illegally and had not paid tax. One had  to
    look at the economic well-being of the country,  this  family  had  not
    contributed but they had received the benefit of an education to  which
    they were not entitled. The Judge had set out the facts in some detail.
    The Judge had acknowledged that the 3rd and  4th  Appellants  had  come
    here as minors. The delay in  making  the  applications  for  leave  to
    remain was unreasonable. Their private lives were established at a time
    when their immigration status was precarious.

12.  In  conclusion  counsel  for  the  Appellants  acknowledged  that  the
    Appellants' immigration history was not good  but  there  had  been  no
    proper proportionality exercise carried out by  the  Judge.  There  was
    nothing on the best interests of the 3rd Appellant. Whilst  the  family
    had benefited from NHS treatment that was not  conclusive.  One  should
    not visit the iniquities of the parents upon the children. They did not
    want to come here, the parents brought them.

Findings

13. The first issue which the Judge had to decide in this case was  whether
    the Appellants could meet the Immigration Rules. She proceeded  on  the
    basis that they could not. The argument  before  me  is  that  the  3rd
    Appellant could meet the Immigration Rules at the date  of  application
    and that therefore the Judge had incorrectly analysed the case  on  the
    basis that all  four  Appellants  were  adult  over  stayers.  The  3rd
    Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on the 10th of  February  2009
    and had applied for leave to remain on 3rd of March 2016 a period of  7
    years and 21 days. At the date of application, the  3rd  Appellant  was
    just over 17 years and 8 months old. He was a minor who had been in the
    United Kingdom for at least 7 years. The Judge was incorrect to say  at
    [27] that the family had overstayed for over 6 years before  they  made
    their current applications. By proceeding on the basis  that  all  four
    Appellants were adults at the date of  hearing  the  Judge  potentially
    overlooked the 3rd Appellant's position under the Immigration Rules.

14. I note at this stage that the Appellants also sought to argue before me
    that the Judge had failed to properly consider section 117B (6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The difficulty with  this
    argument is that the sub-section did not apply.  The  Judge  was  quite
    correct to point out that at the date of hearing  all  four  Appellants
    were adults. Since the section  applies  at  the  date  of  hearing  as
    opposed to the provisions of the Immigration Rules which apply  at  the
    date of application the 3rd Appellant was no longer a qualifying  child
    at the date of hearing by a period of ten months.

15. Returning to the issue under the Immigration Rules, the Respondent  had
    accepted in her refusal letter dated 31st of  May  2016  that  the  3rd
    Appellant met the suitability requirements in section S-LTR but it  was
    not  accepted  that  the  3rd  Appellant  could  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements of section R-LTRC 1 .1 (d) (iii) because he failed to meet
    the requirement that at least one of his parents must be in the  United
    Kingdom with leave. Since that did not apply because neither of the 3rd
    Appellant's parents had  leave,  he  could  not  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements and thus could not  meet  that  part  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

16. The Respondent was aware that the 3rd Appellant was 17 years old at the
    date of application and had lived in the United Kingdom for 7 years but
    he had not lived continuously in United Kingdom for at least  20  years
    and the Respondent considered it would be reasonable to expect the  3rd
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom and return to Brazil as a  family
    unit with his parents and brother. Consequently, the  Appellant  failed
    to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv) and by  extension
    although not specifically mentioned Section EX.1.

17.  The  Respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances to justify allowing the 3rd Appellant's application.  The
    3rd Appellant would be familiar with the culture in Brazil and able  to
    adapt to life more easily there. He could speak  Portuguese  and  there
    would be no language barrier.

18. The Judge noted at [8] that  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision it was stated that the 3rd Appellant was under 18
    when the current application was made. She had also noted  at  [5]  the
    Respondent's refusal  of  the  3rd  and  4th  Appellants'  applications
    because they did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. It does
    not appear from the determination that it was argued at first  instance
    that the 3rd Appellant  could  bring  himself  within  the  Immigration
    Rules. The argument appeared to be whether the appeal should be allowed
    outside the rules under Article 8.

19. For section EX.1 to apply it would have to be shown that it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the 3rd Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.
    The section is an exception to  certain  eligibility  requirements  for
    leave to remain as a parent. For section EX .1  to  apply  to  the  3rd
    Appellant and his family it would have to be  shown  that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the 3rd Appellant to leave the United Kingdom. The
    Respondent had rejected  that  view  in  the  refusal  letter  for  the
    detailed reasons given in the refusal letter (see paragraph 17 above).

20. The Judge had not  summarised  the  Respondent's  reasons  but  clearly
    accepted them since she noted at [17] that there could be no appeal  on
    the basis the Respondent had  not  correctly  applied  the  Immigration
    Rules as that was no longer a permissible ground of appeal. Even if  it
    was a material error of law for the Judge not to consider section EX .1
    or at least indicate in her determination  that  she  agreed  with  the
    Respondent's view that it was reasonable to expect the 3rd Appellant to
    return to Brazil, it is difficult to see how this error was material as
    was submitted to me by the Presenting Officer.

21. All 4 Appellants were adults by the time of the hearing and thus  could
    not succeed under the 2002 Act provisions for the reasons which I  have
    set out above. In assessing the reasonableness of expecting  a  17-year
    old to leave the United Kingdom with his parents the Tribunal would  be
    bound to consider the Court of Appeal authority of MA  Pakistan  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 which held that whilst there  needed  to  be  very  strong
    reasons why a child here more than 7 years should be removed  from  the
    United Kingdom, the Tribunal was able to look at the immigration status
    of the parents in assessing the reasonableness of expecting  the  child
    to leave the United Kingdom.

22.  In  this  case  the  parents'  immigration  record  was  poor  as  was
    acknowledged at the hearing before me. Not only had they overstayed  by
    several years they also appeared to have worked illegally.  These  were
    powerful factors to be put into the  balance.  Whilst  one  should  not
    visit the sins of the parents upon  the  children,  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness involves taking all of the background facts into account
    and these include the poor immigration  history  of  the  parents.  The
    Judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the  difficulties  in  the  Appellants'
    immigration history and gave it due weight. She also gave weight to the
    consideration that the family would be returned as a unit and that they
    had all received benefits to which they were not  entitled.  Whilst  it
    would have been preferable perhaps for the Judge to have made it  clear
    that in agreeing with the Respondent's view on  the  Immigration  Rules
    she specifically found  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  3rd
    Appellant to return to Brazil, it is difficult  to  see  that  had  she
    considered the matter in those terms it would have  made  any  material
    difference to the outcome of her decision.  I  do  not  find  therefore
    there was any material error of law in the Judge's  decision  since  it
    was reasonable to conclude that the  3rd  Appellant  should  return  to
    Brazil with the other three Appellants.

23.  I  deal  with  the  remaining  grounds  of  appeal  for  the  sake  of
    completeness since permission was granted on all grounds.  The  grounds
    sought to argue that there had been procedural unfairness by reason  of
    the late submission of the Respondent's  bundle.  The  Appellants  were
    represented by experienced counsel at the hearing at first instance and
    it does not appear that any application was made to the  Judge  for  an
    adjournment for further papers to be received. The point was  also  not
    argued before me. The grounds of appeal were drawn up by the Appellants
    in person and not  by  the  legal  representatives  or  those  who  had
    represented them at first instance. In those circumstances, I am not at
    all convinced  that  there  was  any  procedural  error.  There  was  a
    difficulty over the absence of the 1st Appellant who had was  not  able
    to attend to give evidence because of ill health but at [2]  the  Judge
    made clear that counsel did not seek an adjournment. It does not appear
    that counsel sought an adjournment for any other reason  either  and  I
    can only assume that the issue of  the  papers  was  clarified  at  the
    hearing.

24. The Judge adequately considered the issue of the  1st  Appellant's  ill
    health and gave cogent reasons why that was not  an  objection  to  him
    returning to Brazil, for example the existence of  medical  facilities.
    The grounds are a mere disagreement with the Judge's finding but do not
    indicate any error of law.

25. The 3rd Appellant states that he has engaged in  studies,  has  friends
    and his life would be severely disrupted if he were to be  required  to
    return to Brazil. There is no indication that any medical  evidence  is
    available to substantiate the 3rd Appellant's  claims.  He  is  now  an
    adult with the benefit of a United  Kingdom  education,  he  can  speak
    Portuguese and I see no reason why he cannot fully integrate back  into
    life in Brazil as the Respondent pointed out in her refusal letter.  He
    has had the benefit of an  education  to  which  he  was  not  strictly
    speaking entitled because he had no leave to be here.  That  was  as  a
    result of a decision of his parents not his but in any event  there  is
    nothing to indicate that it would be disproportionate to interfere with
    the private and family life 3rd Appellant has built up in this  country
    whilst here unlawfully. The 3rd Appellant has made friends (it would be
    surprising if he had not) but he could  remain  in  contact  with  them
    through modern means of communication. Importantly he  would  have  the
    support of his immediate family as the Judge implicitly acknowledged at
    [34].

26. The point made at the hearing at first instance was that  the  3rd  and
    4th Appellants could contribute to the United Kingdom but equally  they
    could contribute to Brazil upon return and this factor is neutral.  The
    3rd Appellant also complained in his grounds of onward appeal that  the
    effects of the assault upon him had not been fully taken  into  account
    by the Judge. The difficulty with this is that it is not at  all  clear
    what evidence was before the Judge regarding the assault which was  not
    taken into account. As I have indicated there was no  relevant  medical
    evidence and without this  evidence  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  a
    physical attack in the United Kingdom could have an adverse  impact  on
    the 3rd Appellant's return to his country of origin. In  conclusion,  I
    find that the Judge did not make a material error of law in  dismissing
    the Appellants' appeals and I dismissed their  onward  appeals  against
    her decisions.

Notice of Decision

The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decisions to dismiss each of  the  Appellants'
appeals

Appellants' appeals dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 3rd of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 3rd of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

