
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: HU/14064/2019 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2020                |On 31 December 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                           GIAN CARLO RAMOS SAYSON
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


For the appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Shahban
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Canadian citizen with  date  of  birth  given  as
   1.12.90, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  8.11.19  (Judge  Alis),
   dismissing his human rights appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
   of State, dated 15.7.19, to refuse his application for leave to remain in
   the UK on private and family life grounds.

2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 19.8.20, considering it arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
   assessing whether there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  or  exceptional
   circumstances, or in the proportionality assessment, by failing  to  make
   findings on the significance of the sponsor's grandmother's evidence that
   she was dependent on the sponsor and that there was family  life  between
   the sponsor and his grandmother.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

4. The relevant background can be summarised as follows.

5. None of the facts were  in  contention.  The  appellant  has  been  in  a
   relationship with Mr Ouseley for some 7 years, the first 4 of  which  was
   conducted remotely as the appellant lived in Canada and Mr Ouseley in the
   UK. Although there had been five visits of  Mr  Ouseley  to  Canada,  the
   relationship was kept hidden from the appellant's family.  He  wished  to
   remain  in  the  UK  with  his  partner,  whose  family  were   extremely
   supportive. It was not disputed that they  had  been  in  a  relationship
   since 2013 and had lived together in the UK since October 2016.

6. The appellant first entered the UK in September 2016 on a  Tier  5  Youth
   Mobility visa, with leave to remain until 26.9.18.  The  day  before  the
   expiry on his leave, on 25.9.18 he made an invalid application for  leave
   to remain as an unmarried partner. A valid but out  of  time  application
   was not made until 21.2.19.

7. The application was  brought  on  insurmountable  obstacles  grounds.  As
   Judge Alis noted at [8] to [9] of the decision, the burden  of  proof  of
   showing insurmountable obstacles lay on the appellant on the  balance  of
   probability. He also bore the burden of  showing  that  family  life  was
   engaged, after which it would be for the respondent to  demonstrate  that
   the refusal decision was proportionate.

8. The application was refused by the respondent, on the  basis  that  there
   were no (EX1 of Appendix FM)  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
   continuing  in  Canada,  and  no  very  significant  obstacles   to   the
   appellant's  integration  there  (paragraph  276ADE).  In  addition,  the
   appellant could not meet Appendix FM as he was an illegal  overstayer  at
   the date he made his application. Neither did the respondent accept  that
   there were exceptional circumstances under GEN 3.2 of Appendix FM.

9.  The  grounds  are  not  well  drafted  but  Ms  Saifolabi  was  able  to
   encapsulate in brief terms her primary submission that the  judge  failed
   to consider, assess, or make findings  in  respect  of  the  grandmothers
   evidence,  which  she  submitted  was  relevant  to  both  the  test   of
   insurmountable obstacles and article 8 proportionality outside the Rules.
   She pointed to the considerations set out by the judge between  [41]  and
   [51]  of  the  decision,  which  make  no  specific  reference   to   the
   grandmother. It was submitted that  the  grandmother's  evidence  of  her
   emotional and practical dependence on the  appellant's  partner  was  the
   'kernel' of the appeal but that the  judge  had  omitted  this  from  his
   considerations and there was no consideration as to whether  the  refusal
   decision created unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  grandmother.



10. It is important to recognise  that  at  the  outset  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  appeal  hearing,  as  noted  at  [10]  of  the  decision,   the
   appellant's representative Mr Sardar made clear that the appeal was being
   pursued solely under EX1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, on  the
   basis that there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing
   in Canada with his partner Mr  Ian  Ouseley.  This  was  repeated  in  Mr
   Sarwar's closing submissions, as noted  by  the  judge  at  [25]  of  the
   decision, where he submitted that "this was one of the few cases that the
   appellant could demonstrate there were insurmountable obstacles to family
   life continuing outside the United Kingdom." At [45] of the decision  the
   judge records that  Mr  Sarwar  did  not  content  that  refusal  of  the
   application would breach paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, which
   is why the judge did not go on to consider that route in respect  of  the
   appellant's private life.

11. In relation to insurmountable obstacles, the  appellant's  evidence  was
   that when his Catholic parents discovered his sexual orientation and  his
   relationship with Mr Ouseley, they made it clear that  they  disapproved.
   They have never met his partner. The claim  was  made  on  the  basis  of
   insurmountable obstacles, with the appellant asserting  that  his  family
   and private life would be greatly  disrupted  because  his  family  would
   never accept his partner and because he believed his sexuality would  not
   be accepted in Canada. He also submitted that his partner would  struggle
   with the social norms of Canada, such as the humour and limited  vacation
   time.

12. Although it is submitted  the  judge  did  not  consider  or  take  into
   account the evidence in relation to the grandmother, that  is  not  borne
   out by a consideration of the decision as a whole. The assessment of  the
   evidence and findings  begins  at  [29]  of  the  decision.  Within  that
   section, at [36] and [37]  of  the  decision  the  judge  recognised  the
   stumbling block to  be  the  close  connection  between  the  appellant's
   partner and his family, in particular  his  grandmother,  who  gave  oral
   evidence explaining that he had been "extremely helpful in providing  her
   support following the recent death of her husband." She was upset at  the
   thought of the appellant being required to leave. Effectively, the  judge
   took and accepted this evidence at its highest in the appellant's  favour
   and the argument that it was not considered is unsustainable. As  stated,
   the facts and relevant  factors  were  not  in  contention  and  properly
   identified by the judge, who at [51] of the decision  confirmed  that  he
   had had regard to the "factors discussed above." I am satisfied that this
   reference included all of the assessment made from [29] onwards under the
   heading 'Assessment of Evidence and Findings', including those about  the
   grandmother.

13. It is important to  note  that  Mr  Sarwar's  submission  was  that  the
   combination of this relationship between the partner and his  grandmother
   "coupled with the rejection of  their  relationship  by  the  appellant's
   family amounted to an insurmountable obstacle."

14. The judge's conclusion at [33] of the decision  that  as  there  was  no
   evidence that the population of Canada  is  intolerant  towards  the  gay
   community is unsurprising and has not been challenged. There,  the  judge
   observed that "there would be nothing to prevent the  appellant  and  his
   partner relocating to Canada and if  the  appellant's  family  could  not
   accept the relationship then they were  old  enough  to  find  their  own
   property." It follows that the second part of Mr  Sarwar's  assertion  of
   insurmountable obstacles because of  the  rejection  of  the  appellant's
   partner by his family is not made out. Frankly, that aspect of the  case,
   including reliance on the claim that the  partner  would  not  understand
   Canadian humour or would have less  generous  vacations  from  work,  was
   always painfully weak.

15. The only remaining part of the  assertion  of  insurmountable  obstacles
   relied on by Mr Sarwar was, therefore, in relation to the effect  on  the
   partner's grandmother. However, having accepted the appellant's  case  at
   its highest, including the evidence of the effect on the  grandmother  of
   the partner leaving to live with  the  appellant  in  Canada,  the  judge
   rejected the primary submission that these circumstances reached the high
   threshold of 'insurmountable obstacles' to family life continuing outside
   the UK. As defined by EX2, insurmountable obstacles are very  significant
   difficulties which would be faced by the appellant or  their  partner  in
   continuing family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
   overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the appellant or their
   partner."

16. Despite Mr Sarwar's voluntary restriction of the ambit  of  the  appeal,
   the judge did go on to  consider  exceptional  circumstances  within  and
   without the Rules under article 8 ECHR,  applying  section  117B  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  to  the  proportionality
   balancing exercise, correctly noting at [48] that in cases of  precarious
   family life a very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the
   public interest in immigration control.

17. The judge set out a number of factor weighing against the  appellant  in
   the proportionality balancing exercise, including that he came to the  UK
   on a temporary basis with no legitimate  expectation  of  being  able  to
   settle. His relationship with his partner was precarious from the outset.
   Neither could he demonstrate financial independence  sufficient  to  meet
   the requirements of the Rules. The judge correctly directed himself on GM
   (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 that "the test for an assessment outside
   the Immigration Rules is whether  a  "fair  balance"  is  struck  between
   competing public and private interests. This is  a  proportionality  test
   order to ensure that references in the Immigration Rules and in policy to
   a case having to be "exceptional" before leave to remain can be  granted,
   are consistent with article 8, they must be construed as not imposing any
   incremental  requirement  over  and  above  that  arising  out   of   the
   application of an article 8 proportionality test, for instance that there
   be "some highly unusual" or "unique" factor or feature." The judge  noted
   that the appellant could not meet the normal requirements  of  the  Rules
   for leave to remain under Appendix FM because he had overstayed his leave
   and because he could not meet the financial requirements.

18. As stated, outside the Rules there would have to be  a  very  strong  or
   compelling claim. Whilst there was no specific reference to the effect on
   the grandmother between [41] and [51] of the  decision,  I  am  satisfied
   that it is implicit from the decision read as a whole that  this  was  at
   the forefront of the judge's mind, describing it in the assessment of the
   evidence as "the real stumbling block". Whilst I am satisfied  the  judge
   had accepted that the grandmother would be upset and perhaps  devastated,
   there was no evidence that the partner lived with his grandmother or that
   the relationship between was such as to amount to  family  life  engaging
   article 8 ECHR, or, more significantly, that there was such  a  level  of
   dependency between the partner and his grandmother that the decision  was
   unjustifiably harsh. As stated above, the appellant's case was never  put
   on that basis, as Mr Sarwar was entirely confident that the circumstances
   amounted to insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  outside
   the UK. I am satisfied that it was open  to  the  judge  to  reject  that
   submission, for the reasons given in the impugned decision, and that  the
   claim that the judge merely ignored the effect on the grandmother is  not
   sustainable.  Even if the judge should have made specific

19. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  the  human  rights
      appeal remains dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.




Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 December 2020

