


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: HU/14094/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2017                   |On 2 May 2017                 |
|Prepared on 27 April 2017          |                              |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr JUSTICE McCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    C. P.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kumar, Solicitor, Capital Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of the Philippines, entered the  United
           Kingdom lawfully on 19 September 2008 as the seventeen year  old
           dependent daughter of a work  permit  holder,  her  mother.  Her
           leave to remain expired on 13 December 2011  without  any  valid
           application for a variation having been made. Thus she became an
           overstayer at the age of twenty.


        2. The Appellant sought to regularise  her  immigration  status  by
           application made on 13 August 2015, aged  23,  for  a  grant  of
           leave based upon her relationship  with  her  mother  and  three
           younger siblings. At the time they were aged 22, 19, and 17, and
           all of them lived together in one household.  Her  siblings  had
           travelled to the UK with entry clearance as dependents of  their
           mother, a work  permit  holder  in  2009.  In  contrast  to  the
           Appellant, they had not become overstayers.

        3. That application was refused on 4 December 2015, and  an  appeal
           against the refusal was dismissed in a  decision  of  the  First
           tier Tribunal ["FtT"] promulgated on 19 July 2016.

        4. The Appellant's application to the FtT for permission to  appeal
           that decision is a lengthy  one  that  challenges  paragraph  by
           paragraph the analysis of  the  evidence,  and  the  conclusions
           reached upon the disputed issues of primary fact. The grounds do
           not assert that the  wrong  burden  or  standard  of  proof  was
           employed, and on a fair  reading  should  have  been  identified
           immediately as no more than an impermissible attempt to  reargue
           the appeal.

        5. Permission to appeal was  however  granted  by  decision  of  29
           December 2015 in the following terms:


           "The grounds allege that the judge's findings of  fact  did  not
           accurately reflect  the  evidence;  that  the  appeal  warranted
           consideration, and should have been  allowed,  on  human  rights
           grounds outside of the Rules.
           It seems on the face of the decision, that the  Judge  may  have
           misinterpreted some of the evidence but I am not satisfied  that
           this would have made a material difference in the  appeal  under
           paragraph 276ADE  where  the  focus  was  on  "very  significant
           obstacles" to the appellant's reintegration in the  Philippines.
           The Judge did not refer to SSHD v SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
           1604 and R (Sunassee) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387  and  concluded
           that it was not necessary to consider the appeal outside of  the
           Rules. This is an arguable error of law. The Judge  went  on  to
           make a hypothetical assessment of proportionality in  the  event
           of consideration of  the  appeal  outside  of  the  rules  being
           warranted. However this  focuses  almost  exclusively  upon  the
           public interest factors in s117B of Part 5A of the NIAA 2002 and
           fails to adequately engage with the family life of the appellant
           and her family members. The  assessment  of  proportionality  is
           insufficient and the decision  contains  an  arguable  error  of
           law."
           [emphasis added]


        6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice in response to that  grant
           of permission dated 18 January 2017  in  which  she  noted  that
           notwithstanding the terms in which permission had been  granted,
           the FtT had expressly considered the guidance  to  be  found  in
           SSHD v SS (Congo) and argued that the alternative findings  that
           were made upon the proportionality of the decision in the  event
           that Article 8 was engaged were sound and  were  properly  based
           upon the evidence.


        7. Thus the matter comes before us.

        8. It is plain that there is an error in the grant  of  permission,
           because, as both parties now accept before  us,  the  Judge  did
           refer himself expressly to the guidance to be found in  both  SS
           (Congo) and R (Sunassee) v SSHD.


        9. Equally it is plain that neither the grounds nor  the  grant  of
           permission engage with the fact  the  Judge  expressly  accepted
           that the Appellant enjoyed "family life"  with  her  mother  and
           three adult siblings - at [59] - and that the low  threshold  of
           engagement  for  Article  8  was  met  on  the  evidence.   That
           conclusion, favourable to the Appellant, was open to him on  the
           evidence notwithstanding the ages of all of those involved; Butt
           v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 184, and, Singh v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
           630.


       10. The Judge noted the evidence of the  Appellant  and  her  mother
           that she was like a "second mother" to her younger siblings.  It
           was accepted that life would be  much  more  difficult  for  the
           Appellant's mother if the Appellant were not available  to  look
           after the  household  whilst  she  was  working  full  time,  in
           particular the occasions she worked  on  night  shift.  However,
           with the passage of time all of those younger siblings were  now
           themselves adults. None  of  them  suffered  from  any  relevant
           medical conditions and the conclusion  was  that  there  was  no
           credible  reason  why  they  could  not  as  adults  look  after
           themselves whilst their mother was out at work: [68].


       11. There were a number of areas in which  the  Judge  rejected  the
           evidence of both the Appellant and her  mother  as  untrue.  The
           grounds identify  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
           approach to the evidence or findings relevant to these  matters.
           We are satisfied that at best they amount to  no  more  than  an
           impermissible attempt to reargue the appeal. The correct  burden
           and standard of proof were employed and the findings  were  more
           than adequately reasoned and are plainly rational.

       12. By the decision of the FtT the Appellant was found to have lied:

           i) when she  denied  any  subsisting  relationship  between  the
              maternal and paternal sides of  her family, the reality being
              that both  sides  of  the  family  had  provided  significant
              assistance to both her and her mother,
          ii) when she described the circumstances in  which  she  and  her
              siblings had lived in the Philippines between 2005 and  2008,
              the reality being that they had been cared for properly by an
              uncle and aunt, with the help of remittances from her  mother
              in the UK, and
         iii) when she denied having sat the "Life in the UK"  test,  which
              she had in fact failed on three occasions.


           Although before the Judge the Appellant had  blamed  her  mother
           for the failure to make an application within time to extend her
           leave to remain in 2011, the Judge noted that in  2012  she  had
           accepted that  both  she  and  her  mother  had  overlooked  the
           requirement to do so. The Judge was entitled  to  consider  that
           the failure of the Appellant to tell the truth in these respects
           was significant, and that she had  failed  to  engage  with  the
           Respondent with the degree  of  candour  and  co-operation  that
           could properly be expected of her, and that her failure to do so
           was something that should properly be considered when  assessing
           the proportionality of the decision under appeal.

       13. The Judge noted that the Appellant's mother  had  been  able  to
           remit funds to the Philippines between 2005 and 2008 in order to
           provide  financial  support  to  her  children  (including   the
           Appellant) and there was no obvious reason on the  evidence  why
           the Appellant should not once again be supported financially  by
           her mother in the event of her  return  should  she  need  this:
           [69]. Equally, although there would be an impact upon all of the
           members of the family now living in the UK in the event  of  the
           Appellant's removal, these family  members  had  been  separated
           before when  rather  younger  as  a  result  of  their  mother's
           decision to travel to the UK for work in 2005 and  the  decision
           to bring them to the UK as her dependents sequentially.  It  was
           therefore concluded that it was a matter  for  their  individual
           choice whether they now  followed  the  Appellant  back  to  the
           Philippines or remained in the UK.
       14. The Judge identified, correctly, that in the  circumstances  the
           Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
           for a grant of leave. She had not spent more than  half  of  her
           life in the UK and there were no significant  obstacles  to  her
           reintegration to the Philippines. She had  been  educated  there
           and was familiar with the language and culture. She had not  cut
           her ties to her family and since she had previously  been  cared
           for by an uncle and aunt satisfactorily there was no reason  why
           she could not draw upon the support and shelter  that  would  be
           available to her from her family. She had  a  brother  and  both
           paternal and maternal aunts, uncles and cousins to look to.


       15. Although the Judge did not have the benefit of the  guidance  of
           the Supreme Court to be found in R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11,  it
           is plain that the decision discloses no arguable material  error
           of law in the approach taken to  the  evidence.  The  Judge  was
           obliged to consider  the  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
           removal and did so in accordance with the guidance to  be  found
           in the relevant jurisprudence.

       16. The Appellant's position in the UK  was  initially  "precarious"
           within the meaning of that term  as  used  in  Jeunesse  and  as
           explained in AM (s117B) Malawi  [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC). From 2011
           it was unlawful. The weight to be given  to  the  "family  life"
           that she relied upon had therefore  to  be  considered  in  that
           light. This was not a case in which the Appellant was ever under
           a reasonable misapprehension as to her ability to remain in  the
           UK. Furthermore, the refusal of the application would not result
           in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  Appellant  for  the
           reasons given by the Judge. Thus, as the Judge identified, there
           was nothing very compelling about her circumstances or those  of
           her family members  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  her
           removal. Moreover the Appellant's case  was  never  put  on  the
           basis of the Chikwamba principle. The findings of fact  made  by
           the Judge and the undisputed evidence that  had  been  submitted
           fell a long way short of establishing that entry clearance would
           be bound to be granted to the Appellant if it were  applied  for
           from the Philippines.


           Our Conclusions

       17. Permission to appeal was granted in the terms set forth  in  [5]
           above. As demonstrated, this was  based  on  a  manifest  error.
           Standing back, it is difficult to conceive of any error  of  law
           which, to a material extent, could have vitiated the decision of
           the FtT. This was, ab initio, a quite hopeless  appeal.  On  the
           current state of the law it  could  only  have  been  dismissed.
           While the permission judge may have been seduced by  the  prolix
           grounds of appeal, permission to appeal  should  not  have  been
           granted.


       18. Thus the FtT did not make any  material  error  of  law  in  his
           decision to dismiss the appeal, and that decision must stand.





   DECISION






      The Decision of the FtT did not involve the making of any error of law
      and is accordingly affirmed.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 April 2017
