
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14214/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 26 March 2021                 |On 15 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                           jocelyn obando beginio
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K. Mc Carthy, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. This is the appeal of Ms Jocelyn Obando Beginio,  who  had  made  a
         human right claim on 13 December 2018  which  was  refused  by  the
         respondent in a decision taken on the 5 August 2019.

      2. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came  before  the  FtT
         (Judge Rothwell) on 23 January 2020. The judge heard evidence  from
         the appellant, another family  member,  and  also  from  Dr  Patel,
         consultant psychiatrist who had provided a report  dated  6  August
         2018.

      3. Judge  Rothwell  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision to refuse her human rights claim in a decision promulgated
         on the 4 February 2020.

      4. Permission to appeal was issued and on 13 May 2020  permission  was
         granted by FtTJ Robertson.

      5. On the 4 November 2020,  the  Upper  Tribunal  heard  the  parties'
         submissions and in a decision promulgated on 9 December  2020,  the
         Upper Tribunal set out its reasons for reaching the  decision  that
         the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error of law and
         that the decision should be set aside.

      6. This decision should  be  read  on  conjunction  with  the  earlier
         decision made by the Upper Tribunal.

      7. As to the remaking of the appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered
         that it was not  a  decision  that  could  be  remade  without  the
         necessity of further evidence. The appellant had provided a further
         witness statement and an updated report from Dr Patel. The evidence
         had significantly changed in the intervening  period  and  thus  it
         required further oral evidence and factual findings being  made  on
         that evidence.

      8. Both advocates agreed that there would need to be  a  rehearing  in
         the light of the new events and on the basis that the  decision  is
         to be remade on the basis of  the  evidence  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing.

      9. It has now been listed before the Upper  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
         decision.

     10. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity  direction  and  no  submissions
         were made by Counsel on behalf of the appellant as to why  one  was
         necessary before the Upper Tribunal.

Background:

     11. The background is set out in the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  and  the
         evidence  in  the  bundle.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  the
         Philippines.  She claims to have entered the United  Kingdom  on  9
         February 2002. In a letter sent by her solicitors dated 3  December
         2018, she could not remember on what basis she entered  the  United
         Kingdom or on what Visa.

     12. She made an application for leave to remain on 24 July 2014 on  the
         basis that she had the role of a career of her aunt,  Ms  V,  which
         was refused on 21 October 2014 without a right  of  appeal.  In  or
         about May 2015, it is said that the appellant  stopped  caring  for
         her aunt as a result of problems that she had with her.

     13. The appellant began caring for aunt J in or about October 2017  and
         has been acting as a carer since that date.

     14. On 13 December 2018 she made the current application for  leave  to
         remain that was refused in a decision letter of the 5 August 2019.

     15. The application was made on the basis of her being a  carer  for  a
         family relative who I will refer to as "aunt J", who  suffers  from
         dementia, diabetes, arthritis, increased cognitive decline and self-
         neglect, hypertension, and other connected illnesses.  There  is  a
         carer who attends her four days a week for  a  period  of  only  30
         minutes. The appellant provides all the personal and daily care for
         aunt J. Her evidence was that she left the house daily  to  do  the
         shopping and is out from 11 AM until about 12:30 PM. She cares  for
         aunt J with daily assistance  from  her  aunt  E  who  comes  every
         afternoon whilst the appellant goes  to  work  from  2.00pm-2.30pm-
         4.00pm - 4:30 PM.

     16. The basis of her case was that aunt J could not properly  be  cared
         for at home if the appellant were not there to undertake  her  care
         and that she could not be cared for in a care home because  of  the
         cultural issues.

     17. In her application she also raised the issue of her own parents who
         live in the Philippines who are also unwell as they  have  suffered
         from strokes and cannot work.  The  appellant  has  been  providing
         financial support to her parents as well as working as a cleaner.

The decision letter:

     18. The respondent refused that application in  a  decision  of  the  5
         August 2019. Her application was considered under  "private  life".
         It was not  accepted  that  she  could  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE, either on the basis of her  length  of  residence
         since 2002 or whether there were very significant obstacles to  her
         integration. It was considered that in her application she had said
         she spoke the language that was widely spoken  in  the  Philippines
         and that this would help her to adapt to life there, both  socially
         and culturally. She had parents and siblings remaining  there  also
         and there was no evidence that her family  would  not  be  able  to
         assist her or accommodate on return. Additionally, she  resided  in
         the Philippines up to the age of 33, which included her  childhood,
         formative years, and a significant portion of her adult life. It is
         therefore considered that she would have retained knowledge of  the
         life, language and culture and  thus  would  not  face  significant
         obstacles to reintegrating into  life  into  the  Philippines  once
         more.

     19. Under the heading "exceptional  circumstances"  it  was  considered
         whether refusing her application would breach article 8 because  it
         would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  appellant
         or another family member.

     20. The respondent considered her claim that if she were not in the  UK
         to look after her family relative then her health would deteriorate
         badly as she required 24/7 support. The decision letter noted  that
         the appellant stated she used to care for another auntie until  May
         2015 as she was  facing  problems.  Her  aunt  was  aggressive  and
         abusive, and she did not feel  safe  in  the  house  and  thus  she
         stopped caring for her other aunt. It is now stated she  cared  for
         aunt J.

     21. The respondent  considered  that  there  would  be  sufficient  and
         appropriate alternative care available for aunt  J  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

     22. Consideration was given to a GP's letter dated  18  April  2018  in
         which it was stated that the relationship built up with  her  niece
         provided psychological and  social  support.  "This  in  itself  is
         helping to keep her functionally stable. The lack  of  the  support
         could lead to a more rapid decline in her condition."

     23. The respondent took into account the appellant's claim that  carers
         came in on certain days to see her aunt  and  that  she  had  asked
         these carers for a full-time help on multiple occasions,  but  they
         have told that it is not possible. The GP makes reference to social
         workers being involved. The respondent considered  that  the  local
         authority and social services would be  under  a  duty  to  provide
         suitable care  for  people  with  whom  they  have  community  care
         functions for and it was noted that aunt J  was  already  receiving
         care and assistance from social services and was under the care  of
         the memory clinic it was considered  that  the  appellant  was  not
         required to remain in the UK to arrange alternative  care  she  was
         already receiving  support.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
         appellant had provided little in the way  of  evidence  on  whether
         alternative care provision had been  sought  for  aunt  J  or  such
         support have been denied and that there has  been  sufficient  time
         since entry to the UK to seek alternative care  provision  for  her
         aunt. As a British citizen she would  be  entitled  to  receive  an
         appropriate level support from the NHS or social services as  their
         care needs dictate and it be nothing to prevent them  from  seeking
         private  care  provision  thus  the  secretary  of  state  was  not
         satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of the concession
         relating to carers and refuse the application on that basis also.

     24. The decision letter went on to consider return to the  Philippines.
         However, the respondent considered that she could return  and  gain
         legal employment  there.  It  was  concluded  that  there  were  no
         exceptional circumstances in her case and a refusal to grant  leave
         outside  the  rules  would  not  result  in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences. Thus, the application was refused.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

The evidence:

     25. The hearing took place on 24 March 2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face -to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined  in  a  remote  hearing.  The  appellant  gave  evidence
         remotely as did Dr Patel.

     26. There were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         that the witness evidence was given clearly and without difficulty.
         In the end,  there  was  very  little  oral  evidence  given.  Both
         advocates were able to make their respective cases  by  the  chosen
         means. I am grateful for their clear and helpful submissions.

     27. The evidence before the tribunal can be summarised as follows:

          1) The bundle of evidence before the FtTJ (which included witness
             statements from  the  appellant  dated  11/11/20  19,  witness
             statement from Ms EB dated 11/11/19; medical report from Dr  R
             dated 18/4/18 and report from Dr Patel dated 6/8/18.

          2) A supplementary bundle which included the witness statement of
             the appellant dated 1/10/20, updated witness statement  of  Ms
             E, Bueno, and medical report of Dr Patel dated 24/8/20.

          3)  In  a  second  supplementary  bundle  there  was  an  updated
             independent psychiatric report of Dr Patel dated 23/3/21.

          4) The respondent's bundle contained a copy  of  the  application
             form, a letter  from  the  appellant's  representatives  dated
             3/12/18, witness statements of the appellant and Ms EB, of the
             appellant and aunt J, patient medical records for aunt  J  and
             report of Dr Patel dated 6/8/18, the decision letter.

          5) Documents in relation to the error of  law  hearing,  included
             the decision of FtTJ Rothwell propagated 4/2/20, error of  law
             grounds dated 14th every 2020, grant of permission promulgated
             13/520, directions  of  the  tribunal  and  counsel's  witness
             statement dated 19th - H 20 pending  councils  contemporaneous
             record of the hearing of 23 January 2020.

          6) I was also provided with a skeleton argument in behalf of  the
             appellant dated 25 March 2021.

     28. I heard oral evidence from the appellant. In evidence in chief  she
         confirmed that the contents the witness statements filed and  dated
         3/12  2018,  11/11/2019,  and  updated  witness   statement   dated
         1/10/2020 were true and that she wished to rely upon  them  as  her
         evidence in chief. There were no further additional questions asked
         by counsel.

     29. In cross-examination Ms Pettersen asked the  appellant  to  confirm
         the date that she ceased caring for her aunt M  and  she  confirmed
         that that was May 2015. Questions were asked to establish what  the
         appellant had done since that date. The  appellant  confirmed  that
         she began caring with for aunt J in 2017  after  her  diagnosis  of
         dementia and that she moved in to look after her in  2019.  In  her
         oral evidence she stated "I went to (aunt J's home)  to  sleep  but
         was not there permanently. In 2019 she had frequent falls and  then
         I stayed there for days and nights."

     30. The appellant was referred to the medical notes for aunt J  in  the
         respondent bundle and at page 151  was  asked  to  identify  Samuel
         Diaz. The appellant stated that it was a name of the person in  the
         surgery.

     31. The appellant was also referred to page  152  and  that  there  was
         reference to a review of the care plan. The appellant was asked  if
         she was present when the care  plan  was  reviewed.  The  appellant
         replied, "I don't know about  the  care  plan".  She  confirmed  in
         evidence that she had never seen a care plan for aunt J.

     32. In respect of her most recent witness statement (paragraph  8)  she
         was asked to confirm whether carers were still coming to  see  aunt
         J. The appellant stated "yes - they coming to see her and was  sent
         by the agency. I don't have the right to send them away. They  will
         come 30 minutes to see if she is taking a  medication  but  I  will
         have already done this. They then sit down and wait for their  time
         to finish and then they leave."

     33. No further questions were asked in cross-examination.

     34. In re-examination, the appellant was asked by counsel how  far  her
         address was from that of aunt J's. The appellant replied: "it is  a
         five minutes' walk."

     35. I asked the appellant to explain the accommodation of aunt  J.  She
         confirmed that she lived in a form of sheltered  housing  but  that
         there was no one permanently on site to provide assistance but that
         the aunt J had an emergency cord.  In her evidence she stated  that
         she would not be able to pull such accord herself as  a  result  of
         her medical conditions. She stated  that  because  of  the  current
         pandemic the manager did not always come to the property  that  was
         there approximately every two or three days.

     36. The tribunal heard evidence from Dr Patel, consultant psychiatrist.
         For the  purposes  of  these  proceedings  he  has  provided  three
         reports. They are dated as follows:

          1) 6/8/2018 (page 352 respondent's bundle)

          2) 24/8/20(page 5 - 13 of the appellant supplementary bundle;

          3) 23/3/21 (page 1  to  4  of  appellant's  second  supplementary
             bundle).

     37. Dr Patel confirmed the contents of his three reports. In  his  oral
         evidence in chief he was asked about the  position  of  care  homes
         during the current pandemic and whether the pandemic  affected  his
         advice on whether patients should go into care  homes  or  not.  Dr
         Patel stated " I would say that it would work out as a  death  trap
         for anyone to be placed in a care home. I am referring to the  risk
         that she (aunt J) might be exposed to.  In  care  homes  there  are
         approximately 30 to 40 residents and lots of interactions with care
         and staff members compared with being in her own home where she has
         fairly limited exposure from  other  individuals.  It  would  be  a
         dangerous situation for everyone." In his evidence he  also  stated
         that there would be  restrictions  as  to  visits  made  by  family
         members going into care homes.

     38. In cross-examination, Dr Patel was asked if he had seen a care plan
         in respect of aunt J. In his evidence  he  confirmed  that  he  had
         access to some reports from aunt J's GPs (diagnosis  with  physical
         issues) and also including the diagnosis of the GP  concerning  her
         Alzheimer's disease but he did not have access to  the  care  plan.
         When asked if one existed, Dr Patel stated that there  was  a  care
         plan for everyone linked to social  services.  He  stated  that  it
         would consist of visits,  who  would  go  and  how  frequently.  He
         further stated that when there were serious concerns and it  was  a
         progressive disease such as Alzheimer's or there  were  behavioural
         problems associated such as trying to leave the  accommodation  and
         wandering into the streets, but only then a  GP  or  the  community
         health team would become involved. He confirmed that this  had  not
         happened in this case. Further confirm that  the  committee  health
         team was not involved with aunt J to his knowledge but he  was  not
         sure.

     39. In his evidence he further stated that if aunt J  did  not  receive
         the care from the appellant visiting and caring for her, then it is
         likely that she would have been out of control but at present  aunt
         J was "well contained and was doing well in that regard".

     40. There was no further cross-examination and no re-examination.

The submissions:

     41. At the conclusion of the oral evidence, I  heard  submissions  from
         each of the advocates.

     42. I shall summarise the submissions made by Ms Pettersen on behalf of
         the respondent.

          1) She relied upon the decision letter which  I  have  summarised
             earlier in this decision.

          2) She submitted that the argument  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant is that she provides care for aunt J that could  not
             be provided or was not available by any other person and  thus
             this amounted to family life as a  result  of  the  dependency
             upon her by aunt J.

          3) She submitted that there appeared to be gaps in  the  evidence
             concerning where the appellant was  living  between  2015  and
             2019. Whilst the appeal must be determined as at the  date  of
             today's hearing, in 2018, the appellant was working  elsewhere
             two hours per day and continued to do so up until  March  2020
             when her employer decided it  was  not  safe  to  continue  to
             attend the property according to her witness statement  (dated
             October 2020).

          4) Ms Pettersen submitted that the appellant could not  meet  all
             of the respondent's carers policy and that initially  a  grant
             of leave would be for three months and at 17.4 it sets out the
             requirements of further leave to remain and there are a number
             of  detailed  reports  that  the  respondent   would   require
             information. In particular a care  plan  but  in  this  appeal
             neither Dr Patel nor the appellant had seen a  care  plan.  In
             the light of the appellant's evidence, carers do come  in  and
             while she stated she was not authorised to tell  them  not  to
             come, the true picture of the care that aunt  J  requires  has
             not been  formally  assessed.  She  submitted  that  this  was
             important when considering the carers policy.

          5) As to the issue of family life, she submitted that aunt J is a
             fairly  distant  relative,  and  that  dependency   upon   the
             appellant has grown over the past few years. She accepted that
             family life was established.

          6) The issue was that of proportionality.

          7) Taking account of the public interest considerations  set  out
             under section 117A-D, the appellant had  been  in  the  United
             Kingdom since 2002 and it was not  known  on  what  basis  she
             entered the United Kingdom but it is accepted that she did not
             attempt to regularise  her  leave  until  2014  when  she  had
             applied for leave to care for a further relative.

          8) The public interest of  effective  immigration  control  under
             section 117(1) applied. While  she  spoke  English  (S117B(2),
             there was no evidence that  she  was  financially  independent
             although she has had some employment in the past; it  was  not
             clear how she supported herself in 2002 until the present day.
             Even if she was receiving money from aunt J  or  other  family
             members it is not clear what those funds were.  She  submitted
             that her private life was established was in the UK unlawfully
             and aunt J was not a qualifying partner and  that  any  strong
             private life had only developed in recent years. In  terms  of
             section 117B (5), her status has been  precarious  since  2002
             and she could have no expectations of remaining in the  United
             Kingdom.  S117B(6)  does  not  apply  there  are  no  children
             involved.

          9) She submitted that even taking into account aunt  J's  medical
             condition, there was not a full picture of her background  and
             there was no copy care plan available. There was  no  evidence
             one  way  or  another  from  social   services   as   to   her
             circumstances and the position of the appellant was not  there
             to assist aunt J.

         10) In terms of proportionality Dr Patel's  evidence  stated  that
             there would be poor conditions in a care home in the event  of
             the appellant leaving the UK but there was no care  plan  show
             that the appellant would fall within  the  policy.  Given  the
             lack of evidence  the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United
             Kingdom was therefore proportionate.

     43. Ms McCarthy on behalf of the appellant had provided a  detailed  16
         paged skeleton argument dated 23/3 21. It is not necessary  to  set
         out that document and it is a matter of record.

     44. Ms McCarthy supplemented her written submissions with oral argument
         as follows.

          1) Addressing the oral submissions made by  Ms  Pettersen,  there
             were no gaps in the appellant's chronology demonstrated by the
             evidence. The appellant lived with her previous aunt until she
             was forced to leave that property as a  result  of  abuse  and
             then moved to her current address which is five minutes'  walk
             from aunt J. When caring for aunt J  initially  in  2017,  she
             went to and fro and sometimes stayed overnight but since  2019
             after aunt J had fallen, she moved in to live with her as  set
             out in her recent witness statement.

          2) It appears that there is a care plan as someone is sending  in
             carers or  it  may  be  that  this  was  arranged  before  the
             appellant became involved and therefore was a system still  in
             place. She conceded that it was not ideal but that the current
             care provided is to send carers three  or  four  times  for  a
             limited period. It is also the position that the care plan  is
             not adequate because the appellant has become more involved in
             the care of aunt J. Dr Patel's evidence is that the  care  she
             requires is more extensive than the short visits undertaken by
             the current carers. He further sets out the  decline  in  aunt
             J's medical condition and sets out his advice  for  her  full-
             time care and supervision. As explained by Dr Patel, the  care
             aunt J needs is not simply checking that  she  is  taking  her
             medication but that she needs assistance  with  intimate  care
             and that aunt J is unhappy  for  this  being  carried  out  by
             someone else. Reference been made for the need to wear a nappy
             she has had accidents and this has an impact on  her  dignity.
             She is comfortable with the care from her niece who provides a
             degree of intimate care for her.  That  "she  will  inevitably
             become completely dependent on others. It is not  possible  to
             give a timeline about a  future  decline  in  her  ability  to
             manage herself with  support  from  others."  Furthermore  she
             established a good rapport with her and is able to  speak  tag
             along (evidence of Ms EB).

          3) She submitted that the medical evidence was that  the  ongoing
             stimulation and care the  appellant  was  currently  providing
             helped keep aunt J stable and living within her own  home  and
             therefore had a "protective quality" for her care rather  than
             a stranger undertaking such care. In this context the evidence
             of Dr Patel refers to dementia patients and their carers which
             is  seen  as  "frightening"  there  are  often   clashes   and
             aggression and fear because the patient is unfamiliar  and  is
             unable to communicate thus a high level of distress can occur.

          4) Ms McCarthy highlighted the extracts in the skeleton  argument
             relating to the nature of the diagnosis of  aunt  J  and  that
             this was a progressive illness.

          5) Dr Patel set out the type of care that she would need and that
             he is very clear that the type of companionship and care given
             by  the  appellant  cannot  be  replicated  by  an  unfamiliar
             environment and stranger care. The ongoing care for her is her
             best option.

          6) As to alternative care, there is no care plan but  it  can  be
             said that any care plan there was was not adequate for aunt  J
             given the evidence. There is no other family  member  who  can
             provide for her care. The appellant has  a  good  rapport  and
             understands aunt J and has a close  relationship.  The  carers
             come in for a very short period and  Dr  Patel's  evidence  is
             that her care needs have increased significantly.  Dr  Patel's
             evidence was that a care home would not provide for continuity
             of care, she would have a fear of other people, not being able
             to connect with  them  and  also  issues  of  dignity  as  her
             intimate care would be carried out by others that she did  not
             know.

          7) As to the issue of family life, Ms McCarthy  referred  to  the
             skeleton  argument  and  that  applying  a   "fact   sensitive
             approach" here something more than emotional ties existed  and
             that aunt J is dependent upon the appellant and  that  she  is
             her main family  tie  and  has  no  one  else.  Dependency  is
             clarified in the decision of Kugathas referred  to  "real  and
             effective support" and  that  looking  at  the  evidence,  the
             appellant had provided care for aunt J since 2017 the care met
             the threshold and had been living  with  her  undertaking  her
             care since that time. When  considering  the  quality  of  the
             relationship it is family life rather than a form  of  private
             life and is relevant to the proportionality assessment.

          8) When  considering  the  public  interest  considerations,  the
             factors treat family life and private  life  as  qualitatively
             different and more protection is given to  family  life  ties.
             However the form of family  life  here  is  not  addressed  in
             section 17 and only looks at  a  qualifying  partner.  However
             looking at the decision in Rajendran it confirms that this  is
             the only family life expressly referred to in the section  but
             that under the provisions of article 8 case law, it should  be
             taken into account. She submitted that the Strasbourg case law
              (Jeunesse) looked at the time when family life is created and
             were unaware that the immigration status  was  precarious  and
             that in that case it was stated that it was likely  that  both
             parties realised that  the  relationship  was  established  in
             precarious  terms  and  that  it  was  only   in   exceptional
             circumstances  the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be   a
             violation of article 8. However she submitted the present case
             was an exception to the test is when family  life  was  formed
             and deepened between the appellant and aunt J,  the  appellant
             out was already suffering from dementia and was not aware that
             she was forming family life  which  was  precarious.  Now  her
             cognitive decline was such that she could not  be  aware  that
             such circumstances applied. She has very strong family ties to
             the appellant and that is her main family life and  she  would
             find the appellant's loss to be distressing and would  have  a
             very significant impact on her wider health and care. Thus  it
             cannot be said that she took a risk when  establishing  family
             life.

          9) Notwithstanding the weighted limited to the other factors, the
             strength of family life is so great on the particular  factors
             that outweigh the weight  which  should  be  attached  to  the
             appellant's unlawful presence and some unlawful employment. As
             to financial dependence,  the  witness  evidence  demonstrated
             that Ms Buemo provided money for the appellant and  was  happy
             to continue to do this and also that  aunt  J  gave  her  some
             money. Her presence did not draw additional funds.

         10) In summary she submitted that the family life was  of  such  a
             strong nature that the loss of the appellant  to  her  aunt  J
             would demonstrate a significant effect to her well-being.  The
             evidence of Dr Patel is at the current care provided would not
             be adequate for R and J's knees and there will be  problem  of
             intimate care in the  conflict  identify  between  a  dementia
             patient and care given by strangers.  Thus  his  evidence  was
             analysis of the evidence and findings of  fact  that  she  was
             well cared for now by the appellant  and  that  other  options
             available would not meet her needs.  She  submitted  that  the
             proportionality assessment felt in favour of the appellant.

     45. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Findings of fact and analysis of the evidence:

     46. There has been little challenge to the factual evidence before  the
         tribunal. I also take into account that there has been no challenge
         raised to the contents of the reports of Dr Patel,  a  psychiatrist
         who has submitted reports having carried out  clinical  assessments
         of aunt J.

     47. I shall set  out  the  factual  findings  that  are  necessary  for
         considering this appeal.

     48. There is no dispute  that  the  appellant  is  a  national  of  the
         Philippines who first entered the  United  Kingdom  on  9  February
         2002. In a letter sent by his solicitors dated 3 December 2018, the
         appellant could not  remember  on  basis  she  entered  the  United
         Kingdom or on what visa. Whilst  it  cannot  be  substantiated  the
         basis upon which she entered the United Kingdom it is reasonable to
         infer that this was likely to be of a temporary nature  and  it  is
         accepted on her behalf that she had overstayed her  leave  and  had
         remained unlawfully in the UK after 2002.

     49. There is little detail as to how the appellant lived in the  United
         Kingdom from 2002. However, it is the case that she lived with  her
         maternal aunt (Aunt M) and acted as her carer until about May 2015.
         In July 2014, the appellant made an application for leave to remain
         on the basis that she had the role of the carer of her aunt but was
         refused without a right of appeal .It is said that Aunt M  suffered
         from a number of illnesses including being registered as blind  and
         having undergone a kidney transplant. It is said that as  a  result
         of the illnesses she had, her behaviour was aggressive towards  the
         appellant as set out in her first witness statement at paragraphs 3
         - 5. Therefore from approximately May  2015  the  appellant  ceased
         caring for her aunt and undertook some employment.

     50. Whilst  Ms  Pettersen  submitted  that  there  were  gaps  or  some
         uncertainty as to what happened after this date, in my judgement it
         is  clear  from  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  given  a
         consistent picture of the care that she began to  undertake  in  or
         about October 2017 for aunt J. Whilst the appellant refers  to  her
         as auntie, it is common ground that the direct family connection is
         that the appellant's and Aunt J's great-grandparents were siblings.
         They are therefore distantly related.

     51. I am satisfied from the evidence that the appellant began  to  care
         for aunt J in or about October 2017. She had  been  diagnosed  with
         dementia and that prior to the appellant undertaking her care, aunt
         J was struggling to care for her  herself.  She  was  not  washing,
         changing her clothes, or  cleaning  house  and  that  the  property
         become infested with bedbugs. The appellant's home is five minutes'
         walk from aunt J's home. Following aunt J's  cognitive  decline  in
         2019, the appellant has  stayed  overnight  at  Aunt  J's  home  to
         undertake her care. While she has maintained a home address,  I  am
         satisfied that this was to collect post and that the  evidence  set
         out in the most recent statement is that she has been living at the
         home of aunt J to ensure her care needs are being met.




    Aunt J's medical condition and care needs:

     52. There is no care plan from the  local  authority  in  the  evidence
         before the tribunal which sets out  a  summary  of  aunt  J's  care
         needs. However there are four medical reports, three that have been
         written by consultant psychiatrist Dr Patel who set  out  aunt  J's
         medical condition and future prognosis.

     53. There has been no challenge to these medical reports on  behalf  of
         the respondent  save  for  that  I  have  identified  in  the  oral
         submissions above.

     54. I shall therefore summarise that evidence.

     55. Aunt J has been registered with her practice since 1994  and  Dr  R
         summarises her medical condition in a report dated  18  April  2018
         (p43-74 RB) as follows;  she  has  Alzheimer's  and  dementia  with
         increased  cognitive  decline  and  self-neglect,  ICD  10   mental
         behavioural disorder, diabetes, has suffered from recurrent  falls,
         has arthritis in her left knee, suffers from hypertension, and  has
         suffered from a dislocation of her  shoulder  and  a  stroke.   The
         report summarises her condition as  having  "significant  cognitive
         decline with  three  major  chronic  diseases.  Her  healthcare  is
         complicated  by  psychological,  emotional,  and   social   factors
         affected by her progressive dementia. In addition she is unable  to
         mobilise well.". Reference is made to her being unable to currently
         self-care, showing  increase  of  cognitive  decline,  and  a  poor
         compliance with medication for her conditions. Reference being made
         to the medication that she is prescribed and that she is under  the
         care of a  memory  clinic.  In  terms  of  general  care  that  she
         requires, she  has  a  poor  compliance  with  medication  for  her
         conditions, she needs help with washing, dressing, eating  personal
         hygiene and toileting. She  is  unable  to  do  her  own  shopping,
         cooking, or washing in the appellant undertakes those tasks for her
         as well as providing her with conversation in  Tagalog  (her  first
         language) and familiar foods from the Philippines.

     56. In 2018 he reached  the  conclusion  that  she  would  continue  to
         decline cognitively and that she current required full-time 24-hour
         care.  The  support  given  by  the  appellant  was   keeping   her
         "functionally stable" and that the "lack of the support could  lead
         to a more rapid decline in her condition."

     57. There are three reports from Dr Patel. In his first report he  sets
         out his qualifications and experiences in general adult psychiatry.
         He confirms in the first report (dated  6/August/18)  that  it  was
         prepared on the basis of an examination of aunt J and was  compiled
         after interview  and  examination.  For  the  second  report  dated
         24/8/20, Dr Patel confirmed that he had examined  aunt  J  for  the
         purposes of the report but did so remotely using a video method and
         it was not performed face-to-face as it took place during the covid-
          19 pandemic. Similarly the short addendum report dated 23/321  was
         conducted in similar circumstances. However Dr Patel makes it plain
         that notwithstanding the remote consultation,  the  steps  that  he
         undertook to ensure that he was able to carefully listen and assess
         the circumstances of the consultation (I refer to  page  7  of  the
         supplementary bundle).

     58.  Having read the reports and  having  heard  him  give  brief  oral
         evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  he  is  clearly  an  experienced
         psychiatrist with particular expertise in the field relevant to the
         factual circumstances of this appeal.

     59. Dr Patel provides further  evidence  concerning  aunt  J's  medical
         condition. As I have stated  it  is  not  in  dispute  between  the
         parties.

     60. Dr Patel confirms the diagnosis set  out  in  the  earlier  medical
         report  and  that  she  suffers  from  "multiple  complex   medical
         illnesses for many years. These include strokes, arthritis in  both
         knees, high blood pressure (hypertension), high cholesterol levels,
         diabetes mellitus Type II,  recurrent  falls,  and  right  shoulder
         distillation. She  was  diagnosed  with  dementia  and  Alzheimer's
         disease with late onset (ICD - 10 category F0 0.1) in October 2017.
         Dr Patel considered that it was  a  "progressive  and  irreversible
         mental illness" and that in her case she is "grossly  disorientated
         in time and place but not persons. She  is  regarded  at  an  early
         stage  of  the  condition.  It  produces  appreciable  decline   in
         intellectual functioning. It usually interferes with activities  of
         daily living such as washing, dressing, eating,  personal  hygiene,
         excretory  and  toilet   activities.   This   is   accompanied   by
         deterioration in emotional control, social behaviour or motivation"
         (at p 355RB).

     61. In terms of her condition, he found that her ability to look  after
         herself had "significantly deteriorated over the  past  two  years.
         Her dementia appears to have started 2  to  3  years  ago  but  was
         diagnosed in October 2017.  She  is  unable  to  do  her  shopping,
         cooking, or washing. She is unable to  perform  her  activities  of
         daily living without support from her carers." He  found  that  her
         condition was a "progressive and irreversible disease of the brain"
         and that her prognosis  is  "sadly  very  grim".  He  expected  her
         condition to deteriorate progressively  over  the  years  and  that
         there was no effective treatment to halt it and thus her care needs
         and to increase progressively. He identified in 2018 that she would
         need 24/7 care in the near future.

     62. In the updated report (dated 24/8/20; supplementary bundle 5-13) Dr
         Patel stated that from his review and consultation in  his  opinion
         her cognitive functions had deteriorated  significantly  since  his
         previous assessment in 2018. Thus her condition  and  diagnosis  of
         dementia in Alzheimer's  disease  with  a  late  onset  (ICD  -  10
         category F0 0.1) has significantly deteriorated over the  past  two
         years.  In  particular  he  observed  a  severe  decline   in   her
         communication skills  due  to  worsening  cognitive  functions  and
         hearing loss. His conclusion was that aunt J was "suffering from  a
         progressive   neurodegenerative   disease   namely   dementia    in
         Alzheimer's disease for which there is no cure. Her care needs will
         grow steadily over the years and if she lives  long  her  condition
         will necessitate 24/7 care in the future."

     63. In his report of  23  March  2021,  Dr  Patel  observed  a  further
         deterioration following his consultation.  He  stated  "her  mental
         functions  of  deteriorated  further  since  I  first  examined  on
         31/7/2018. She has become less spontaneous and more forgetful.  Her
         physical health has also deteriorated, her mobility is reduced, and
         she's become more dependent on her carers."

     64. Dr Patel's report also set out aunt J's care needs and the type  of
         care required. In the report dated 24/8/20 "current care needs", he
         states the following:

          1) a severe decline in her communication skills due to  worsening
             cognitive functions and hearing loss.

          2) She slower while eating a needs frequent prompting.

          3) She needs reminders to attend toilet otherwise an office  will
             get wet.

          4) The appellant attends every day and put her to bed  around  11
             PM.

          5)  The  different  carers  come  only  three  times  a  day   at
             unpredictable times. Each carer visits spends very little time
             and  they  do  not  communicate  with  her.   When   they   do
             communicate, aunt J does not understand what they are saying.

          6) Aunt J can no longer use of phone.

          7) It takes up one hour to wake up in the morning and  get  ready
             for the day. She spends most of the time  dozing  on  and  off
             while sitting in the chair.

          8) He concludes at p9  that  "her  care  needs  of  significantly
             increased which are met by carers and her niece  who  provides
             personal care. Aunt J would not like  the  carers  to  provide
             personal care due to embarrassment."

     65. Dr Patel's recommendation is set out at paragraph 3.5. He sets  out
         that aunt J "encounters different carers in  a  different  name  to
         speak different accidents. She finds it very difficult to  remember
         their names, recognise and establish good rapport with them as they
         keep changing. Such arrangement creates its own problems  for  her,
         anxiety stress confusion, lack of  continuity  and  consistency  of
         care provided. Even people without any health problems  that  alone
         dementia will  struggle  to  manage  under  the  circumstances.  As
         against this, her niece is able to provide loving and high  quality
         care to (aunt J). Both of them talking their language and  this  is
         very vital for (aunt J)  to  communicate  her  needs.  Familiarity,
         trust, emotional attachment, and cultural awareness cannot ever  be
         replaced by independent carers in  advancing  years.  Miss  Beginio
         cooks Filipino food for her aunt which she prefers at any time.  It
         is universally accepted that most elderly people prefer to live and
         receive care in their own home. It is  also  highly  cost-effective
         for the families and the Exchequer compared with care  and  nursing
         homes. Living in their own  home  provides  freedom  to  enjoy  the
         comfort of familiar surroundings. Any move  to  a  care  home  will
         unsettle and stabiliser. This might lead to a devastating  blow  to
         her. Care homes will inevitably increase risk of  cross  infections
         due  to  communal  living  and  physical  altercations  with  other
         residents which will shorten her life expectancy further."

     66. At page 11, he expressly considers the Covid-19 pandemic  and  that
         this has "exposed  the  risks  associated  with  care  and  nursing
         homes." Reference is made to different care homes interpreting  the
         rules differently and that many GPs and  families  have  been  kept
         away from care homes for a long  time  leading  to  the  widespread
         isolation of residents. The despair of isolation he considers to be
         as dangerous as Covid  19  or  cancer.  As  his  recommendation  he
         states, "I would strongly emphasise  social  services  cannot  take
         control of this patient in a care because she needs 24/7 care."  He
         considers that it  is  of  "paramount  importance  that  ((aunt  J)
         continues living in her own home with the support and care from  Ms
         Beginio".

     67. Dr Patel's evidence as to her long-term prognosis states  that  she
         will inevitably become completely dependent on others and that  the
         illness is that she have "predispose her  to  serious  consequences
         and increased risk of mortality." Dr Patel is not possible to  give
         a timeline about her  future  decline  in  her  ability  to  manage
         herself with support from others but again notes  that  as  she  is
         suffering from a progressive neurodegenerative disease  it  is  one
         for which there is no cure.

     68. In summary, Dr Patel is of the opinion that  her  care  needs  have
         grown steadily over  the  years  that  if  she  leaves  longer  her
         condition will necessitate 24/7 care in the future (see  conclusion
         at paragraph 4.0 p11AB supplementary bundle). It is his  view  that
         her care needs are met by her living in their own home and with her
         care being provided by Ms Beginio (see updated report 23/3/21).

     69. The evidence before the tribunal also sets out the  nature  of  the
         care tasks undertaken by the appellant. They are  set  out  in  the
         appellant's witness statements, the supporting witness evidence  of
         Ms EB and the report of Dr Patel. Again there is no  dispute  about
         the nature of the care undertaken by the appellant.

     70. In her most recent witness statement the  appellant  confirms  that
         her role as a carer include the following:

           . in the morning she wakes around and  assists  with  toileting,
             bathing, and dressing.

           . She cooks all her meals for her as she cannot  stand  for  too
             long due to her arthritis and recurrent falls.

           . She sorts and administers her medication throughout the day;

           . she provides her personal care and dressing her;

           . she accompanies her to GP and hospital appointments;

           . she attends to her throughout the night and in emergencies;

           . household tasks are performed;

           . she provides stimulation and companionship by talking  to  her
             in tagalong and watching television with her;

           . she undertakes her shopping.

     71. There is no care plan in the papers before me but from the evidence
         that I have both read and heard the nature of the outside  agencies
         in the care that they provide can be established from the  evidence
         as follows. A carer nominated by an agency visits three times a day
         with each carer spending approximately 20 minutes to 30 minutes  at
         the home. Thus the total amount is approximately one  hour  and  10
         minutes. The carers are there to see whether  medication  has  been
         given although from  the  summary  of  the  care  provided  by  the
         appellant, that was a task that  she  undertakes.  The  appellant's
         evidence is that she has to tell the carer which medicine aunt J is
         due to take. The only other practical care is to hand over a parcel
         of food. The carers who come are different ones  and  do  not  have
         much conversation with aunt J.

     72. Previously aunt J received assistance by way of "meals  on  wheels"
         but that has stopped as a result of  the  lack  of  resources  (see
         witness statement of Ms EB 11/12/19 AB25).

     73. Having summarised the evidence, both the witness  evidence  of  the
         appellant and that of Dr Patel, there is  no  dispute  between  the
         parties that aunt J has significant care needs as a result  of  her
         medical conditions and most notably her diagnosis of  dementia  and
         Alzheimer's for which there is no cure. It is also not  in  dispute
         that her condition has deteriorated since 2018 and that as a result
         care needs have increased and will continue to do so.

     74. I am  also  satisfied  from  the  evidence  before  me  that  those
         demanding care needs are currently met by the  appellant  and  that
         the nature of the care that is  provided  by  others  as  described
         above, is of a shorter and less effective type of  care  than  that
         undertaken by the appellant.

     75. I am  also  satisfied  that  the  evidence  demonstrates  that  the
         assistance has been reduced due to  lack  of  resources  (meals  on
         wheels).

     76. Furthermore, in terms of other family  members  who  could  provide
         assistance and the care of aunt J, I am satisfied that there is  no
         other family relative  who  could  undertake  aunt  J's  care.  The
         evidence of Ms EB, which is unchallenged, is that as  a  result  of
         her age and her own medical circumstances, she is unable to provide
         ongoing care beyond that of innocence sitting with her for one hour
         when the appellant leaves the property to undertake shopping.

     77. I am satisfied from the evidence that she requires a full-time live-
         in carer and that this  is  currently  being  carried  out  by  the
         appellant and the type of care that she provides is unlikely to  be
         replicated by someone who does not have the  type  of  relationship
         established between the appellant and aunt J.

Discussion:

     78. Against that factual background, I now undertaken analysis  of  the
         legal issues in the appeal.

     79. This is a  human  rights  claim  and  the  only  ground  of  appeal
         available to the appellant was that the respondent's  decision  was
         unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

     80. The relevant law in respect of establishing "family life"  for  the
         purposes of Art 8 was helpfully summarised in the Court of Appeal's
         decision in Rai as referred to in the skeleton argument.

     81. The decision in Rai involved a claim by an adult child of a  former
         Ghurkha soldier who sought to join his family in the UK relying  on
         Art  8.  Therefore,  the  factual  circumstances  are   dissimilar.
         However, the principles are of relevance. In that case, drawing  on
         the earlier case law of the Court of Appeal, Lindblom LJ (with whom
         Beatson and Henderson LJJ agreed) said this at [16]-[20]:

             "16. The legal principles  relevant  to  this  issue  are  not
                  controversial.

               1. In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
                  [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph  17  of
                  his judgment) that "if dependency is read down as  meaning
                  "support", in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing
                  the Strasbourg jurisprudence,  "real"  or  "committed"  or
                  "effective" to the word "support", then it represents  ...
                  the irreducible minimum  of  what  family  life  implies".
                  Arden L.J. said (in paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the
                  "relevant factors ... include identifying who are the near
                  relatives of  the  appellant,  the  nature  of  the  links
                  between them and the appellant, the age of the  appellant,
                  where and with whom he has resided in the  past,  and  the
                  forms of contact he has maintained with the other  members
                  of the family with whom he claims to have a family  life".
                  She acknowledged (at  paragraph  25)  that  "there  is  no
                  presumption of family life". Thus "a family  life  is  not
                  established between  an  adult  child  and  his  surviving
                  parent or other siblings unless something more exists than
                  normal emotional ties". She added that "[such] ties  might
                  exist if the appellant were dependent  on  his  family  or
                  vice versa", but  it  was  "not  ...  essential  that  the
                  members of the family should be in the same  country".  In
                  Patel and others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai  [2010]
                  EWCA Civ 17, Sedley L.J. said  (in  paragraph  14  of  his
                  judgment, with which Longmore  and  Aikens  L.JJ.  agreed)
                  that "what may constitute an extant family life falls well
                  short of what constitutes  dependency,  and  a  good  many
                  adult children ... may  still  have  a  family  life  with
                  parents who are now settled here not by leave or by  force
                  of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

               1. In Ghising (family life -  adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  the
                  Upper  Tribunal  accepted  (in   paragraph   56   of   its
                  determination) that the judgments  in  Kugathas  had  been
                  "interpreted too restrictively in the past and ought to be
                  read in the light of subsequent decisions of the  domestic
                  and Strasbourg courts", and (in paragraph 60)  that  "some
                  of the [Strasbourg] Court's decisions indicate that family
                  life between adult children and parents  will  readily  be
                  found, without evidence  of  exceptional  dependence".  It
                  went on to say (in paragraph 61):

                  "61. Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                      reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012]
                      Imm. A.R.1], finding that a significant  factor  will
                      be whether or not  the  adult  child  has  founded  a
                      family of his own. If he is still single  and  living
                      with his parents, he is likely to enjoy  family  life
                      with them. ...".

                  The Upper Tribunal set out the  relevant  passage  in  the
                  court's judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs  46
                  to 49), which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

                  "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                      suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years
                      old, who resides with his  mother  and  has  not  yet
                      founded a family of  his  own,  can  be  regarded  as
                      having "family life"."

               1. Ultimately, as Lord Dyson M.R. emphasized when giving  the
                  judgment of the court in Gurung (at  paragraph  45),  "the
                  question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one
                  of fact and depends on a careful consideration of all  the
                  relevant facts of the particular case". In some instances,
                  "an adult child  (particularly  if  he  does  not  have  a
                  partner or children of his own) may establish that he  has
                  a family life with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R.  said,
                  "[it] all depends  on  the  facts".  The  court  expressly
                  endorsed (at paragraph 46), as "useful" and as  indicating
                  "the correct approach to be adopted", the Upper Tribunal's
                  review of the relevant jurisprudence in paragraphs  50  to
                  62 of its determination in Ghising (family life - adults -
                  Gurkha policy), including its  observation  (at  paragraph
                  62)  that  "[the]  different  outcomes   in   cases   with
                  superficially similar features emphasises to us  that  the
                  issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

               1. To similar effect were these observations of  Sir  Stanley
                  Burnton in  Singh  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                  Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in  paragraph  24  of  his
                  judgment):

                  "24. I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                      referred lead to any difficulty  in  determining  the
                      correct approach to  Article  8  in  cases  involving
                      adult children. In the case of adults, in the context
                      of immigration control, there is no legal or  factual
                      presumption as to the existence or absence of  family
                      life for the purposes of Article 8. I point out  that
                      the approach of the  European  Commission  for  Human
                      Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not  include
                      any requirement of exceptionality. It all depends  on
                      the facts. The love and affection  between  an  adult
                      and his  parents  or  siblings  will  not  of  itself
                      justify a finding of a family life. There has  to  be
                      something more. A young adult living with his parents
                      or siblings will normally have a family  life  to  be
                      respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a  family
                      life with his parents does not suddenly cease to have
                      a family life at midnight as he  turns  18  years  of
                      age.  On  the  other  hand,  a  young  adult   living
                      independently of his parents  may  well  not  have  a
                      family life for the purposes of Article 8."

     82. As will be clear, the need to establish "family life"  is  a  fact-
         sensitive issue.  It will not be presumed to exist between  adults.
         What must be established is  "more  than  normal  emotional  ties".
         There  must  be  "support"  which  is  "real"  or  "committed"   or
         "effective".

     83. In Uddin v SSHD [2020]  EWCA  Civ  332,  the  Senior  President  of
         Tribunals (Sir Ernest Ryder, with whom Bean and King  LJJ  agreed),
         having set out extracts from the decision in Kugathas, said this at
         [31]:

             "Dependency, in the Kugathas sense, is accordingly not a  term
             of art.  It is a question of fact; a matter of  substance  not
             form.  The irreducible minimum of  what  family  life  implies
             remains that  which  Sedley  LJ  described  as  being  whether
             support is real or effective or committed".

     84. I have also considered  the  decision    of  Lama  (video  recorded
         evidence - weight - Article 8 ECHR) [2017) UKUT 00016 at paragraphs
         30 - 33. It states as follows:

             "32. Strikingly,  in  PT  (Sri  Lanka)  the  Court  of  Appeal
             highlighted the need for a "  fact  sensitive  approach":  see
             [26]. Notably, the Court quoted without demur  the  assessment
             of "dependency" in Kugathas at [17], referring to the argument
             that a finding of family life  does  not  entail  an  absolute
             requirement of dependency:

                  "That is clearly right  in  the  economic  sense.  But  if
                  dependency is read  down  as  meaning  'support',  in  the
                  personal sense, and if one adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
                  jurisprudence, 'real' or 'committed' or 'effective' to the
                  word  'support',  then  it  represents  in  my  view   the
                  irreducible minimum of what family life implies."

                                                               [my emphasis]

             Thus, at its heart, family  life  denotes  real  or  committed
             personal support between or among the persons concerned.  Such
             persons need not necessarily be related by blood and, in  that
             sense, are not a family in  the  traditional  or  conventional
             senses. However, they are  readily  embraced  by  one  of  the
             dictionary definitions of "family", namely " a group of things
             that are alike in some way". Mere likeness is not, of  course,
             sufficient for Article 8 purposes. The "likeness", in  Article
             8 terms, is constituted by committed support, emotional  bonds
             and, very frequently, a strong sense of duty."

             33.  In harmony with my comment about Article 8 in [30] supra,
             the  case  law  is  replete  with  statements  which  are  the
             antithesis of hardedged rules or absolute principles. This  is
             illustrated by the terms  in  which  Baroness  Hale  expressed
             herself in a  short  concurring  judgement  in  Beoku-Betts  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39,  at
             [4]:

                  "The  right  to  respect  for  the  family  life  of   one
                  necessarily encompasses  the  right  to  respect  for  the
                  family  life  of  others,  normally  a  spouse  or   minor
                  children, with whom that family life is enjoyed."

             Thus, in the Strasbourg jurisprudence, family  life  has  been
             extended beyond relationships of blood, marriage, and adoption
             (Clayton & Tomlinson, The  law  of  Human  Rights,  2  nd  ed,
             13.148)."

     85.  By applying that decision, whilst the appellant  and  aunt  J  are
         distantly related by blood because their  great  grandparents  were
         siblings, it does not preclude a finding of  family  life  as  even
         unrelated people may share family life.

     86. As set out above, paragraph 32 of the decision in Lama demonstrates
         that "at its heart, family life denotes real or committed  personal
         support between or among the persons concerned. Such  persons  need
         not necessarily be related by blood  and,  in  that  sense,  not  a
         family in the traditional conventional senses.  However,  they  are
         readily embraced by one of the dictionary definitions of  "family",
         namely "a group of things that are alike in some way." That this is
         not, of course, sufficient for article 8 purposes.  The  "likeness"
         in article 8 terms, is constituted by committed support,  emotional
         bonds and, very frequently, a strong sense of duty."

     87. There is  little  dispute  concerning  the  factual  evidence.  The
         appellant has cared for Aunt J since her diagnosis of  dementia  in
         October 2017 and since her fall in 2019 has lived with her although
         she still maintains her own property which is 5 minutes  away  from
         Aunt J's home. Whilst the evidence refers to other carers attending
         for short periods,  the evidence demonstrates  that  the  appellant
         undertakes the bulk of the duty of day-to-day care, including  aunt
         J's personal and intimate care  .The  evidence   also  demonstrates
         that  the  appellant  provides  a  cultural  link  for  aunt  J  by
         conversing with her in Filipino and providing Filipino style  food.
         Other evidence before the Tribunal demonstrates that the  appellant
         provides  not  only  the  physical  care  for  aunt  J   but   also
         psychological support and social support which had  the  effect  of
         keeping her functionally stable (see GP report 18/4/18).)

     88. The evidence of Dr Patel was that the appellant provided  the  type
         of personal care that could not be replicated by  someone  who  was
         not a family member. At page 7 of the report he stated that as  the
         appellant was undertaking  her  care  needs  of  washing,  personal
         hygiene and toileting, aunt J did not have to suffer the  indignity
         and embarrassment and cleaning up problems  as  the  appellant  had
         undertaken those tasks. He concluded  that  aunt  J's  needs  would
         increase and would necessitate 24/7 care and  that  she  was  being
         cared for "outstandingly well" and that the  appellant's  care  was
         "irreplaceable  without  life-threatening  consequences  and  great
         cost". He made reference to her health deteriorating rapidly if the
         appellant was not available to care for her.

     89.  Against  that  background  I  am  satisfied  that   the   evidence
         demonstrates that the appellant's relationship with Aunt J  is  one
         of a family life relationship and properly considered goes beyond a
         relationship of patient and carer but is one  of  effective,  real,
         and  committed  support.  The  evidence  demonstrates   significant
         dependency on the appellant. I observe that during her  submissions
         Ms Pettersen accepted that family life had been established between
         the appellant and aunt J.

     90. I move straight to the issue of proportionality (the  questions  of
         interference, accordance with the  law,  and  legitimate  aim,  all
         being uncontroversial).

     91. In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8,  the  heart
         of the assessment is whether the decision strikes  a  fair  balance
         between the due weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining an effective system  of  immigration  control  and  the
         impact of the decision on the individual's private or family life.

     92. In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a court or
         Tribunal should give appropriate weight  to  Parliament's  and  the
         Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength  of  the  general
         public interest as expressed in the relevant  rules  and  statutes:
         see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and see   R  (MM  and  others)
         (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC
         10, the Supreme Court at [43].

     93. A court must accord "considerable weight"  to  the  policy  of  the
         Secretary of State at a "general level": Agyarko paragraph [47] and
         paragraphs [56] - [57]; and see also Ali paragraphs  [44]  -  [46],
         [50] and [53]. This includes the policy weightings set out in  Part
         5A (sections 117A- 117D) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 (inserted by the Immigration Act 2014).

     94. As provided by section 117A (1), Part 5A applies where a  Court  or
         Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under the
         Immigration Acts breaches Article  8  and  as  a  result  would  be
         unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Section 117A
         (2) requires the Court  or  Tribunal,  in  considering  whether  an
         interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
         family life is justified under article 8(2), to have regard in  all
         cases to the considerations listed in section 117B.

         Section 117B states as follows: -

             "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
             cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English -

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-"

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where -

                  (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

     95. I consider first the mandatory considerations set  out  in  section
         117B NIAA 2002, as amended.  The  public  interest  in  maintaining
         effective immigration control is  strong,  mandated  as  it  is  by
         primary legislation.

     96. As to the  assessment  of  financial  dependence  upon  the  state,
         S117B(3) states that it is  in  the  public  interest  and  in  the
         particular interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
         Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom are financially independent because such persons, (a) not a
         burden on taxpayers and (b) better able to integrate into  society.
         Whilst Ms Petterson submits that it is unclear on  what  basis  she
         has been able to maintain herself, I accept  the  evidence  in  the
         witness statements  that  she  has  been  provided  with  financial
         assistance from Ms EB and from aunt J and has  also  been  in  paid
         employment  at  times  (albeit  unlawfully)  and  thus   has   been
         financially independent, that is not reliant upon  state  benefits.
         However, even if I found that  she  was  "financially  independent"
         that was a neutral matter, alongside her ability to speak  English,
         which did not militate positively in her favour in  the  scales  of
         proportionality as set out in the decision of Rhuppiah at paragraph
         57.

     97. There is no clear evidence as the basis upon which she entered  the
         UK. Ms McCarthy's skeleton argument refers to her entering on visit
         visa. Taking at its highest, it was only ever on a very  precarious
         basis, namely as a visitor. Thus, the lawful presence here does not
         carry any significant weight in her favour.

     98. The appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since  a
         period from 2002. That is a significant majority of the time  spent
         in this country. With reference to section 117B(4),  there  are  no
         particularly compelling circumstances arising in her case which  go
         to materially mitigate the reduction of weight to  be  accorded  to
         her private life.

     99. When addressing the  S117  public  interest  factors,  Ms  McCarthy
         submitted that S117B does not expressly refer to  forms  of  family
         life other than "a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner".
         In the decision of Rajendran (S117B- family  life)  v  SSHD  [2016]
         UKUT  138,  the  tribunal  confirmed  that  the   "Little   weight"
         provisions of s 117B (4) (a) and S117(5) are confined  to  "private
         life" established by person at a time when their immigration status
         is unlawful or precarious. However a  court  should  not  disregard
         "precarious family life" criteria set out in established article  8
         jurisprudence.

    100. Ms McCarthy submitted that one  of  the  "precarious  family  life"
         authorities  endorsed  was  Jeunesse,  and  the  reference  to  the
         consideration as to whether family life was created at a time  when
         the persons involved were aware that the immigration status of  one
         of them was such that the persistence of that  family  life  within
         the host state were from the outset would be precarious. Where that
         is the case, it is likely only to be in  exceptional  circumstances
         that the removal of the non-national family member will  constitute
         a violation of article 8. On the facts of this case she argues that
         it falls within an exceptional case because family life was  formed
         and deepened between the appellant and  aunt  J  when  aunt  J  was
         suffering from dementia and was not  aware  that  she  was  forming
         family life which was precarious.

    101. It is correct that  the  public  interest  considerations  make  no
         reference to other  relationships  than  those  with  a  qualifying
         partner or with a qualifying child.  In  my  judgement  it  is  not
         necessary to consider the ability of aunt J to be  aware  that  she
         was establishing a family life with the appellant at  a  time  when
         the appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully. That is because
         to ensure consistency with the HRA 1998 and the ECHR, section  117B
         must,  however,  have  injected  into  it  a  limited   degree   of
         flexibility so that the application  of  the  statutory  provisions
         would always lead to an  end  result  consistent  with  Article  8:
         Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 paragraphs [36] and [49].

    102. In Rhuppiah the Supreme Court held that section 117A  (2)  features
         an inherent degree of flexibility. Lord Wilson put it this way,  at
         [49]:

             "The effect of section 117A (2) is clear. It  recognises  that
             the provisions of section 117B cannot put decision-makers in a
             straitjacket which constrains them to determine  claims  under
             article 8 inconsistently with the article itself. Inbuilt into
             the concept of "Little weight" itself is  a  small  degree  of
             flexibility: but it is in  particular  section  117A  (2)  (a)
             which provides the limited degree of flexibility recognised to
             be necessary in paragraph  36  above.  Section  117A  (2)  (a)
             necessarily  enabled  their   applications   occasionally   to
             succeed. It is impossible to improve  on  how,  in  inevitably
             general terms, Sales LJ in his judgement describe  the  effect
             of section 117A(2) (a) as follows;

                  53. Although a court or tribunal shall have regard to  the
                  consideration a little weight should be given  to  private
                  life established in (the specified) circumstances,  it  is
                  possible without violence to the language to say that such
                  generalised normative guidance may  be  overridden  in  an
                  exceptional case by particularly strong  features  of  the
                  private life in question."

    103. In my judgement it is not  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the
         private life and the family life established by  the  appellant  in
         the United Kingdom. Even by giving little weight to the appellant's
         private life established while she  has  been  resident  in  United
         Kingdom unlawfully, the section 117 factors do not mean that weight
         cannot be given to the family life established between herself  and
         aunt J.  I would be prepared to place weight upon her  relationship
         with Aunt J. Having said that, I find that the weight  attributable
         to this factor would be significant and whilst the relationship was
         formed during her unlawful status, the relationship is based  on  a
         particularly significant dependency.

    104. The list of relevant factors to be considered in a  proportionality
         assessment is "not closed" and there is in principle  no  limit  to
         the factors which might,  in  a  given  case,  be  relevant  to  an
         evaluation under article 8, which is a fact sensitive exercise  and
         that this includes  the  nature  of  the  family  life  established
         between the appellant and aunt J and on the basis of the dependency
         of that relationship as outlined in the evidence.

    105. If Article 8 is engaged, as  on  the  facts  of  this  appeal,  the
         Tribunal may need to look at the extent to which  an  appellant  is
         said to have failed to meet the requirements of the rules,  because
         that may inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that  must
         follow.

    106. When undertaking an assessment under the Immigration Rules relating
         to private life under Paragraph 276ADE, there is  no  dispute  that
         she cannot meet those requirements given her  length  of  residence
         since 2002   nor has it been argued that there are very significant
         obstacles to her reintegration to the Philippines. It has not  been
         argued that the appellant can meet Appendix FM.

    107. I have  been  referred  to  the  carer's  policy  set  out  in  the
         Immigration Directorate Instructions; Chapter 17: Section 2: Carers
         (see Appendix A; skeleton  argument  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant).

    108. The policy  states  that  each  case  must  be  looked  at  on  its
         individual merits but when considering whether a period of leave to
         remain shall be granted, the following  points  are  amongst  those
         that  should  be  borne  in  mind  by  caseworkers;  the  type   of
         illness/condition (it should be supported by consultant's  letter):
         and the type of care required; and  the  care  which  is  available
         (e.g. from the social services or other relatives/friends) and  the
         long-term prognosis. Caseworkers should be aware that  whilst  most
         applications will come from carers who are in the  U.K.'s  visitors
         this will not always be the case.

    109. Section 17.3 of the carer's policy provides that it would  normally
         be appropriate to grant leave to remain for three  months  to  care
         for a sick relative on the strict understanding  that  during  this
         period arrangements will be made for the future care of the patient
         by a person who is not subject to Immigration Rules.

    110. Section 17.4 of the policy states  that  where  an  application  is
         received requesting a further period of leave to continue  to  care
         for a sick relative  the  applicant  must  produce,  amongst  other
         things, a letter from the local social  services  department  where
         they  are  known  to  be  involved,  advising  of  their  level  of
         involvement, the perceived benefits of the presence in  the  UK  of
         the applicant, and an explanation as to  why  suitable  alternative
         care arrangements are not available, along  with  further  evidence
         that alternative arrangements for the  care  of  the  patient  have
         been, or are being, actively explored.

    111. There is no dispute that the appellant cannot meet the requirements
         of the policy as the evidence that would  support  the  application
         has not been forthcoming. I accept that there is a  letter  from  a
         registered medical practitioner, in the form of a report from Dr R,
         but this is not from  an  NHS  consultant.  There  are  also  three
         reports from Dr Patel, who is a  consultant  psychiatrist  and  has
         provided full details of her condition and the long-term prognosis.
         What is missing is any evidence  from  the  local  social  services
         department advising of their level of involvement in  the  benefits
         of the presence of the applicant and also an explanation as to  why
         suitable alternative care arrangements are not  available.   Allied
         to this, there is no evidence of alternative arrangements  for  the
         care of aunt J is being actively explored.

    112. I accept the submission made by Ms Pettersen that this is a  factor
         that weighs in the balance against the appellant.

    113. However, I am satisfied that the reports of Dr Patel are sufficient
         in their contents to accurately describe and evidence  the  illness
         and condition of aunt J. It is supported by evidence from the local
         GP practice. I am also satisfied that his report as  to  her  long-
         term prognosis sets out his opinion which is properly  reasoned  by
         reference to her  condition.  No  submissions  have  been  made  to
         undermine his opinion in this regard.

    114. There is no care plan that has been made available to the tribunal.
         Furthermore, there  is  no  supporting  evidence  from  the  social
         services department about their level of involvement.  It  has  not
         been explained why that care plan has not been provided even taking
         into account the circumstances of the covid- 19 pandemic.

    115. That said, it is possible to confirm at a basic level the level  of
         involvement as this is consistent with the evidence  given  by  the
         appellant  as  to  the  agency  carers  who  come   to   the   home
         approximately three times a day.

    116. Whilst there  is  no  evidence  from  social  services  as  to  the
         perceived benefits  of  the  appellant's  presence,  I  accept  the
         opinion of Dr Patel as to the  significant  benefit  the  appellant
         provides for the care of aunt J. There is no dispute that aunt  J's
         condition has deteriorated since 2017 but that the care provided by
         the appellant both in  terms  of  physical  and  psychological  and
         social support has  the  benefit  of  keeping  aunt  J's  condition
         stable.  Dr Patel's evidence is  that  the  care  provided  by  the
         appellant is" loving and high quality" and that  the  "familiarity,
         trust, emotional attachment and cultural  awareness  could  not  be
         replaced by  independent  carers".  There  has  been  a  particular
         emphasis upon the intimate care given by the appellant which aunt J
         would not wish to have provided by a stranger. Further emphasis has
         been given to her cultural needs and that this has been carried out
         by the appellant in a practical way by providing familiar foods and
         also by conversing with her and communicating with her in  Tagalog.
         The most significant benefit provided by the appellant is that aunt
         J can live in her own home being cared for by a familiar and loving
         carer.

    117. Reference in the policy is made to whether private  care  has  been
         costed and assessed or  whether  voluntary  services/charities  can
         assist. Based on the unchallenged evidence of the medical condition
         of aunt J, in my judgement it is unlikely that a voluntary  service
         or a charity could assist in the type and nature of  care  that  is
         required. I accept the evidence given by Dr Patel that without  the
         care provided by the appellant, and the nature of  the  care  which
         she receives  and needs which is 24/7 care, the only alternative to
         this would be for her to live in a care home.

    118. In my judgement it is a relevant factor to take into  account  that
         most people prefer to live and receive care in their  own  home  as
         this can provide the lack of continuity and  consistency  of  their
         environment. As Dr Patel noted, "living in their own home  provides
         freedom to enjoy the comfort and familiar surroundings. Any move to
         a care home will unsettle and stabilise her. This might lead  to  a
         devastating blow to her". On the particular facts of this case, and
         in the particular circumstances of our current  times,  a  move  to
         such an environment would be likely to not only destabilise her but
         also inevitably increase the risk of infection from covid 19. There
         is also the possibility of the appellant being unable to visit aunt
         J and for separation to take place between them as a result of  the
         current pandemic. Whilst matters have improved  since  the  initial
         lockdown  in  2020  and  the  later  one  in  2021,  there   remain
         uncertainties for the future.

    119.  In  summary,  whilst  the  appellant's  ability  to  satisfy   the
         immigration rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal, it is capable of being a  weighty  factor  when  deciding
         whether such refusal is proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
         enforcing immigration control.  Thus  in  my  judgment  this  is  a
         weighty fact on the side of the respondent's side.

    120. Whilst aunt J may prefer to receive care from a  family  member,  I
         take into account that her wishes are not determinative. There  are
         likely to be a number  of  people  in  the  UK  who  require  care,
         including care for intimate aspects  of  their  personal  care  but
         receive care from the social services. That said, I accept that the
         care of the appellant is qualitatively different from the care that
         can be provided by alternative carers as this has been  established
         by the evidence of Dr Patel which has not been  challenged  by  the
         respondent. Thus  whilst  I  take  into  account  that  the  social
         services are obliged to provide  such  care  as  is  required,  the
         presence of the appellant in the same home is  able  to  assist  at
         times when a paid carer may not be able to do so.

    121. The evidence, which was not challenged, is that she  provides  care
         for Aunt J which not only extends to her  physical  well-being  but
         also her emotional well-being. There  is  no  evidence  before  the
         tribunal  that  the  type  of  physical  care  or  importantly  the
         emotional care undertaken by  the  appellant  could  reasonably  or
         practically be provided by the state. It is not a matter of  choice
         or of desire but in my judgement the evidence demonstrates that the
         care provided by the appellant for Aunt J is because  she  requires
         the physical and emotional care that the appellant can provide at a
         critical stage of her life.

    122. Whilst it  is  not  necessary  to  identify  any  "unique"  or  any
         "exceptional" factor (see Agyarko at [47], [60]), in  my  judgement
         the circumstances that relate to the appellant's and  the  care  of
         aunt J are compelling on  the  evidence  for  the  reasons  already
         outlined. In my judgement those circumstances are of such weight to
         demonstrate that when the interference with the appellant's  family
         and private life is  balanced  against  the  public  interest,  the
         consequences of removal are "unjustifiably harsh."

    123. I have concluded on the particular facts of this unusual case  that
         given the significant  adverse  consequences  for  the  appellant's
         relative identified in the unchallenged evidence of Dr Patel,  that
         the appellant has shown that if she were required to leave  the  UK
         this would have unduly harsh  consequences  for  aunt  J  and  that
         having undertaken the  necessary  balancing  exercise,  and  having
         weighed  up  all  the  competing  factors,  for  and  against   the
         appellant, I have come to the conclusion that  her  return  to  the
         Philippines would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
         Article 8 rights of aunt J and the appellant. I am  satisfied  that
         the removal of the appellant would be a disproportionate breach  of
         article 8 as at the date of the hearing on that factual basis.

    124. The type and amount of leave granted will entirely be a matter  for
         the respondent.

    125. For the reasons previously given, I am satisfied that the  decision
         of the FtTJ made an error on a point of law and the decision should
         be set aside. I remake the appeal: I allow the appeal on Article  8
         grounds.



Notice of Decision.

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and therefore the decision  of  the  FtT
         the decision should be set aside. I remake the appeal: I allow  the
         appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated     12 April 2021






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.
