
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14639/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decision under Rule 34 Without a     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 15th September 2020               |On 16th September 2020               |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                   N.A.B.
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of  Jamaica.  She  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 8 December 2002 and subsequently had leave to  remain  until
    31 May 2010. On 24 October 2018, she applied for leave to remain on the
    basis of the family and private life that she had established with  her
    British citizen partner. Her application was refused on 13 August  2019
    and she appealed against this decision.

2.   Her appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lemer  in  a
    decision promulgated on 5 February 2020.  The  Respondent  applied  for
    permission to appeal and this was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Davidge on 26 May 2020.

3.    On  3  July  2020  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane  made   further
    directions, having come to the view that in the  light  of  the  Corona
    Virus Pandemic, it would be appropriate to determine whether there  had
    been an error of law on the papers. On 9 July 2020,  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department filed and served written  submissions  in
    respond to these directions. On 17 August 2020,  the  Respondent  filed
    and served a Rule 24 Response. In  this  response,  she  accepted  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lemer had made a material error  of  law  and
    submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing.

4.   It was the Respondent's view that the appeal  could  be  determined  on
    the papers. The Respondent did not oppose  the  error  of  law  hearing
    being decided on the papers.

5.   I have read and taken into account the  detailed  submissions  made  by
    both parties and have taken into account the fact that the error of law
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lemer lead to  him  not  giving  full
    consideration to the Respondent's case outside the  Immigration  Rules.
    In these circumstances, I find that there are issues which will need to
    explored at an oral hearing but,  in the light of the findings of  fact
    that will need to be made, the appropriate venue for such a hearing  is
    the First-tier Tribunal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   As accepted by both parties, Frist-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lemer  made  a
    material error of law when he found that the Respondent had  a  partner
    for the purposes of Appendix FM to the  Immigration  Rules.  Therefore,
    the subsequent decision that the Respondent  met  the  requirements  of
    EX.1 of Appendix FM also amounted to an error  of  law  and  undermined
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lemer's assessment of proportionality for the
    purposes of Article 8(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

7.   Therefore, I find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lemer's  decision
    contained material errors of law.

8.   I have also maintained the  anonymity  order  due  to  the  information
    contained in this case about a child.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lemer's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to be heard de novo  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judges Lemer or Davidge.

Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 15 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

