
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14181/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2020                   | On 21 January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     a s
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant's wife and minor children from serious harm, having regard to
    the interests of justice and the principle of proportionality.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the remaking of the decision in this appeal following my  error
    of law decision, promulgated on 15 October 2019, in which I  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, having found that it contained
    material errors of law.

 2. Although it was the Secretary of State who brought the  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, now that I have set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the appeal is once more that of A S. Therefore, I  shall
    refer to him as the Appellant and to the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

 3. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan  born  in  1973,  had  originally
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  Respondent's  decision
    of 19 October 2017, refusing his human rights claim. That  claim  arose
    from deportation proceedings initiated by the Respondent following  the
    Appellant's conviction on 13 November 2015 for  causing  actual  bodily
    harm to his wife. He was sentenced to  a  period  of  2  years'  and  9
    months' imprisonment.  A  restraining  order  was  also  imposed.  This
    triggered the provisions of the UK Borders  Act  2007,  which  required
    Respondent to make a Deportation Order against the Appellant by  virtue
    of section 32(5).

 4. The essence of the Appellant's case in resisting deportation on Article
    8 ECHR grounds has always rested upon the assertion that he has  strong
    ties in the United Kingdom, established since his lawful arrival at the
    age of 6  years  in  1979,  and  has  no  connections  whatsoever  with
    Pakistan, whether in respect of familial, social, cultural,  religious,
    or practical matters. He has six children in this country, four of whom
    are adults. the Appellant has not had significant involvement with  the
    two minor children as they reside with his wife and  contact  has  been
    limited as result of the index offence and the restraining order.

 5. It is only right to note that whilst  the  particular  details  of  the
    offence are not strictly speaking relevant to the narrow issues  to  be
    decided in this appeal, the Appellant's assault on his wife was, on any
    view, very nasty indeed. Following an argument apparently arising  from
    the Appellant's belief that his wife was having  an  affair,  he  first
    physically  assaulted  her  and  then,  it  what  was  described  as  a
    calculated act,  threw  boiling  water  into  her  face,  resulting  in
    permanent scarring and lasting  psychological  effects.  The  Appellant
    denied the charge of actual bodily harm (a charge that the trial  judge
    thought underestimated the gravity of the offence) and was convicted by
    a jury. It is apparent from the sentencing remarks by Her Honour  Judge
    Lloyd that in addition to the appalling behaviour at the  time  of  the
    offence itself, the Appellant had conducted himself very poorly  during
    the trial as well.

The error of law decision and scope of this appeal

 6. My error of law decision is appended to this remake decision, below. In
    summary, the First-tier Tribunal's error  lay  in  failing  to  provide
    adequate reasons for the conclusion that the Appellant would face "very
    significant obstacles to  integration"  on  return  to  Pakistan,  with
    reference to  the  private  life  exception  contained  within  section
    117C(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended
    ("NIAA 2002") and para 399A of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  At
    [13]-[14] and [16] I said the following:

         "13.     The difficulties arise in respect of what  the  judge  has
         not said and done. There is no reference to  any  of  the  relevant
         case-law on the "very significant obstacles to  integration"  test,
         such  as  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,  Bossade   (ss.117A-D   -
         interrelationship  with  Rules)  [2015]  UKUT   00415   (IAC)   and
         Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances
         test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC). A failure to refer to relevant cases
         normally not, of itself, disclose a material error. However, may be
         indicative of substantive misdirection and/or  a  failure  to  take
         relevant matters into account.

         14.       In  this  case,  as  notwithstanding   the   absence   of
         references, the judge has in my view  failed  to  provide  adequate
         reasons for his conclusion that the Claimant's return  to  Pakistan
         would be "unduly harsh" (in other words, that they would  be  "very
         significant  obstacles  to  integration").  This  is  because   the
         following matters have not been expressly addressed:

          1) the fact that the Claimant has adult  family  members  in  the
             United Kingdom who would (or at least might) provide  relevant
             support to him on his return to Pakistan;

          2) that the Claimant speaks Urdu  and  Punjabi,  in  addition  to
             English;

          3) the fact of the Claimant's  ability  to  work  in  the  United
             Kingdom. Mr Bazini's point about the family business  was  not
             the subject of any finding by the judge;

          4) the issue of whether the Claimant has knowledge  of  Pakistani
             culture and/or society through his familial and/or social ties
             in this country.

         ...

         16.      In light of the above, I set aside the  judge's  decision.
         In  so  doing,  certain  animal  elements  of   it   shall   remain
         undisturbed. The conclusions on the first two limbs of exception  1
         under paragraph 399A of the Rules and section 117C(4) of  the  2002
         Act shall stand. So too will the finding of fact that the  Claimant
         has no extended family members in Pakistan."

 7. In respect of [16], and for the avoidance of any doubt, the judge  made
    the unchallenged finding that the Appellant had resided lawfully in the
    United Kingdom for most of his life (having entered this country at the
    age of 6 years and been granted Indefinite Leave to Remain on  25  June
    1979) and was socially and culturally integrated here. Thus, the  first
    tow limbs of the three-limb test set out in section 117C(4)  NIAA  2002
    and para 399A of the Rules are satisfied.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal had concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    benefit from the family life exception contained within section 117C(5)
    NIAA 2002 and paragraphs 399a and 399b of the Rules. That conclusion is
    not challenged and is no longer a live issue in this appeal.

 9. In light of the above, the legal issues are narrow and can be stated as
    follows:

         i. can the Appellant show that he  would  face  "very  significant
            obstacles" to reintegration into Pakistani society? If he  can,
            he satisfies all three limbs of the private life exception  and
            his appeal will fall to be allowed;

        ii. if he  cannot,  is  he  nonetheless  able  to  point  to  "very
            compelling circumstances over and  above"  those  described  in
            either of the  two  exceptions  contained  within  sub-sections
            117C(4) and (5) NIAA 2002 and para 399 and 399A  of  the  Rules
            (in other words, can he show that it would be  disproportionate
            to  deport  him   notwithstanding   the   very   great   weight
            attributable to the public interest)? If  he  can,  his  appeal
            must be allowed on this alternative basis. If  he  cannot,  his
            appeal must be dismissed.

10. In terms of the factual matrix now in play, a number  of  matters  have
    been accepted by the Respondent throughout,  whilst  others  have  been
    resolved in light of the First-tier Tribunal's decision and what I said
    in the error of law decision. The following facts are not in dispute:

         i. the Appellant has resided in the United Kingdom with Indefinite
            Leave to Remain since shortly after his arrival at the  age  of
            six in 1979;

        ii. the Appellant has no familial ties in Pakistan;

       iii. the Appellant has only made a  single  trip  back  to  Pakistan
            since arriving in  this  country,  that  being  at  some  point
            shortly after his marriage to his wife in 1992;

        iv. the Appellant has frequent contact with at least  four  of  his
            six children United Kingdom;

         v. the Appellant suffers from a mental  health  condition,  namely
            depression.

The evidence

The documentary evidence

11. I have had full  regard  to  the  documentary  evidence  contained  the
    Respondent's bundle, the Appellant's bundle produced for the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, and the Appellant's supplementary bundle produced for
    the resumed hearing. The supplementary bundle  was  provided  late  and
    without any  explanation  from  the  Appellant's  solicitors.  That  is
    unsatisfactory and I  informed  Mr  Bazini  that  I  expect  a  written
    explanation from JJ Law Chambers. In the event, Mr Avery did not object
    to this evidence being admitted.

12. The supplementary bundle contains an updated witness statement for  the
    Appellant, a psychiatric report by Consultant Psychiatrist  N  Pradhan,
    dated 24 December 2019, GP medical records, and  evidence  relating  to
    the Appellant's family's business in the United Kingdom.

13. Mr Bazini also provided a  number  of  Internet  articles  relating  to
    social and cultural practices within Pakistan, the Respondent's Country
    information Policy Note on healthcare provision in Pakistan, and recent
    FCO travel advice to British citizens.

The oral evidence

14. The Appellant attended and gave oral  evidence.  There  were  no  other
    witnesses. In light of the medical report, I indicated  at  the  outset
    that I would be treating the Appellant as a vulnerable  witness  within
    the meaning of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of  2010,  and
    with reference to AM (Afghanistan) [2018] 4 WLR 78 and  SB  (vulnerable
    adult: credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT 00398 (IAC). I have assessed  his
    evidence in this context. I am satisfied that the Appellant  understood
    the nature of the proceedings,  was  able  to  participate  fully,  and
    understood the questions put to him.

15. In examination-in-chief, the  Appellant  adopted  his  updated  witness
    statement. He gave further information about his work  history  in  the
    United Kingdom, stating that he had last worked for an employer some 25
    years ago. Since then his only work had  been  related  to  the  family
    business, where he currently undertook fairly  limited  driving  duties
    involving picking  items  up  and  delivering  them  to  the  shop.  He
    confirmed his ability to speak Urdu and  Punjabi,  although  he  stated
    that he had a clear English accent. I was told that  he  does  like  to
    drink alcohol, although not to excess. The Appellant explained that  he
    had never been religiously observant. His father used to attend  Friday
    prayers, but no  longer  did  so.  In  respect  of  relationships,  the
    Appellant stated that he did not wish to marry  again,  but  rather  to
    have "open relationships", as was the case with his current partner, R,
    whom he had been seeing for a relatively short period of time. This was
    described as a "friends with benefits" relationship.

16. The Appellant was then cross-examined. He stated that  he  lives  in  a
    property owned by his family and that they also own the shop. Appellant
    told me that he had been on Incapacity  Benefit  for  approximately  20
    years until it was stopped some time ago  following  a  review  by  the
    relevant department. The benefit had been awarded and continued on  the
    basis of poor  mental  health.  The  Appellant  had  been  on  relevant
    medication almost 25 years, and presently took Propranolol. He had been
    assessed by a psychiatrist in 1995. I was told  that  his  mother,  who
    lives next  door,  provided  a  lot  of  practical  assistance  to  the
    Appellant, including encouraging him to get out of bed,  and  providing
    food and emotional support.

17. On the subject of his relationship with his wife, the Appellant told me
    that they had met whilst she was living at a women's refuge.  They  had
    been in an  intimate  relationship  before  the  marriage.  During  the
    marriage she had undertaken all domestic  tasks  and  had  managed  the
    household money. The Appellant told me that he had  never  had  a  bank
    account. He also stated  that  neither  he  nor  his  wife  had  really
    associated with the Pakistani community in their home area. Most of his
    wife's friend had in fact been "white English".

18. In re-examination, the Appellant stated  that  his  wife's  family  had
    thought worse of her because of her relationship with him. His children
    said that they have no contact with their maternal grandmother.

The parties' submissions

19. Mr Avery relied on the reasons for refusal letter  and  submitted  that
    there  were  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to   the   Appellant's
    integration into Pakistani society. The Appellant's evidence should  be
    treated with caution. It was submitted that the Appellant had been well
    integrated into the Pakistani community in the United Kingdom and  this
    would stand him in good stead in respect of a return  to  Pakistan.  If
    indeed the Appellant drank alcohol and was not  religiously  observant,
    these would not constitute very significant  obstacles.  The  Appellant
    had shown himself able to work. The content of the medical  report  was
    not challenged, but Mr Avery submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  only
    taking medication in this country and could acquire that in Pakistan.

20. On the fall-back argument of "very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above", Mr Avery submitted that on any rational basis no such  features
    applied here.

21. Mr Bazini relied on the preserved findings from  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (see  above).  It  was  highly  unlikely  that  the
    Appellant's family in the United  Kingdom  would  be  able  to  provide
    meaningful support to him if he were in Pakistan, particularly in light
    of their relatively straitened financial circumstances. The Appellant's
    own work history was extremely limited. On what  was  said  to  be  the
    Appellant's own credible evidence, he was not well-integrated into  the
    Pakistani community in United Kingdom, nor had his  wife  been.  I  was
    referred to letters she had written to the Crown  Court  following  the
    Appellant's conviction in 2015. In addition, the Appellant's very  poor
    mental health was a significant factor. His overall  functioning  would
    be very limited. I was referred to pages 17-18 of  the  Country  Policy
    and Information Note, together with various pages within  the  articles
    on Pakistani society and culture. When placed  in  the  relevant  legal
    framework, the facts of this case disclosed "very significant obstacles
    to integration" or, alternatively, "very compelling circumstances  over
    and above".

The relevant legal framework

22. Although para 399A of the Rules has been referred to  throughout  these
    proceedings, it is section 117C NIAA 2002  which  provides  the  actual
    legislative framework for my consideration  in  this  case.  Therefore,
    hereafter I shall refer only to  the  2002  Act,  specifically  section
    117C(4)(c ), that being the sole live criterion within the private life
    exception. That provision states:

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) ...

             (b) ...

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

23. The meaning of the phrase "very significant obstacles"  was  originally
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon and  Others  (NIAA  2002
    Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT  00013  (IAC).  At
    [[37], the Upper Tribunal concluded that:

         "The other limb of the test, "very significant obstacles", erects a
         self-evidently elevated threshold, such that  mere  hardship,  mere
         difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval or  inconvenience,  even
         where multiplied, will generally be insufficient in  this  context.
         The philosophy and reasoning, with appropriate adjustments, of this
         Tribunal in its exposition of the sister test "unduly harsh" in  MK
         (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 at [46] apply."

24. This analysis was considered by the Court of Appeal in  Parveen  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 932. Having quoted the passage set  out  above,  Underhill  LJ
    made the following observations at [9]:

         "I have to say that I do not find that a very useful gloss  on  the
         words of the rule. It is fair enough  to  observe  that  the  words
         "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold, and I  have  no
         difficulty with the observation that the test will not  be  met  by
         "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I am  not  sure  that  saying
         that "mere" hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even if  multiplied,
         will not "generally" suffice adds anything of substance.  The  task
         of the Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is
         simply to assess the obstacles to integration  relied  on,  whether
         characterised as hardship or difficulty or anything  else,  and  to
         decide whether they regard them as "very significant"."

25. The approach to be taken in respect of "integration"  is  well-settled.
    At [14] of Kamara [2016] 4 WLR 152, the Court of Appeal held that:

         "14.      In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
         "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that  he  be
         deported, as set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a
         broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job  or
         to sustain life while living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
         appropriate to treat the statutory  language  as  subject  to  some
         gloss and it will usually be sufficient for  a  court  or  tribunal
         simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen  to
         use. The  idea  of  "integration"  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
         that other country is carried on and a capacity to  participate  in
         it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
         be able to operate on a day-today basis  in  that  society  and  to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family life."

26. In respect of the "very compelling circumstances over and above" issue,
    NA (Pakistan) [2017] 1 WLR 207 confirms that an individual who has  not
    been sentenced to at least 4 years imprisonment  can  rely  on  section
    117C(6) NIAA 2002 and, in so doing, can  seek  to  argue  that  factors
    arising under either of the two exceptions  are,  when  taken  together
    with  other  relevant  matters,  sufficient  to  meet  the  very   high
    threshold.

Findings of fact

27. My findings of fact are confined only to matters relevant to the fairly
    narrow issues in this appeal. I have course taken all the evidence into
    account, including that not specifically mentioned hereafter.

28. In respect of the Appellant's vulnerability, I find that this  has  not
    caused him material prejudice in presenting  his  evidence  to  me.  In
    fact, on a general level, I found  his  oral  evidence  to  be  candid,
    internally consistent, and broadly consistent with external sources. In
    addition, there was nothing inherently improbable  about  what  he  has
    said, either orally or in writing. It is right to say that I found  the
    oral evidence to be of real significance in reaching  my  findings  and
    conclusions in this appeal.

29. Turning to more specific matters, I find that the report of Dr  Pradhan
    is reliable in all respects. As mentioned earlier, there  has  been  no
    challenge to  this  evidence.  It  clearly  emanates  from  a  suitably
    qualified  expert.  Although  the  author  saw  a  number  of  relevant
    documents prior to writing the report, it appears as though he had  not
    seen the reasons for refusal letter. However, in all the  circumstances
    (including the absence of any challenge by  Mr  Avery),  this  omission
    does not materially undermine the weight attributable to the  evidence.
    I find that the history  given  by  the  Appellant  at  the  assessment
    interview accords well with what he has said elsewhere  concerning  his
    personal background, the relationship with his wife, his  long-standing
    mental health problems going back some 20 years, the index offence, and
    his current circumstances.

30. In respect of the mental health assessment itself, I place  significant
    weight on the author's view that there was nothing to suggest that  the
    Appellant was being untruthful or exaggerating his  symptoms.  I  place
    very significant weight on Dr Pradhan's diagnosis, and I find as a fact
    that the Appellant is, and has been for some  time,  suffering  from  a
    moderate depressive  episode.  I  also  find,  based  on  the  author's
    opinion, that the Appellant had begun suffering from a  panic  disorder
    in his 20s. Based on the expert opinion, and in light of  the  evidence
    as a whole, I find that the prognosis of the Appellant's mental  health
    condition is likely to  be  poor,  given  its  longevity,  his  current
    circumstances, and the high  likelihood  of  additional  stresses  been
    placed upon him if he were to be deported to Pakistan.

31. It is Dr Pradhan's opinion that were the Appellant to be separated from
    a "stable secure family base" in the United  Kingdom,  it  is  "likely"
    that  he  would  suffer  a  deterioration  of  his  mental  health  and
    experience a worsening of his depressive and anxiety symptoms.  I  find
    is a fact that the likelihood of such a deterioration  is  high,  given
    that the Appellant would indeed be separated from  the  family  support
    network in this country, and would be returning to a country which,  to
    all intents and purposes, would be  entirely  foreign  to  him  and  in
    respect of which he would have no familial or social support.

32. The GP  medical  records  contained  within  the  supplementary  bundle
    provide additional corroboration of Dr Pradhan's views and the evidence
    of the Appellant himself. The "Significant Past" contains references to
    chronic anxiety and personality disorders. The latter is linked to 1995
    and  is  consistent  with  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  saw  a
    psychiatrist at this time.

33. I find that as matters stand, the Appellant is only taking  Propranolol
    by way of medication. He is not receiving, for example, CBT.

34. I find that the Appellant did visit Pakistan on a single occasion, soon
    after his marriage  to  his  wife  in  1992.  There  is  no  reason  to
    disbelieve his account of events. I accept that the trip was  traumatic
    for the couple, as described in his first witness statement, his wife's
    letter, and as recorded in Dr Pradhan's report.

35. I find that the Appellant in fact has a very limited employment history
    in this country. I accept that his last job, aside from working for the
    family business, was over 20 years ago. That fits well enough with  his
    evidence (supported by the GP records)  that  he  has  a  long-standing
    mental health problem. It is also consistent with  his  claim  to  have
    been in receipt of what  used  to  be  called  Incapacity  Benefit  for
    approximately 20 years. It is more likely than not that  the  onset  of
    mental health problems in or around 1995 led to an inability to work. I
    am certainly not prepared  to  indulge  in  any  speculation  that  the
    incapacity to work was ever fortunately perpetuated. In fairness to  Mr
    Avery, no such suggestion has been put forward.

36. I find that the Appellant has been undertaking limited "work"  for  the
    family business. There has been no challenge to his claim that this has
    only involved driving to and from a wholesaler  in  order  to  pick  up
    items which have been listed for  him  by  his  sister  (who  runs  the
    business). It is clear to me that these tasks involve minimal input  by
    the Appellant and, contrary to Mr Avery's submission, do  not  indicate
    that any great responsibility has been placed  upon  the  Appellant  by
    family members.

37. In respect of that family  business,  the  accounts  contained  in  the
    supplementary bundle indicate very low net profit indeed. For the  year
    ending 5 April 2018, the figure amounted to only �7160. Bank statements
    for other members of the family confirm the  Appellant's  own  evidence
    that they are all seemingly living on limited  financial  resources.  I
    find that this is the case. In all the circumstances, I find that it is
    unlikely that the Appellant would be able  to  receive  meaningful  and
    stable financial assistance from his family in this country were he  to
    return to Pakistan.

38. Whilst treating the Appellant's evidence with a degree  of  caution,  I
    find that he has provided inaccurate picture  of  the  general  support
    given to him by other members of his family, in particular his  mother.
    Although it is the case that he undertakes a certain amount of work for
    the family business, his evidence that he suffers  from  insomnia,  low
    mood, and general lethargy, is  entirely  consistent  with  his  mental
    health condition.  It  is  plausible  that  his  mother  would  provide
    emotional and practical support to him on  a  day-to-day  basis.  I  am
    prepared to accept that she does encourage him to get out  of  bed,  to
    eat properly, and that she provides food for him.

39. A further aspect of the evidence which struck me as not only  credible,
    but indicative of the Appellant's overall ability to have  managed  his
    affairs on a fully independent basis, is his claim that  he  has  never
    had a bank account. I find this to be the case.

40. I find that the Appellant does speak Urdu and Punjabi. Given  his  time
    in this country and the age at which he  arrived  here,  it  is  highly
    likely that he does so with what may be described as an English accent.

41. This leads me to the question of the Appellant's integration  into  the
    Pakistani community in the United Kingdom. Mr Avery's position is  that
    there are close ties, and that these are relevant to  the  question  of
    the Appellant's circumstances on return to that country.  There  are  a
    number of aspects of the evidence before me which lead me to find  that
    there has in fact been little integration, when that term  is  seen  in
    its broader context.

42. First, I accept that the Appellant has provided  truthful  evidence  as
    regards the nature of his religious observance.  This  evidence,  which
    was not challenged by Mr Avery, satisfies me that he had never observed
    fasting within Ramadan,  has  not  celebrated  Eid,  has  not  attended
    mosque, and has  not  even  concern  himself  with  the  halal  dietary
    requirements. I also accept that at  least  one  of  his  siblings  was
    similarly disinclined to observe these  basic  aspects  of  the  Muslim
    faith.  It  is  also  likely  that  the  Appellant's  father  was   not
    particularly observant, given that he had permitted his son  to  remain
    detached from the faith. Whilst in no way suggesting that  all  Muslims
    are presumed to be fully observant, that faith is reasonably seen as  a
    relatively significant aspect of much of the Pakistani community in the
    United Kingdom.  In  turn,  this  particular  aspect  of  the  evidence
    supports the Appellant's contention that he has not  been  particularly
    integrated into that community.

43.  Second,  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  entered  into  an   intimate
    relationship with his wife prior to their  marriage.  His  evidence  on
    this was clear  and,  once  again,  went  unchallenged.  A  pre-marital
    relationship would, on the face of it,  run  contrary  to  the  general
    expectations of at least the more religiously observant elements of the
    Pakistani community, whether in this country or elsewhere.

44. Third, and importantly,  there  is  a  letter  from  Appellant's  wife,
    contained in the main  bundle,  dated  2  February  2017,  which  I  am
    satisfied accurately represented her view at the time (I  note  that  a
    similarly supportive letter had been written by her to the Crown  Court
    Judge in 2016). Amongst other matters, she states that she had  refused
    to enter into an arranged marriage, as had been demanded by her family.
    The letter indicates that she  has  no  family  support  at  all.  This
    indicates that her decision to marry the Appellant was seen as a slight
    on her family, and that this consequently led to  a  breakdown  of  the
    relationship between them  and  her.  It  is  also  of  note  that  the
    appellant met his wife whilst she was residing in a women's  refuge.  I
    infer from this that she had at  that  time  been  distanced,  for  one
    reason or another, from her own family and community.

45. Fourth, the Appellant has told me, in what I regard as credible  terms,
    that he likes to drink  alcohol  and  that  he  wishes  to  have  "open
    relationships" with women. I am satisfied that he is currently in  such
    a relationship.

46. Bringing the above together, there is a cumulative force  in  the  non-
    integration submission made by Mr Bazini. By contrast, I do not  accept
    Mr Avery's argument that  the  sentencing  remarks  indicate  that  the
    Appellant himself was  integrated  in  the  Pakistani  community  here.
    First, the wife's fear of the Appellant following the offence does  not
    of itself indicate that he was pursuing  a  "cultural  agenda",  as  it
    were. Second, the possible views and actions of other  members  of  the
    Pakistani community, including potentially those within the Appellant's
    family, do not necessarily lead to the conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    himself was acting from a similar platform.

Conclusions

47. I now turn to place the facts of this case within the applicable  legal
    framework.

48. As can be seen from the  case-law,  the  Appellant  must  meet  a  high
    threshold in respect of the first issue, namely whether there are "very
    significant obstacles" to his integration into Pakistani society.

49. Applying the high threshold  and  having  reached  a  broad  evaluative
    judgment on the particular facts of this  case,  I  conclude  that  the
    Appellant satisfies the test. My reasons for  this  conclusion  are  as
    follows.

50. I start with what may be considered the  most  obvious  factor  in  the
    Appellant's favour, namely his absence from Pakistan since the  age  of
    just 6 years old. This point encapsulates two aspects: first, that  the
    Appellant has no meaningful memory of having lived in  the  country  of
    his birth. In other words, there is no embedded "database"  upon  which
    he can draw; second, that he has been brought up, educated,  and  lived
    as an adult in the United Kingdom for the overwhelming majority of  his
    life. On the face of it, it is accurate to say that the Appellant is  a
    complete stranger to Pakistan.

51. I take into account  the  fact  of  the  Appellant's  single  visit  to
    Pakistan over 20 years ago. As I have found above, this was in no way a
    happy experience. On  the  Appellant's  account,  it  resulted  in  him
    setting himself against the prospect  of  ever  returning  there.  That
    subjective element is relevant to my overall assessment.

52. The Appellant has no family or other social network  in  Pakistan.  The
    consequence of this is that what might otherwise provide  a  protective
    or mitigating factor in respect of the very great  difficulties  likely
    to confront the Appellant upon a return, is absent.

53. On my findings, the Appellant's family in the United Kingdom be  unable
    to provide meaningful and sustainable financial assistance  to  him  in
    Pakistan.  Again,  a  factor  potentially  capable  of   assisting   in
    reintegration in one way or another, is absent

54. A further  potential  ameliorating  factor  might  be  an  individual's
    familiarity with the social and/or cultural and/or religious norms  and
    peculiarities of the society in question. In the present case,  I  have
    found  that  the  Appellant  has  not  been  well-integrated  into  the
    Pakistani community in the United Kingdom. In  many  respects,  he  has
    lived his life outside of what may be considered "normal" or "expected"
    parameters. With regards to the articles provided  by  Mr  Bazini,  the
    Appellant's relationship with his wife and  current  partner,  together
    with his non-observance of any significant aspects of the Muslim faith,
    would undoubtedly place him beyond the  position  of  an  "insider"  in
    Pakistan (certainly in respect of the great majority of the  population
    in that country). In short terms, this is  not  a  case  in  which  the
    returnee has already, to a greater  or  lesser  extent,  lived  a  life
    reflective of that which is the norm in the country of origin.

55. Whilst perhaps not of any great significance  seen  in  isolation,  the
    Appellant's like of alcohol and his wish to have  "open  relationships"
    simply reinforces the distance between him and the type of life that he
    would have to adapt to in Pakistan.

56. The Appellant is not a healthy individual. I have found that he suffers
    from an enduring mental health condition that  has  had  a  significant
    impact upon his day-to-day life in this country.  Over  the  course  of
    much of his life, this has led to an inability to work.  I  have  found
    that he needs emotional and practical support from  family  members.  I
    have found that the prognosis for him is poor and is likely to be  much
    worse upon return to Pakistan. This is for the  fairly  obvious  reason
    that such an occurrence would amount to a very significant stressor  in
    his life, particularly when combined with the absence  of  any  support
    network in that country. Thus, the difficulties I have set out  in  the
    preceding paragraphs are highly likely to be compounded by  the  mental
    health condition, and vice versa.

57. It is quite possible that the Appellant would  in  theory  be  able  to
    access medication in Pakistan, but  in  my  view  that  fact  does  not
    significantly detract from the cumulative force of  the  other  factors
    weighing in his favour. The  medication  he  has  been  taken  in  this
    country for  many,  many  years  has  not  prevented  very  significant
    functional impairment and there is  no  good  reason  to  suppose  that
    taking similar medication in Pakistan would have any greater benefit. I
    also bear in mind what is said in the Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note to the effect that mental health care provision in Pakistan is, to
    say the very least, extremely limited.

58. I have found that the Appellant has been able  to  continue  a  limited
    form of work behalf of the family business. I stress the word "limited"
    because in reality it has amounted to not much more than driving from A
    to B and picking up goods which have been listed for him in advance. He
    does not have what can properly be described as a good track record  of
    employment, nor has he acquired any readily transferable skills  whilst
    in the United Kingdom, aside perhaps from being able to  drive.  Having
    said that, I do take into  account  the  fact  that  unskilled,  manual
    labour may in principle be an option for the Appellant in Pakistan.

59. I have also  found  that  the  Appellant  has  had  relatively  limited
    experience in managing his own affairs,  particularly  in  relation  to
    financial matters. The lack of any bank account ever being held  is  an
    indication of this.

60. The Appellant does speak Urdu and Punjabi, and this linguistic  ability
    would no doubt be of assistance. He would  be  identifiable  as  coming
    from abroad, in light of what I have accepted is an accent, but this of
    itself would probably not cause any great difficulties.

61. These considerations, viewed cumulatively, disclose what I deem  to  be
    very significant obstacles, both on a subjective and  objective  basis,
    to the Appellant understanding how life  in  Pakistan  is  carried  on,
    having the appropriate capacity to participate in it such that he would
    have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted  in  that  society,  being
    able to establish within a reasonable time a variety  of  relationships
    (social and economic), and to the actuality of him considering  himself
    to be an  "insider"  and  for  others  to  perceive  and/or  treat  him
    similarly.

62. The Appellant therefore satisfies the  third  and  final  limb  of  the
    private life exception under section 117C(4) NIAA 2002. On this  basis,
    his appeal must be allowed.

63. In light of my conclusion on the exception, it is unnecessary to go  on
    and consider the  alternative  argument  of  whether  "very  compelling
    circumstances over and above" those described in the exceptions  exist.
    On the face of it, it is somewhat difficult to see how, in the  absence
    of  there  being  "very  significant  obstacles  to  integration",  the
    Appellant would be able to show sufficiently strong additional features
    in this case. The primary focus of the  evidence  and  submissions  has
    always been on the difficulties lying in the  path  of  return,  rather
    than, for example, particularly strong  relationships  with  the  adult
    children.

Anonymity

64. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. I maintained  this
    in respect of my error of law decision. This was on the basis that  the
    Appellant's case concerns minor children and, in respect of his wife, a
    victim of domestic violence. Although I have not provided  any  details
    of  these  individuals  in  my  error  of  law  and  remake  decisions,
    maintaining the anonymity direction is nonetheless appropriate  in  all
    the circumstances.

Postscript

65. As mentioned earlier in my decision, I had  asked  for  an  explanation
    from the Appellant's solicitors as to why the supplementary bundle  was
    served late. To their credit, a response was sent later on the  day  of
    the hearing and received by the Upper Tribunal  the  day  after.  I  am
    grateful to them for this. I accept what is said in the letter  by  way
    of explanation, particularly  in  relation  to  the  obtaining  of  the
    medical report from Dr Pradhan. The only further comment I  would  make
    is that where delays have occurred, representatives should  inform  the
    Upper Tribunal (and indeed the Respondent) to inform them  of  this  in
    advance of a hearing.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remake the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
Respondent's refusal of the human rights claim was unlawful under section  6
of the Human Rights Act 1998, with reference to Article 8 ECHR.

Signed      [pic]            Date: 16 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee  award  and  have  decided  to  maintain  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal  not  to  make  any  award  in  all  the
circumstances.

Signed      [pic]            Date: 16 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14181/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     a s
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant  (referred  to  as  the  Claimant  in  this  decision).  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by JJ Law Chambers



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For  ease  of  reference,  I  shall  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal as the Secretary of State and the
    Respondent as the Claimant.

 2. This is a challenge by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge G J Ferguson ("the judge"), promulgated on  9
    August 2019, in which he allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 19 October 2017,  refusing  his  human
    rights claim. That claim  in  response  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to make a deportation order against  the  Appellant  following
    his conviction for actual bodily harm  on  13  November  2015  and  the
    subsequent sentence of 2 years' and 9 months' imprisonment.

The judge's decision

 3. It was common ground that the Claimant, who was  born  in  March  1973,
    left his native Pakistan at the age of 6 and had resided in the  United
    Kingdom ever since. He had been granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
    1979. In light  of  the  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted that the Claimant had spent most of his life lawfully resident
    in  this  country  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  399A(a)  of   the
    Immigration  Rules  and  section   117C(4)(a)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.

 4. At paragraphs 26 and 27 of his  decision,  the  judge  found  that  the
    Claimant  was  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United
    Kingdom, with reference to paragraph 399A(b) of the Rules  and  section
    117C(4)(b) of the 2002 Act.

 5. The judge then considers the  issue  of  "very  significant  obstacles"
    under paragraph 399A(c) of the Rules and section 117C(4)(c) of the 2002
    Act. He makes a specific finding that the Claimant  did  not  have  any
    extended family members residing in Pakistan. The judge attaches weight
    to the fact that the Claimant's residence in the United Kingdom was, as
    at the date of hearing, was twice that required under other  provisions
    of  the  Rules  (presumably,  the   judge   had   in   mind   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii)). Also of importance was the fact that the Claimant  had
    left Pakistan at a young age, thereby, in the judge's view, not  having
    established any ties in  his  home  country  prior  to  departure.  The
    absence of ties to Pakistan, the age at departure, and  the  length  of
    time spent in the United Kingdom, combined to lead  the  judge  to  the
    conclusion that it would be "unduly harsh" for the Claimant to  return.
    The satisfaction of the exception provided for in paragraph 399A of the
    Rules and section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act  permitted  the  Claimant  to
    succeed in his appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds do not challenge  the  judge's  conclusion  on  social  and
    cultural integration in this country. Rather, they focus on  the  issue
    of "very significant obstacles". It is said that:

      1) the judge failed to apply the "very significant obstacles" test;

      2) the judge failed to give adequate reasons;

      3) that in any event a lack of family ties and experience of living in
         a country "do not amount to" very significant obstacles,  and  that
         the Claimant could not fall within exception 1 under the Rules  and
         section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on
    3 September 2019.

The hearing

 8. Ms Holmes relied on the grounds of appeal. In the first  instance,  she
    submitted that there was a difference  between  the  "very  significant
    obstacles" test and that of "unduly harsh": the former being  objective
    in nature, and the latter more subjective. If there  were  no  material
    difference, she submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account or provide reasons in respect  of  the  Claimant's  ability  to
    work, the supportive family he has  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  his
    linguistic abilities (ability to speak Punjabi and Urdu, in addition to
    English).

 9. Mr Bazini submitted that there was  not  a  great  deal  of  difference
    between the two tests and in the context of this  case  any  difference
    was without a material distinction. He submitted that  every  case  was
    fact-specific. Although the judge had not referred  to  relevant  case-
    law, as a matter of  substance  he  had  taken  relevant  matters  into
    account. He had been entitled to place real significance on the age  at
    which the Claimant left Pakistan and the time he has  resided  in  this
    country. The linguistic issue had been implicitly taken  into  account.
    It was speculative to suggest that the  Claimant  could  find  work  in
    Pakistan when he had only ever worked for a  family  business  in  this
    country. In all the circumstances, it was submitted  that  the  judge's
    decision was sustainable.

Decision on error of law

10. I conclude that the judge has materially erred in law.

11. When  drawing  considerations  together  at  paragraph  32,  the  judge
    concludes that it would be "unduly harsh" for the Claimant to return to
    Pakistan. The relevant test was of course  that  of  "very  significant
    obstacles to integration" under paragraph 399A(c) and section 117C(4)(c
    ) of the 2002 Act. It is, with respect, somewhat puzzling as to why the
    wrong terminology was used  at  this  stage.  However,  the  judge  had
    clearly set out the correct provisions earlier  in  his  decision  and,
    when he turned to consider the third element of exception 1  under  the
    Rules and the 2002 Act, he made express reference to "very  significant
    obstacles" (see paragraph 28). Furthermore, at least for  the  purposes
    of this appeal, it would  seem  as  though  there  is  little  material
    difference between the two tests. Both will often contain a combination
    of subjective and objective factors. In short, the judge's error is not
    material.

12. The judge was clearly entitled to take the Claimant's age when he  left
    Pakistan and the significant time spent living in  the  United  Kingdom
    into account when assessing whether the exception was made out.

13. The difficulties arise in respect of what the judge has  not  said  and
    done. There is no reference to any of  the  relevant  case-law  on  the
    "very significant obstacles to integration" test, such as Kamara [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813, Bossade (ss.117A-D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015]
    UKUT 00415 (IAC) and  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -
    compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC).  A  failure  to
    refer to relevant cases normally not, of itself,  disclose  a  material
    error. However, may be indicative of substantive misdirection and/or  a
    failure to take relevant matters into account.

14. In this case, as notwithstanding the absence of references,  the  judge
    has in my view failed to provide adequate reasons  for  his  conclusion
    that the Claimant's return to Pakistan  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  (in
    other  words,  that  they  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration"). This is because the  following  matters  have  not  been
    expressly addressed:

      1) the fact that the Claimant has adult family members in  the  United
         Kingdom who would (or at least might) provide relevant  support  to
         him on his return to Pakistan;

      2) that the Claimant speaks Urdu and Punjabi, in addition to English;

      3) the fact of the Claimant's ability to work in the  United  Kingdom.
         Mr Bazini's point about the family business was not the subject  of
         any finding by the judge;

      4) the issue of  whether  the  Claimant  has  knowledge  of  Pakistani
         culture and/or society through his familial and/or social  ties  in
         this country.

15. To the extent that Mr Bazini suggests that none of these matters  would
    make any difference to the outcome because the absence of any  ties  to
    Pakistan leads to one rational conclusion only, I disagree.  Given  the
    high threshold for showing "very significant obstacles"  and  the  need
    for a broad evaluative judgment on the question of "integration", these
    matters could have a material bearing on this case. Similarly,  to  the
    extent that the Secretary of State raises a perversity challenge, it is
    misconceived. It cannot properly be said that on no legitimate view  of
    the Claimant's circumstances as a whole (including those not  expressly
    dealt with by the judge) could he succeed.

16. In light of the above, I set aside the judge's decision. In  so  doing,
    certain animal elements of it shall remain undisturbed. The conclusions
    on the first two limbs of exception 1 under paragraph 399A of the Rules
    and section 117C(4) of the 2002  Act  shall  stand.  So  too  will  the
    finding of fact that the Claimant has no  extended  family  members  in
    Pakistan.

Disposal

17. I consider it appropriate to retain this matter in the  Upper  Tribunal
    and listed for a resumed hearing before myself in due course.  At  that
    hearing, the sole focus shall be the third limb of  exception  1  under
    paragraph 399A of the Rules and section 117C(4) of the 2002  Act.  Oral
    evidence on relevant issues may be permitted, subject to the  provision
    of an updated witness statement from the Claimant.

Anonymity

18. The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order  because  of  the
    existence of minor children. Although  these  children  have  not  been
    referred to in my decision, in all the circumstances it is  appropriate
    to continue the order, pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in due course.



Directions to the parties

      1) The Claimant shall file and serve any updated evidence relied on no
         later than 14 days before the resumed hearing;

      2) Oral evidence will only be permitted if the  evidence  referred  to
         above includes an updated witness statement from the Claimant;

      3) No interpreter  shall  be  booked  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  unless
         otherwise advised by the Claimant;

      4) The Secretary of State shall file and serve any additional evidence
         relied on no later than 10 days before the resumed hearing;


Signed      [pic]            Date: 14 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
