
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14539/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Parliament House, Edinburgh |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 June 2019                      |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     YD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Katani, Katani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

 1. The appellant, a citizen of China born on 6 April 2007, appeals against
    the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle  who,  following  a
    hearing in Glasgow on 9 November 2017, dismissed the appellant's appeal
    against the respondent's refusal to grant her entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom, in order to join her mother  (the  sponsor),  a  person
    present and settled in this country.   The  judge's  decision  recorded
    that  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied   the   sponsor   had   sole
    responsibility for the appellant; or  that  adequate  arrangements  had
    been made for the appellant in the United Kingdom; or  that  there  was
    adequate  evidence  of   suitable   provision   for   the   appellant's
    accommodation.  The judge concluded that the appellant had  not  shown,
    on balance, that she met the requirements of the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules (paragraph 297 of  HC  395)  and  that  she  had  not  shown  the
    respondent's decision would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the 1950 Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms.

 2. Paragraph 5 of the judge's decision  describes  what  happened  at  the
    hearing:-

         5.(a)    The respondent was represented  by  Mr  A  Govan,  a  Home
             Office Presenting Officer.   When  this  case  called  in  the
             morning,  the  sponsor  was  present  and  the  appellant  was
             represented by [A] of Katani & Co, solicitors.   [A]  made  an
             application to adjourn.  No steps have been taken  to  prepare
             for this hearing.  [A]  conceded  that  the  sponsor  received
             notice of the hearing in August 2017, but  told  me  that  the
             sponsor then instructed solicitors in Portsmouth, despite  the
             fact that she lives in Aberdeenshire.  [A] told me  that  last
             week the appellant was told by the English  agents  that  they
             cannot appear before the tribunal in  Glasgow.   On  Friday  3
             November the  sponsor  contacted  Katani  &  Co,  and  at  6pm
             yesterday [A] met the sponsor for the first time.

         (b)  The application to adjourn was made in identical terms to  the
             application to adjourn made in writing  on  7  November  2017,
             which was refused on 8 November 2017.   No  new  argument  was
             advanced.  I refuse the application to adjourn  because  there
             has been adequate time to prepare.  The decision in this  case
             is dated 10 May 2016.  The notice of appeal was lodged by  the
             sponsor on 6 June 2016.  The notice of hearing was  posted  to
             the sponsor who did not have a representative on 30 May  2017.
             There is nothing  on  the  tribunal's  file  to  show  that  a
             representative has been instructed prior to the involvement of
             Katani & Co this week.

         (c)  I put the case to the end of the list to allow the sponsor and
             her solicitor time to prepare a witness statement.   The  case
             called again  at  2:30pm.   [A]  renewed  his  application  to
             adjourn, & a witness statement for the sponsor  was  tendered.
             [A] told me that he had many documents (there appeared  to  be
             hundreds of documents on his desk) which he wanted  to  tender
             as if they were in a bundle.  What [A] had was  not  a  bundle
             there was no index, the documents were  not  attached  to  one
             another, nor were they paginated.  The Home Office  presenting
             officer had not seen the documents.  I refused the application
             to adjourn and I refused  to  accept  the  documents  that  he
             wanted to tender as a bundle.

         (d)  [A] then withdrew from acting, & the  sponsor  indicated  that
             she was leaving with [A].  Before the sponsor left, I was able
             to tell her that I will  determine  the  case  on  the  papers
             before me."

 3. The judge made the following findings of fact:-

         "10.(a)  The  appellant  is  the  daughter  of  the  sponsor.   The
                appellant's parents divorced in 2007, when she was only five
                months old. The appellant's mother (the sponsor) was granted
                custody of the appellant.  Her father  was  ordered  to  pay
                child maintenance.  There has been no  contact  between  the
                appellant and her father since 2007.

               (b)  The  appellant  has  always  lived  with  her   maternal
                grandparents.  In  July  2010  her  mother  moved  into  the
                property and stayed with the  appellant  and  the  sponsor's
                parents until August 2010, when the sponsor decided to  come
                to the UK.  The sponsor has lived in the UK since then.  She
                works and has never relied on benefits.   The  sponsor  owns
                the property that she lives in.  There is a  school  nearby,
                and the sponsor has made enquiries about a place  there  for
                the appellant.

              (c) The arrangements for the appellant's day-to-day  care  are
                made by her maternal grandparents.  Since coming to the  UK,
                the sponsor has sent money to her grandparents to contribute
                to  the  appellant's  maintenance  and  accommodation.   The
                appellant is a native Chinese speaker.  She is only 10 years
                old.  She attends school in China.  She is well provided for
                by her grandparents.

              (d) The sponsor and the appellant are in regular contact.  The
                sponsor returns to China from time  to  time  to  visit  the
                appellant.  The sponsor and the  appellant  are  in  regular
                internet contact.  The  sponsor  discusses  the  appellant's
                welfare with the sponsor's parents and joins  with  them  in
                making decisions for the appellant."

 4. Having made those factual findings, the  judge  reached  the  following
    conclusions regarding the issue of whether the appellant had shown that
    she met the requirements of the Immigration Rules:-

         "11.(a)  In R v IAT ex parte Ramos 1989 Imm AR  148  the  Court  of
                Appeal said that the phrase "sole responsibility was not  to
                be construed literally because the situation  presupposes  a
                child  and  parent  living  in  the   different   countries.
                Evidence to show financial support and  continuing  interest
                and affection may be enough".  In TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):
                "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 the Tribunal
                said that "Sole responsibility" is a factual  matter  to  be
                decided upon all the evidence.   The  test  is  whether  the
                parent has continuing control and direction over the child's
                upbringing, including making all the important decisions  in
                the child's life.

            (b)   The appellant cannot succeed under the immigration rules.
                 On the facts as I find them to be  the  appellant's  mother
                has not had sole responsibility for the appellant.   In  the
                penultimate paragraph of her witness statement  the  sponsor
                says

                  My parents helped me when I was  not  able  to  raise  her
                  alone.  And now, I tried my best to  prepared  everything.
                  It's the time to let my parents rest and let  my  daughter
                  has a real mum.

         The  sponsor  candidly  admits  that  she  does   not   have   sole
         responsibility for the appellant.  The sponsor is  clearly  looking
         to the future and understandably wants to have  her  daughter  with
         her, but that is not the test.  It is to the sponsor's credit  that
         she acknowledges the significant contribution her parents have made
         by looking after the appellant.

            (c)    There  is  a  dearth  of  evidence  of  maintenance  and
                accommodation, so that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  cannot
                discharge the burden of proving that all of the requirements
                of paragraph 297 of the immigration rules are met.   Neither
                compelling nor compassionate circumstances are pled.  On the
                limited evidence placed before me, the appellant cannot meet
                the requirements of paragraph 297 of the immigration rules."

 5. Finally, the judge considered the appellant's position by reference  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The judge's findings on  this  matter  were  as
    follows:-

         "12. In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 it was  made  clear
             that (even in a deport case) the  Rules  are  not  a  complete
             code.   Lord  Reed  at  paragraphs  47  to  50  endorsed   the
             structured approach to proportionality (to be found in Razgar)
             and said "what  has  now  become  the  established  method  of
             analysis can therefore continue to be followed ..."

         13.  I have to determine the following separate questions:

             (i)  Does family life, private life,  home  or  correspondence
                  exist within the meaning of Article 8

             (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been  interfered
                  with

             (iii)    If so, was the interference in  accordance  with  the
                  law

             (iv) If so, was the interference in  pursuit  of  one  of  the
                  legitimate aims set out in Article 8(2); and

             (v)  If so, is the interference proportionate to  the  pursuit
                  of the legitimate aim?

         14.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that immigration control
             is in the public interest.  In AM (S117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
             260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that an appellant  can  obtain  no
             positive right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B
             (2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English,  or
             the strength of his financial resources.  In Forman  (ss117A-C
             considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) it was held  that  the
             public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by
             the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article
             8 ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state  or
             is self-sufficient or is likely  to  remain  so  indefinitely.
             The significance of these factors is that where they  are  not
             present the public interest is fortified.

         15.  I am mindful of Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009, and the cases of ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
             [2011] UKSC 4.  I remind myself of the cases  of  Azimi-Moayed
             and others (decisions  affecting  children:  onward  appeals),
             [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW [2015] CSIH 36.

         16.  Family life exists because  the  appellant  is  the  sponsor's
             daughter, and it is clear from the evidence that  the  sponsor
             has contributed to the appellant's welfare and upbringing.  It
             is also clear from the evidence that the sponsor has regularly
             visited the appellant.

         17.  The respondent's decision is not a disproportionate breach  of
             the right to respect for family life because family  life  has
             been pursued between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  at  a
             distance as a matter of choice.  The component  parts  of  the
             family  life  enjoyed  consists  of  the  sponsor's  financial
             contribution, her  enduring  interest  in  the  appellant  and
             regular visits to the appellant in China.  That is the  family
             life  that  was  established  by  choice.   The   respondent's
             decision does nothing to  interrupt  or  interfere  with  that
             established family life.

         18.  In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170 Arden LJ said  that  it  is
             not essential for members of the same family to be in the same
             country for family life to exist albeit that Arden LJ  thought
             that it would "probably be exceptional"  for  family  life  to
             exist in such  circumstances.   In  SM  and  Others  (Somalia)
             [2015] EWCA Civ 223 Bean LJ said it was far  from  clear  that
             the refusal of entry clearance to  the  family  reunion  child
             appellants constituted serious interference with  family  life
             at all.

         19.  Even if family life within the meaning of  article  8  of  the
             1950 Convention exists, the respondent's  decision  is  not  a
             disproportionate breach of the right  to  respect  for  family
             life, because it does not  prevent  enjoyment  of  the  chosen
             pattern of family life.

         20.   The  respondent's  decision  is  made  in  the  interest   of
             preserving fair and effective immigration control.  In so  far
             as it might be argued that the decision is  a  breach  of  the
             appellant's article 8 rights, it cannot be a  disproportionate
             breach because it allows the respondent to pursue a legitimate
             aim  without  detracting  from  the  manner   in   which   the
             appellant's  family  life  has  been  pursued  throughout  her
             childhood.  The decision does not separate  the  sponsor  from
             the appellant.  That separation was the  result  of  a  choice
             made by the sponsor several years ago."

 6. At paragraph 21, the judge made the following observations:-

         "21. It is clear from what was said on the  sponsor's  behalf  that
             the  sponsor  has  now  gathered  a  significant   amount   of
             documentary evidence.  It is a  shame  that  that  documentary
             evidence was not exhibited to the respondent well  in  advance
             of the date of this hearing.  This is a sad case where I  have
             no doubt that the sponsor has the appellant's  best  interests
             at heart, but there was no proper engagement with the tribunal
             process.  It may be that the appellant and sponsor  will  want
             to consider submitting  a  fresh  application  exhibiting  the
             documentary evidence the sponsor now has."

B. The challenges to the judge's decision

 7. On behalf of the appellant, Katani  &  Co  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds contained the following:-

         "The appeal was lodged by the appellants mother (the sponsor),  who
         then instructed a firm of immigration solicitors in Southampton  to
         prepare the appeal on behalf of  her  daughter.   These  solicitors
         initially accepted instructions, but then advised  the  sponsor  on
         3rd November 2017 that they were unable to appear at the hearing in
         Glasgow and withdrew from  acting.   The  sponsor  then  instructed
         present agents on 7th November 2017, two days prior to the hearing,
         who sought an adjournment on the basis that agent's had  only  just
         received instructions, and required  time  to  peruse  and  collate
         extensive evidence the sponsor sought to lodge  with  the  Tribunal
         prior to the appeal.  On the evening before the hearing the sponsor
         produced over 600  pages  of  original  documents  they  wished  to
         intimate to the respondent and lodge for the hearing.  On  the  day
         of the hearing the Tribunal refused a further motion to the adjourn
         the hearing to allow agents time to  prepare  and  to  marshal  the
         papers and collate them into bundles, and  also  refused  to  admit
         into evidence the original documentary evidence the sponsor  sought
         to produce.  A hand-written letter from the sponsor  was  the  only
         document  accepted  into  evidence  by  the  Tribunal,  and  agents
         withdrew from acting.  The Tribunal proceeded to  hear  the  appeal
         'on the papers'.

         Grounds of Appeal

         1.   The Tribunal materially  erred  in  refusing  to  adjourn  the
             appeal hearing.  (expand legal error) [sic]

         2.   The Tribunal  materially  erred  in  refusing  to  accept  the
             appellant's bundle of documents into  evidence  (expand  legal
             error) [sic]

         3.   The Tribunal materially erred in finding  that  the  appellant
             cannot succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.   (expand  legal
             error) [sic]".

 8. As can be seen, the grounds are seriously problematic. They seem to  be
    no more than a working draft, unless the intention really was  for  the
    recipient of the grounds to make up the missing reasons for the alleged
    legal errors. At all events, First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish refused
    permission on 12 June 2018.  As will become relevant  later,  that  was
    some six months after the grounds had been submitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal by Katani & Co.

 9. Judge Frankish concluded that no arguable error arose from the  judge's
    refusal of the adjournment application or from his refusal to admit "an
    unpaginated, unindexed and unconsidered box of hundreds of pages ... of
    documents as a bundle".  On the evidence before the judge,  the  latter
    did not arguably err in law, according to Judge  Frankish,  in  finding
    that  the  appellant  had  not  shown  that  the   sponsor   had   sole
    responsibility or that the respondent's refusal constituted a breach of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. On 27 June 2018, Katani & Co submitted, on behalf of the appellant,  an
    application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal.  Again,  it
    was asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    refusing to adjourn.  Reference  was  again  made  to  a  "hand-written
    letter from the sponsor" as  being  the  only  document  accepted  into
    evidence by the judge.  The description  of  the  statement  as  "hand-
    written" is problematic, given that page 90 of the "second inventory of
    productions" to which  we  shall  return  shortly,  is  a  type-written
    document, signed by the sponsor and dated 9 November  2017.   The  fact
    that this text was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge is  put  beyond
    doubt by the fact that the extract quoted by  the  judge  in  paragraph
    11(b) of his decision features verbatim in the statement.

11. As well as complaining  about  the  failure  to  adjourn,  the  grounds
    submitted to the Upper Tribunal contended, again, that the judge  erred
    in failing to accept the appellant's bundle of documents into evidence.
     As to this, the ground said:-

         "The evidence of the appellant's sponsor sought to rely on  at  the
         hearing have (sic) now been collated into bundles and  lodged  with
         this application for permission to appeal.  In refusing to consider
         this evidence the Tribunal have arguably affected one parties (sic)
         right to a fair hearing."

12. The grounds went on to say that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred
    in finding that the appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Although noting what the judge had quoted  from  the  sponsor's
    statement in his decision, the grounds asserted that "this is not  what
    the witness statement says.  It says that "my parents helped me when  I
    was not able to raise her alone"".

13. Having asserted that sole responsibility was a  factual  matter  to  be
    decided on all the evidence, the grounds submitted that the sponsor

         "has produced a  large  amount  of  evidence  (which  the  Tribunal
         refused  to   consider)   which   clearly   shows   the   sponsor's
         communications with the appellant's teachers and her engagement  in
         the  decision-making  process  relating  to  the   child's   extra-
         curricular activities.  She has  produced  evidence  of  continuing
         control and direction over the child's life  with  the  appellant's
         grandparents providing very much a care-taker/supportive role.  Had
         the Tribunal allowed this evidence to be  lodged,  and  then  taken
         into consideration, the appellant had real prospects of  succeeding
         under the Immigration Rules".

14. Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman granted permission to appeal on 13 August
    2018.  He noted that the appeal "was on human rights grounds only,  not
    in terms of the Immigration Rules, but if there was an  error  on  that
    issue, it might be material".  However, having noted the  challenge  to
    the refusal to adjourn, Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman observed that "if
    it was right not to adjourn, it is very doubtful whether there  was  an
    error of law or procedural impropriety in declining to admit a mass  of
    disorganised documents into evidence at the last moment".

15. We have already referred to the second inventory of productions,  which
    runs to 600 pages.  Both this and the first inventory  of  productions,
    running to 173 pages, were sent to the Upper Tribunal by  Katani  &  Co
    under cover of a letter dated 13 December 2017.

16. At paragraph 6 of his decision, Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman said:-

         "6.  Even as now tendered, in  support  of  this  application,  the
             documents are in two inventories of 173 and 600  pages,  loose
             leaf and not attached together, vaguely indexed, with no guide
             to how they are to be made comprehensively relevant."

17. His grant of permission ended as follows:-

         "7.  The appellant's case needs to become much better focused if it
             is to have any chance of eventual success."

C. Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

18. On 5 October 2018, the Upper Tribunal sent directions to  the  parties,
    consequent upon the grant of permission to appeal.  Direction  4  reads
    as follows:-

         "4.  There is a presumption that, in  the  event  of  the  Tribunal
             deciding that the decision of the FtT is to be  set  aside  as
             erroneous in law, the re-making  of  the  decision  will  take
             place at the same hearing.  The fresh decision  will  normally
             be based on the  evidence  before  the  FtT  and  any  further
             evidence admitted ... together with  the  parties'  arguments.
             The parties must be prepared accordingly in every case."

19. The Upper Tribunal hearing took place  on  24  June  2019,  over  eight
    months after the sending of the Upper  Tribunal's  directions.   On  20
    June 2019, Katani & Co had, under cover of a letter of that date,  sent
    to the Upper Tribunal what they described as  a  "second  inventory  of
    productions" in connection with the  hearing.   This  inventory,  which
    runs to 39 pages, included an undated witness statement of the sponsor.
     Paragraphs 2 to 9 of this statement described  the  inter-relationship
    between the sponsor,  the  appellant  and  the  latter's  grandparents.
    Amongst  other  things,  the  sponsor  said   that   she   took   "full
    responsibility for the decisions in my daughter's life  from  what  she
    eats to what school she attends" and that she had "a massive say in the
    upbringing of  her.   My  parents  take  my  opinion  seriously  and  I
    stipulate when  bedtime  is  and  what  routine  she  has".   She  also
    described herself as being "the sole carer for my daughter.  I go  back
    to China regularly to visit once a year for a full month".

20. Beginning at paragraph 10, the sponsor's witness statement  dealt  with
    the  circumstances  surrounding  the  hearing  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  The sponsor said that after receiving  the  refusal  letter,
    she went to "an immigration interpreter/paralegal"  and  asked  her  to
    find someone to do the appeal for  her.   We  are  not  told  when  the
    sponsor received the refusal but her notice of appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal is dated 6 June 2016.

21.   The   appellant's   statement   continued   by   saying   that    the
    interpreter/paralegal passed her file to "a girl in London",  whom  the
    appellant thought was a paralegal, and that this individual  was  asked
    to prepare "everything for me".

22. After the sponsor received the hearing date  for  the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, she asked the individual if  she  had  arranged  a
    solicitor to represent the sponsor in court.  The sponsor was told that
    at this stage it was too early.   That  was  three  months  before  the
    hearing.  In this regard, we note from the  file  that  the  notice  of
    hearing was sent to the sponsor at her address in Scotland  on  30  May
    2017, which was over five months before the hearing..

23. About two weeks before the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the sponsor was
    given a phone number for "a solicitor but she never gave me the  name".
    The sponsor called the number and found out that the lawyer  was  named
    DP.  We have redacted his name but the statement gives it in full.   DP
    apparently asked the appellant for all the documents in her case.   The
    sponsor sent these by email.

24. The sponsor was then contacted by "the solicitor"  who  said  that  "he
    cannot do my hearing because it is in Scotland and he also had  a  case
    on the same day in England".  The sponsor asked "if he  knew  any  good
    lawyers that he could refer me to in Scotland.   He  provided  me  with
    Katani & Co.  I called Katani & Co and they got me an appointment  with
    a solicitor".

25. The sponsor said that the appointment with A of Katani & Co  "was  made
    one day before the hearing" and that as a result A "had very little, if
    any time to look at my documents".  However, by the time they  went  to
    the hearing, A "had printed off all of my documents but had not  looked
    at them as he had not had enough time because I only saw him at 6pm the
    night before".

26. The statement ends by stating that A tried to ask  for  an  adjournment
    but it was rejected.  The statement is  said  to  have  been  given  in
    Glasgow on 12 June 2019 with the assistance of a Mandarin  interpreter.
    It had been read back to and approved by the sponsor.

27. We have referred to the "second" inventory of productions, sent  on  20
    June 2019.  On 14 June 2019, Katani & Co had sent what  they  described
    in the covering letter  as  "first  inventory  of  productions".   This
    comprised caselaw and an extract from the  Presidential  Guidance  Note
    No. 1 of 2014  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber.

28. Mr Katani made submissions to us on behalf of the appellant.   It  soon
    became apparent that Mr Katani intended only to seek  to  persuade  the
    Upper Tribunal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  been  wrong  to
    proceed as he did and that, accordingly, his  decision  should  be  set
    aside and the  matter  remitted  in  its  entirety  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr Katani was, however, entirely unable to explain  why,  in
    the period of over eighteen months since the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, no attempt had been made to contact DP, in  order  to
    ask for confirmation that he had behaved as alleged,  and  if  so  what
    explanation he had for that; or any attempt made to contact  the  other
    individuals concerned with  assisting  the  appellant  with  her  case.
    Instead, Mr Katani made the remarkable assertion that the sponsor was a
    "victim" of what had happened and should therefore be  treated  in  the
    same way "as a victim of assault" would be.

29. Mr Katani said that he did not know  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    sponsor had instructed his firm.  The solicitor A, was no  longer  with
    Katani & Co.  Mr Katani nevertheless asserted that, in  the  run-up  to
    the hearing, the sponsor was doing everything that she needed to do. Mr
    Katani said that the first meeting with A and the sponsor had  been  on
    6 November 2017.

30. The Upper Tribunal asked Mr Katani  what  documents  in  the  600  page
    inventory of  productions,  he  was  relying  upon  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant,  in  order  to  show  that  the   sponsor   had   had   sole
    responsibility.  Mr Katani responded, even more remarkably, that he did
    not have this inventory.  He reiterated that  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  been  unfair  and  that   we   should
    accordingly remit the matter for a full hearing.

31. The Tribunal drew the attention of Mr Katani  to  paragraph  4  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's directions, as described earlier.  It appeared that Mr
    Katani could not find these amongst the papers he had at the hearing.

32. We asked why, if Mr Katani no  longer  had  a  copy  of  the  600  page
    inventory, he  had  not  asked  the  Tribunal  for  its  assistance  in
    obtaining one from it.  We were concerned that,  as  principal  of  the
    firm, Mr Katani could have no knowledge of  its  contents.   Mr Katani
    responded by saying that he did not know when A had  left  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and therefore did not know  "which  bits
    were taken out by the judge".  The only safe way of proceeding  was  to
    "start from scratch".

33. The Upper Tribunal pointed out to Mr Katani that the  judge's  decision
    recorded that the sponsor had left the hearing with A.  There was  also
    nothing in the sponsor's statement made on 12 June 2019 to suggest that
    she remained behind after A had left.

34. Mr Katani said that the 600 page  bundle  might,  in  fact,  have  been
    produced in England.  It was possible that his  firm  had  not  put  it
    forward.

35. The Upper Tribunal was puzzled by this suggestion of Mr Katani.  It was
    pointed out that Katani & Co would, presumably, have records, including
    whether they had charged the sponsor for producing the inventory.

36. Mr Katani responded that, with almost 100 percent certainty, the bundle
    would not have been produced by his firm.

37. The Upper Tribunal  noted  that,  at  paragraph  17  of  the  sponsor's
    statement of 12 June 2019, she had stated that A "printed off all of my
    documents but had not looked at them".  Mr Katani responded  that  that
    was his firm's policy.  His firm would not act  for  a  client  at  the
    hearing if they could not prepare the case for that person properly.

38. The Upper Tribunal pointed out that the judge had taken the appellant's
    witness statement of 9 November 2017 into evidence.  The Upper Tribunal
    asked Mr Katani if a copy of this had been kept by his firm.  Mr Katani
    responded that he did not know.  A had  been  suspended  by  Mr  Katani
    because of his record keeping and shortly after that  he  had  resigned
    from Katani & Co.

39. The Upper Tribunal suggested to Mr Katani that he was seeking to  place
    complaints about the conduct of A on the shoulders  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Mr Katani said that when his firm took over the matter
    at the last minute the firm's policy was to ask for an adjournment  and
    withdraw if they did not get it on  behalf  of  their  client.  In  the
    present case the judge had proceeded notwithstanding  that  the  issues
    had not been capable of being properly decided on the evidence.   There
    had been much caselaw on the question of sole responsibility.  It  was,
    accordingly, impossible in the circumstances to expect a solicitor  "to
    perform miracles".

40. Asked why A could not have obtained a statement from the appellant when
    she came to see him on 6 November 2017, Mr Katani said  that  this  was
    "just an initial meeting" and that she had had to go back to work.   He
    reiterated that it was his firm's  policy  that,  in  a  case  of  late
    instruction, Katani & Co would ask for an adjournment and then withdraw
    if they did not get it.  Out of 100 or so cases, Mr Katani  said  that
    the present case was the only one where there had  been  a  refusal  to
    adjourn.  Numerous other judges  behaved  in  "a  completely  different
    manner" from that of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the present case.



41. Mr Katani said that he was unaware there had been any  attendance  note
    kept at the meeting between A and the sponsor on 6 November  2017.   He
    was unable to tell us whether a client care letter had been  issued  by
    Katani & Co to the sponsor.  He  reiterated  that  it  was  the  firm's
    policy that if instructions were "too  late"  they  would  ask  for  an
    adjournment.

42. Mr Katani told the Upper Tribunal that he had informed the sponsor that
    the appellant could make a fresh application for entry  clearance.   It
    was put to Mr Katani that, given the lapse of  time,  that  would  have
    been an appropriate course of action on the part of the sponsor.

43. Mr Katani responded that, if the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not been challenged, then an Entry  Clearance  Officer  could
    use that refusal in order to refuse any  new  application.   The  Upper
    Tribunal pointed out, however, that in the present case the  judge  had
    not been able to deal with the matter in any detail, having  regard  to
    the evidence before him.  The point about making  a  fresh  application
    had been highlighted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  himself,  at
    paragraph 21 of his decision.

44. Mr Katani said that Entry Clearance Officers could  "pick  and  choose"
    within the findings of a First-tier Tribunal.

45. According to the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  the  present  case,  the
    sponsor had "made an admission".  Regardless of whose fault it was, the
    appellant had not obtained a fair hearing.

46. For the respondent, Mr Govan submitted that, contrary to the  assertion
    made in the grounds of application, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    considered the case of TD and  applied  it  correctly.   The  appellant
    could have spoken to her statement and been cross-examined  on  it  but
    she did not do so.  Mr Govan also pointed out that the sponsor had  not
    dealt with the concerns of the respondent regarding  a  combination  of
    maintenance.

47. So far as  complaints  about  poor  legal  assistance  were  concerned,
    Mr Govan submitted that there had  been  no  attempt  to  contact  the
    individuals concerned  in  order  to  put  these  complaints  to  them.
    Overall, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  given  matters  careful
    thought.  There was no error in his decision.   Nothing  prevented  the
    appellant from making a fresh application for entry clearance.

48. In reply, Mr Katani said  that,  having  taken  instructions  from  the
    sponsor (who was present at the hearing) he had been told that  it  was
    she who had produced  the  list  at  the  beginning  of  the  600  page
    inventory of productions.  The Upper  Tribunal  expressed  surprise  at
    this, given that the sponsor had had to produce her most recent witness
    statement with the assistance of an interpreter.

49. A said that, at the hearing, the sponsor had pulled out  her  statement
    (now at page 90 of the inventory)  "in  desperation".   She  could,  in
    fact, speak some English.

50. The Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  the  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings
    indicated that A had sought leave to lodge the bundle  later  and  that
    the judge should "part-hear the case today".  This suggestion had  been
    put by the Presenting Officer.

51. The Upper Tribunal asked Mr Katani whether the sponsor's  statement  at
    page 90 had not been a considered view on her behalf.

52. Mr Katani said that the judge, had in effect, had held  a  gun  to  A's
    head that made it absolutely clear that he was going to go ahead on the
    basis described.

53. The Upper Tribunal asked Mr Katani specifically about the fact that the
    inventories of 600 and 173 pages had been sent by  Katani  &  Co  under
    cover of a letter of 13 December 2017.  Mr Katani responded that there
    were "bags in my firm with bits and pieces in it".  The Upper  Tribunal
    asked, what, therefore, Mr Katani would do if the  case  were  in  fact
    remitted.  Mr Katani was asked, in particular, how he could advise  his
    sponsor client whether  it  was  worth  going  ahead  with  a  remitted
    hearing, if he had not seen these materials.

54. Mr Katani responded that it would, in those circumstances, be necessary
    to "start from scratch".

55. The Upper Tribunal sought confirmation that no one in Katani &  Co  had
    formed any view since 9 November  2017  on  whether  the  materials  in
    question had any bearing on the appellant's case.

56. Mr Katani said that he had made his position  "absolutely  clear".   He
    had not yet looked at  the  documents.   He  was  asked  how,  in  that
    eventuality, he could say that his client's case could possibly succeed
    and why, in that event, any remittal would be remotely worthwhile.

57. Mr Katani confirmed that he had not looked at  this  matter.   He  then
    said that he was "not seeking to rely on this evidence today".

D. Discussion

58. Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 provides as follows:-

         "2.-(1)  The overriding objective of these Rules is to  enable  the
                  Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

             (2)  Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-

                  (a)  dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate
                      to the importance of the case, the complexity of  the
                      issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of
                      the parties and of the Tribunal;

                  (b)    avoiding   unnecessary   formality   and    seeking
                      flexibility in the proceedings;

                  ..."

59. "Dealing with the case fairly and justly" involves  striking  a  proper
    balance between the legitimate needs of  a  particular  party  (whether
    appellant or respondent) and not only those of the other party  in  the
    particular proceedings in question but also those of others who may  be
    indirectly affected.  If a particular case is adjourned, there  may  be
    delay in the hearing and disposing of another  case  that  is  awaiting
    hearing.  Although an individual adjournment  may  have  an  immaterial
    effect in itself on the functioning of the overall appellate system, it
    is axiomatic that any system which takes  an  unduly  lenient  view  of
    applications to adjourn will become problematic for all its users.

60. The fact that immigration and asylum appeals raise issues  of  profound
    significance for those concerned in them is, of  course,  to  be  taken
    into account in deciding whether to adjourn.  Nevertheless,  the  point
    just made holds good.

61. In the present case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  acted  entirely
    compatibly with his duty under rule 2.  The judge had proper regard  to
    the submissions made by A of Katani  &  Co.   However,  the  judge  was
    entitled to take account of the fact that the notice of appeal had been
    filed by the sponsor as long ago as  6  June  2016.   The  judge  acted
    appropriately in putting the case back in order to  enable  A  and  the
    sponsor  to  produce  a  witness  statement  from  her.   Whether  that
    statement was hand-written or in typescript is immaterial.  It is plain
    that the judge saw a statement in the very terms in which it appears at
    page 90 of the 600 page inventory.

62. The sponsor was in a position to give evidence, as per  her  statement.
    No suggestion had been made that, despite the fact that her more recent
    statement is said to be compiled with the assistance of an interpreter,
    an interpreter had been requested in connection with the hearing  on  9
    November 2017 or that the sponsor was unable to give adequate  evidence
    in English.  Indeed, the terms of the statement of 9 November 2017 show
    the contrary.

63. The reason for the request for the adjournment  appears  to  have  been
    that Katani  &  Co  had  been  instructed  late.   But,  as  the  judge
    explained, that was not, in the circumstances, a sufficient reason.  So
    far as one can see, A would not have withdrawn from the hearing if,  in
    addition to putting in the witness statement, the sponsor had also been
    able to put in evidence the large amount  of  documentation  which,  it
    would now seem, comprised the  600  and  173  page  inventories.   But,
    however, quite apart from the  Presenting  Officer  not  having  had  a
    chance to see these documents, the stance of Katani & Co, on behalf  of
    the appellant, is that A had not been  able,  over  the  weekend  which
    intervened between A's meeting with the sponsor on 6 November and  the
    hearing on 9 November, to  form  any  view  of  the  relevance  of  the
    materials in question.

64. Indeed, astonishingly, over eighteen months after  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  Katani  &  Co  apparently  remained  in
    ignorance of what was in these inventories.  That is plain from what Mr
    Katani told us.  Despite the fact that A, who was still with  Katani  &
    Co in December 2017, sent the materials to the Tribunal under cover  of
    a letter of 13 December, Katani & Co have not only kept no copy of  the
    materials; they have not seen fit to ask to see them.

65. In the circumstances, the fact that the judge declined to look at these
    materials  has  not  been  shown  to  have  had  any  material  bearing
    whatsoever.  The judge has not been shown to  have  acted  unfairly  in
    proceeding to take account of the witness statement of 9  November  and
    the other materials before him, but not those  described  in  paragraph
    5(c) of his decision.

66. For these reasons, there is no merit in the grounds which  allege  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge acted unfairly in refusing to adjourn  or
    in refusing to accept the materials described in paragraph 5(c) of  the
    decision.

67. The grounds that contend the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  wrong  to
    find, on the evidence before him, that the appellant had failed to show
    sole responsibility are, likewise, misconceived.  The  passage  in  the
    statement which was quoted by the judge was,  plainly,  significant  in
    that it indicated not only that the sponsor had been helped in  raising
    the appellant but that that situation continued to pertain.

68. The real point being made by the sponsor, according to  her  statement,
    was that she now considered her parents were too old and  frail  to  be
    expected to continue to assist in  looking  after  the  appellant.   At
    best, reading this statement as a whole, it is plainly equivocal on the
    issue of sole responsibility.  Given  that  the  burden  lay  with  the
    appellant to show, on balance, it was more likely  than  not  that  the
    requirements of the Rules were satisfied (and, hence, that it would  be
    a disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article  8  rights
    to refuse admission in those circumstances), the judge was not wrong in
    law to dismiss the appeal.  In so doing, the judge had proper regard to
    TD.

69. As will be apparent from what  we  have  said,  we  have  very  serious
    concerns about the conduct of Katani & Co in this case.  Mr Katani,  on
    several occasions  during  his  lengthy  submissions  to  us,  made  it
    perfectly plain that his firm has a policy, when it  considers  it  has
    been instructed "late" by a client, of seeking an adjournment which, if
    not granted, results in the firm withdrawing representation.

70. The fact that such a "blanket" policy is intensely problematic is borne
    out by the facts of  the  present  case.   As  immigration  solicitors,
    Katani & Co can be expected to know what needs to be shown in order  to
    establish sole responsibility under the Immigration Rules.  Katani & Co
    were instructed on 6 November 2017, when A met the sponsor.  Given that
    the sponsor was able, with assistance, to produce a  witness  statement
    on 9 November 2017, it is difficult, to say the  least,  to  understand
    why such a statement could not have been drafted at  or  following  the
    client consultation on 6 November.  Furthermore, it  should  have  been
    possible to peruse the  documentation,  in  order  to  gain  a  general
    impression of whether it advanced the appellant's case.

71. If, following such endeavours, Katani & Co had reached  the  view  that
    the appellant was unable, on the current evidence, to achieve  success,
    the sponsor could have been advised to seek  to  withdraw  the  appeal,
    without the need for a hearing and subsequent  decision.   If,  on  the
    other hand, those  endeavours  had  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had a case worthy of going before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    that case could and should have been advanced.   Instead,  as  we  have
    already noted, Katani & Co persuaded the sponsor that they should adopt
    their policy of seeking an adjournment on the basis that they had  been
    instructed too late to do anything else that might be meaningful.

72. Before us, Mr Katani displayed a marked ignorance of the way  in  which
    appeals are decided in the Upper Tribunal under the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 and the Practice Directions and Statements  of
    its Immigration and Asylum Chamber.  He also  had  paid  no  regard  to
    Direction 4, issued by the Upper Tribunal on 5 October 2018.  Mr Katani
    advanced no explanation as to why he did not  have  the  Directions  in
    question before him at the hearing.

73. In any event, it should have been obvious to Mr Katani that the grounds
    he was seeking to advance required  him  at  least  to  have  seen  the
    materials in the 600 and 173 page  inventories.   As  we  have  already
    noted, remarkably, he and his firm had made no effort to retain a  copy
    of the materials or, failing that,  to  request  them  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

74. Mr Katani also appears to consider it irrelevant that  neither  he  nor
    the sponsor had bothered in the eighteen months  since  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, to contact the individuals whom the sponsor said had,
    in effect, let her down; in particular, the solicitor in the  south  of
    England identified as DP.  Nevertheless, the Upper Tribunal  was  urged
    by Mr Katani  to  take  the  sponsor's  word  that  the  solicitor  and
    (perhaps) others had acted unprofessionally.  It would be  quite  wrong
    for us to do so. Save in exceptional circumstances, the  Tribunal  will
    not take account of an allegation of professional malpractice against a
    person's former representatives in immigration and asylum  proceedings,
    unless those representatives have been made aware of the allegation and
    given a proper opportunity to respond.

75. The present case also highlights the difficulty  where  representatives
    find themselves having to give evidence about what is alleged  to  have
    occurred at a hearing at which they represented an individual.  A  firm
    that finds itself in such a position should not continue to act as  the
    representatives.

76. Mr Katani had no coherent response to the question of why, particularly
    given the lapse of time, the sponsor had not re-applied  on  behalf  of
    the appellant for entry  clearance.  Whilst  we  accept  that  judicial
    findings regarding an earlier application may influence the view of  an
    Entry Clearance Officer considering  a  fresh  application,  each  case
    turns on its own facts.  It  would,  in  particular,  be  a  breach  of
    section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998, which makes it unlawful  for
    a public authority to act in a way that is incompatible with the  ECHR,
    for an Entry Clearance Officer to place reliance on  previous  judicial
    findings where it was apparent that, on the material now available, the
    applicant was properly entitled to entry clearance.

77. In any  event,  no  one  acting  for  the  appellant  appears  to  have
    considered whether, looked at properly in the way described above,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was, on  its  own  terms,  legally
    erroneous and, therefore, whether it was worth expending time (and  the
    sponsor's money) in seeking to challenge it.  We  should  also  mention
    that the issue of maintenance and accommodation, in  respect  of  which
    the respondent also found against the appellant,  does  not  appear  to
    have been addressed.

78.  Mr Katani appears to have had no regard to the sponsor's  most  recent
    statement, given on 12 June 2019, since paragraphs 2 to 12 of this  are
    also, at best, entirely equivocal as to  whether  the  sponsor  is,  in
    truth, asserting that she has sole responsibility  for  the  appellant.
    For  example,  paragraph  4  describes  the  sponsor's  father  as  the
    appellant's "guardian", which suggests a degree  of  involvement  going
    beyond mere  physical  needs.   By  the  same  token,  paragraph  7  is
    equivocal in contending that the sponsor has  "a  massive  say  in  the
    upbringing of [the appellant]", whereas the sponsor's "parents take  my
    opinions seriously".

79. It is plain that Mr Katani has not seen it necessary to form  any  view
    as to whether the appellant's appeal might succeed on the basis of  the
    evidence now adduced.  Nevertheless, his stance remained that the whole
    matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

80. It will be evident that we find Mr Katani's submissions in this  appeal
    to be seriously worrying on a number of levels.  We trust that he  will
    pay very careful regard to what we have said.  In particular, he  would
    be well advised to reconsider his firm's policy regarding  applications
    to adjourn.

E. Decision

The appeal fails on the grounds advanced. The grounds advance  no  challenge
to the assessment made by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  of  the  evidence
that was before him, correctly applying the relevant law. As Upper  Tribunal
Judge Macleman pointed out, although the appeal lay on human rights  grounds
only, compliance with the Rules was obviously relevant to  that  issue.  The
challenge to the refusal of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  adjourn  is
devoid of merit, as is apparent from what we say above.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore does not contain an  error
of law, such that we should set that decision aside.

The appeal is dismissed.





                      Signed                     Date

                         23 September 2019








                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber


