
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14249/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2019                   |On 31 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                   MR M L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aborisade, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Taylor ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 31 August 2018,  in
    which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    application for further leave to remain in the UK as the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen.

 2. Whilst no anonymity direction was made in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
    make such a direction because of my references to the  appellant's  and
    her husband's personal circumstances.

Background

 3. The appellant was born on 7 May 1969 and is a citizen  of  Nigeria.  He
    entered the UK on 21 October 2014 with leave to do so as a spouse.   He
    applied for further leave to remain on that basis but  his  application
    was refused on 30 October 2017 because he had failed to meet inter alia
    the English language requirements of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (paragraphs E-LTRP.4.1 to 4.2):  he  had  failed  to  provide  an
    appropriate English language certificate.

 4. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   At  the  appeal
    hearing the appellant produced an appropriate ELT certificate  and  the
    FTTJ found "the appellant has demonstrated that he is now able to  meet
    that requirement".  Nonetheless the FTTJ dismissed the  appeal  in  the
    following terms at [14]:

         "With little or no disruption to his family life the  appellant  is
         in a position to re-apply for leave as a  spouse.  The  immigration
         rules are designed to be compliant with article 8 ECHR and I am not
         satisfied that the refusal necessarily results in  an  interference
         with family life and contrary to article 8 ECHR.   Additionally  no
         evidence was submitted as to why the  parties  could  not  continue
         their family life outside of the UK."

 5. Permission to appeal to this  tribunal  was  granted  because  "it  was
    arguable that the Judge ought to have considered the Article 8 position
    in light of the new certificate".

 6. Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 7. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Cunha, for  the  respondent,  accepted
    that the FTTJ had erred materially in law for the reasons identified in
    the grant of permission to appeal.   She  conceded  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and remade: in particular a proper  proportionality
    assessment undertaken with regard to the  public  interest  factors  in
    s117A-s117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act").   For the appellant, Mr Aborisade, did not demur  from  the
    respondent's position.

Discussion

 8. The facts were not in  dispute  before  the  FTTJ.  The  appellant  had
    demonstrated he met all the relevant criteria in Appendix FM  with  the
    exception of providing,  with  his  application,  the  correct  English
    language certificate. An appropriate  certificate  had,  however,  been
    provided by the date of the hearing.  It  is  correct  that  this  late
    provision did not assist the appellant in demonstrating that he met the
    provisions of E-LTRP.4.1  to  4.2.   However,  it  was  relevant  in  a
    proportionality assessment pursuant to Article 8 outside the Rules.

 9. It was conceded by Ms Cunha before me that the FTTJ failed to undertake
    an appropriate proportionality assessment for the purposes  of  Article
    8.  I agree.  The FTTJ refers briefly to the  Immigration  Rules  being
    "designed to be compliant with article 8 ECHR" but in R (Chen)  v  SSHD
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) it was held that Appendix FM does  not  include
    consideration of the question whether it would be  disproportionate  to
    expect an individual to return to his home country  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application to re-join family members in  the  U.K.   It  was
    noted there may be cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles
    to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.  but  where  temporary
    separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance may be disproportionate.   This is potentially  such  a  case
    and the FTTJ has failed to address this issue, merely stating  at  [14]
    that "the appellant is in  a  position  to  re-apply  for  leave  as  a
    spouse". He does not state how the appellant would do so or the  impact
    of a fresh application on the appellant's protected rights.

10. The FTTJ further states that he was "not  satisfied  that  the  refusal
    necessarily results in an interference with family life and contrary to
    article 8 ECHR. Additionally no evidence was submitted as  to  why  the
    parties could not continue their family life outside of  the  UK".  The
    latter suggests the FTTJ has failed to take into account  the  evidence
    of the appellant and his wife in the application form; this is  to  the
    effect that they are both in permanent employment in the UK.  Thus  the
    FTTJ has failed to take into account material evidence of relevance  in
    the proportionality assessment.

11. The FTTJ makes no reference at all to relevant public interest factors,
    contrary to the provisions of  s117A  of  the  2002  Act.   This  is  a
    material error of law.

12. With the agreement of the parties' representatives,  I  set  aside  the
    decision.  I adopt the FTTJ's finding that the appellant  produced  the
    requisite language certificate at the hearing and that he had therefore
    demonstrated he met the provisions of paragraphs E-LTRP.4.1 to 4.2.  It
    follows that the appellant has demonstrated he meets the  criteria  for
    the  grant  of  further  leave  to  remain  as  a   spouse.    In   the
    circumstances, the interference with the  appellant's  and  his  wife's
    protected rights is not  outweighed  by  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control.

13. I remake the decision of the FTTJ and  allow  the  appeal  against  the
    refusal of further leave to remain.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  a
    material error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision the remake it by allowing the appeal.


A M Black   Date 24 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Anonymity Direction

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Fee Award

The FTTJ did not make a fee award. I have  considered  making  a  fee  award
because I have allowed the appeal  but  do  not  make  such  an  award.  The
appellant succeeded largely because he was able to produce  at  the  hearing
the requisite documentary evidence to demonstrate he  met  the  criteria  in
the Immigration Rules.


A M Black   Date 24 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
