
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/14293/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                           | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 March 2018                            | On 29 March 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 NISHA LIMBU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Puar instructed by Everest Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Frazer) promulgated on  31  July  2017.   By
    that decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (whom I shall refer to hereafter the "Claimant")  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State  dated  19  May  2016  refusing  her
    indefinite leave to remain (ILR) under the Rules and Art 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The Secretary of  State  appeals  with  permission  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge (E M Simpson) granted on 9 October 2017.

 3. The appellant was  represented  by  Mr  K  Hibbs,  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer and the Claimant was represented by Mr M Puar.

The Background

 4. The Claimant is a citizen of Nepal who was born  on  20  October  1988.
    Her father was a serving Gurkha solider.  He died in  service  in  1990
    when the Claimant was 2 years old.  Following his death,  the  Claimant
    lived in Nepal together with her mother and brother.

 5. Between 1994 and 2008, the Claimant was educated at boarding school  in
    India.  She returned to Nepal during the  holidays  to  live  with  her
    mother.

 6. On 14 July 2007, the Claimant's mother was granted indefinite leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as, and it was not disputed before  the  judge
    or before me, the widow of a Gurkha soldier.

 7. In fact, at the same time, the Claimant  also  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as a dependent when she was 17 years of  age.   By  the
    time of the ECO's decision, the Claimant was 18 years of  age  and  her
    application under the Immigration Rules was refused on the  basis  that
    her mother was, at the time, resident in Nepal.

 8. The Claimant's mother came to the UK on 14 July 2007.   The  Claimant's
    mother sadly died on 24 October 2009.

 9. Prior to her mother's death, the Claimant again applied for  indefinite
    leave to enter in 2008.  That application was refused on the basis that
    the ECO was not satisfied that the Claimant was dependent on her mother
    nor was he satisfied that the Claimant would be adequately accommodated
    without recourse to public funds.  I take those facts from para  11  of
    Judge Frazer's determination.  None of the decisions were placed before
    me but equally neither representative  suggested  that  Judge  Frazer's
    summary in para 11 was inaccurate.  It would appear, however,  that  an
    appeal was lodged against the refusal of indefinite leave to  enter  on
    29 July 2008 but the Claimant's mother (who was of course  in  the  UK)
    died on 24 October 2009 and the Claimant is unaware of what happened to
    the appeal.  Mr Hibbs  indicated  that  the  appeal  was  unsuccessful.
    However, he did not place before me the  decision  of  the  Immigration
    Judge  and  it  is,  perhaps,  not  surprising  that  the  appeal   was
    unsuccessful once the Claimant's sponsor (her mother) had died.

10. At para 12  of  her  decision,  Judge  Frazer  recounts  what  occurred
    following the High Court decision in R (Limbu) and Others v SSHD [2008]
    EWHC  2261  (Admin).   Following  the  publication  of  revised  policy
    guidance dealing with former Gurkhas and their families, the  Secretary
    of State wrote to the Claimant on 13 July 2009  and  on  27  July  2010
    seeking further  information.   However,  the  judge  records  that  no
    further documentation was produced but the Claimant was interviewed  on
    15 December 2009.  It  would  appear  that  her  application  was  then
    considered under para 317 of the Immigration Rules and Art  8  and  the
    Secretary of State went on  to  confirm  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Claimant indefinite leave to enter.

11. Thereafter, on 18 October 2012, the Claimant entered the UK as a Tier 4
    Student.  She undertook  a  degree  at  the  University  of  Sunderland
    (London Campus) and in 2015 she graduated with  an  upper  second-class
    honours degree.

12. In para 13 of her determination,  Judge  Frazer  records  the  evidence
    before her concerning the circumstances during the Claimant's  time  at
    university as follows:

         "The Claimant has been dependent on her paternal  aunt,  Ms.  Netra
         Kala, for her fees and maintenance.   The  claimant  has  lived  in
         London throughout her studies but has  stayed  with  her  aunt  and
         cousins in Llanelli in the holidays.   Her  aunt  and  family  have
         taken in the Claimant as one of their own, so as to speak."

13. At para  14,  the  judge  identified  the  claimant's  dependence  both
    emotionally and financially upon her aunt in the UK as follows:

         "The Claimant depends on  her  aunt  for  emotional  and  financial
         assistance.  She has a brother  in  Nepal  who  has  wife  and  two
         children.  He is unable to provide  for  her  as  he  is  the  sole
         breadwinner and  can  only  support  this  immediate  family.   The
         appellant has grandparents but they are both over  80  and  are  in
         poor health.

14. On 21  December  2015,  the  Claimant  made  an  in-time  human  rights
    application for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
    Immigration Rules under Art 8  as  the  dependent  child  of  a  former
    Gurkha.

15. That application was refused by the Secretary of State on 19 May  2016.



16. The Claimant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal  and  it
    is the resulting decision of Judge Frazer promulgated on 31  July  2017
    allowing the Claimant's appeal under Art 8 which is the subject of this
    appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

17. The essential facts, which I have related  above  and  largely  derived
    from the determination of Judge Frazer, were not in dispute before her.



18. In essence, Judge Frazer accepted that there was "family life"  between
    the Claimant and her aunt in the UK based upon emotional and  financial
    dependency.  Having concluded, therefore, that the decision engaged Art
    8.1, the judge found that  the  decision  was  disproportionate  having
    regard to the "historic injustice", namely that the Claimant  had  lost
    the opportunity to settle in the UK with her mother as  a  child  of  a
    former Gurkha who had died in service.  The judge found that that  that
    "historic injustice" outweighs the public interest.  I have already set
    out paras 13 and 14 of the judge's decision as relevant.  The remainder
    of her reasons are found at paras 15-19 as follows:

         "15. The particular circumstances of the Appellant's  case  can  be
             considered in line with the case law  on  historic  injustice.
             In Limbu it was recognised that Gurkhas had been treated  less
             favourably than comparable commonwealth members of HM  Forces.
             Settlement then became available to Gurkhas and  their  family
             members.

         16.  In R (Gurung) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2013] EWCA Civ 8 in the context of Article 8 ECHR  the  Court
             of Appeal held at paragraph 42 that if  a  Gurkha  could  show
             that but for the historic injustice he would have  settled  in
             the United Kingdom at a time when his  dependent  (now)  adult
             child would have been  able to accompany him  as  a  dependent
             child under the age of 18 that would be a  strong  reason  for
             holding that it was proportionate to permit the adult child to
             join his family now.

         17.  It  is  clear  from  the  applications  that  the  Appellant's
             intention and that of her mother was to  bring  the  Appellant
             over as a dependent.  I note that the first  application  that
             the Appellant made was  when  she  was  17  but  that  it  was
             determined  by  the  Respondent  when  she  had  reached   her
             majority.  All things being equal, had the Respondent's policy
             guidance applied to the appellant prior to 2006 she would have
             been granted entry clearance as a dependent  child.   She  had
             been in boarding school in India but had been dependent on her
             mother and had stayed with her during the school holidays.

         18.  The Appellant has strong ties to her aunt and  her  family  in
             the UK.  Her aunt feels a sense of responsibility towards  the
             Appellant.   The  Appellant's  aunt  is  the  sister  of   the
             Appellant's  father.   The  Appellant  was  supported  by  her
             father's pension when she was in Nepal but when  that  stopped
             her aunt  supported  her  financially.   She  has  funded  the
             Appellant's education in the United Kingdom  and  accommodates
             her during the holidays.  The aunt has  been  the  Appellant's
             only relative in the United Kingdom and there is a significant
             degree of emotional support which comes from  the  aunt  given
             that the Appellant has now lost both of her parents.

         19.  Having heard the  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  he  bonds
             between the Appellant and her aunt go beyond normal  emotional
             ties and that there is family life existing between them.  Her
             aunt and cousins are in  effect  her  surrogate  family.   The
             refusal represents an interference of sufficient gravity as to
             engage Article 8 ECHR.  Such  interference  is  in  accordance
             with the law and  is  necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  an
             effective immigration policy.  However having  regard  to  the
             proportionality I find that but for  the  historic  injustice,
             had the Appellant had an opportunity to settle in  the  United
             Kingdom with her mother as a child of a former Gurkha who  had
             died in service she would have done so.   This  outweighs  the
             public interest in this case.  I have also had regard  to  the
             factors under s.117b and I  note  that  the  Appellant  speaks
             English and is financially dependent on her  aunt  so  is  not
             dependent on public funds.  I therefore allow the appeal under
             Article 8 ECHR."

The Secretary of State's Challenge

19. The Secretary of State's grounds, upon which permission to  appeal  was
    granted, raised essentially two points.   First,  the  judge  had  been
    wrong to find "family life" between the claimant  and  her  aunt.   The
    relationship did not demonstrate the required  dependency  "beyond  the
    normal emotional ties between adults" as required by the case law  such
    as Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and AAO v Entry Clearance Officer
    [2011] EWCA Civ 40.  In addition, it is said that the Claimant's  bonds
    with her aunt are "immaterial to her application as the adult dependent
    relative of a Gurkha soldier, as plainly, her aunt is not a Gurkha."

20. Secondly, the grounds contend that the judge was wrong to conclude that
    the "historic injustice" applied.  It was "pure speculation"  that  the
    Claimant's mother would have settled in the UK upon the  death  of  the
    Claimant's father and, in any event, the Claimant  had  been  given  an
    opportunity to enter the UK in 2006 and 2008 and both applications  had
    been unsuccessful.

21. In his oral submissions, on the first ground Mr Hibbs  was  content  to
    rely upon the grounds and made no specific submissions

22. In relation to the second ground, Mr Hibbs accepted that the Claimant's
    mother had bene admitted, as a policy decision, as a widow of a  Gurkha
    soldier who had died in  service.   He  submitted  that  the  "historic
    injustice" had been corrected by  a  consideration  of  the  Claimant's
    applications for indefinite leave to enter in 2006 and 2008.   However,
    those applications were unsuccessful.  He took me briefly to  a  number
    of policy documents dealing  with  former  Gurkha  soldiers  and  their
    families, in particular he  referred  me  to  the  most  recent  policy
    document entitled "Gurkha discharged  before  1  July  1997  and  their
    family members" (28 December 2017).  He submitted  that  there  was  no
    provision in this policy or indeed in the policies in  force  in  2009,
    namely SET 12 concerning the children of widows of Gurkha soldiers.

The Claimant's Case

23. On behalf of the Claimant, Mr Puar submitted that the  judge  had  made
    clear factual findings in relation to  the  "family  life"  established
    between the Claimant and her aunt applying the  correct  approach  that
    the ties  between  the  Claimant  and  her  aunt  went  "beyond  normal
    emotional  ties"  as  specifically  set  out  in   para   19   of   her
    determination.

24. Further, Mr Puar submitted that the judge had made a clear finding that
    the claimant's mother would have come to the UK following the death  of
    the Claimant's father in 1990 if there had been no "historic injustice"
    against former Gurkha soldiers  and  their  families,  including  their
    widows.  The Claimant's mother would have been able to meet the  policy
    guidance as a widow and, indeed, when the guidance  came  into  effect,
    she was granted indefinite leave to enter as  the  widow  of  a  former
    Gurkha soldier.  The judge also clearly found that had  the  Claimant's
    mother been granted indefinite  leave  to  enter  after  1990  and  the
    Claimant (as her dependent child) would also have  been  granted  entry
    clearance.  He reminded me that the Claimant was  2  years  of  age  in
    1990.  In the light of that, Mr  Puar  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account the "historic injustice" that applied  to
    the Claimant and to give it the significant weight  recognised  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in Ghising and Others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).  There was, Mr Puar submitted, nothing
    in the facts that gave rise to contrary factors such that the  historic
    injustice could not lead  to  a  finding  that  the  decision  was  not
    proportionate.

Discussion

25. The "historic wrong" perpetrated against former Gurkha  servicemen  and
    their families have been considered in a number of cases, for example R
    (Limbu) v SSHD [2008] EWHC 2261 (Admin) and R(Gurung and others) v SSHD
    [2013] 1 WLR 2546.  The essence of that "historic wrong" was  that  for
    former Gurkha servicemen discharged before 1 July 1997, they and  their
    family were denied until 2004 an opportunity to apply for settlement in
    the UK, by contrast to other ex-pat Commonwealth servicemen  and  their
    families.

26. Since 2004, the government has acknowledged the  debt  owed  to  former
    Gurkha  servicemen  and  their  families  and  since  that  time   have
    introduced policies seeking to correct that injustice  both  for  these
    former Gurkha servicemen and their families.  The first such policy  to
    withstand judicial scrutiny was introduced in May  2009  and  known  as
    "SET 12", together with an IDI,  Chapter  15,  s.2A.   They  are  found
    respectively at pages 40-44 and 45-47 of the Claimant's  bundle  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  An earlier Diplomatic Service Procedure  from
    2006 is also found at pages  36  -39  of  the  Claimant's  bundle.   An
    updated version of the IDI (from March 2010) is at pages 48-51  of  the
    bundle.  A further updated edition of  Chapter  15,  s.2A  (dated  June
    2015) is contained  within  the  file.   Finally,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, Mr Hibbs put before me the  most  recent  policy  concerning
    "Gurkhas discharged before 1 July 1997 and their family members"  dated
    28 December 2017.

27. The position of former  Gurkha  servicemen  and  their  family  members
    discharged after 1 July 1997 is contained within the Immigration  Rules
    (HC 395 as amended) at Part 7.  They, of course, had  no  relevance  to
    this appeal as the Claimant's father died in 1990 and  therefore  prior
    to 1 July 1997.

28. I have not found it easy to pick my way  through  the  relevant  policy
    guidance  and  I  was  not  taken  through  it  systematically  by  the
    representatives.

29. It was common ground between the parties that the  Claimant  could  not
    succeed (as  an  adult)  under  any  Immigration  Rules  as  an  "adult
    dependent relative".  Her only claim was under Art 8 outside the  Rules
    which, in essence, required her to establish the  "historic  injustice"
    perpetrated to her through her mother and, ultimately, her father as  a
    former Gurkha servicemen.

30. It was also common ground  between  the  parties  that  the  Claimant's
    mother had been granted indefinite leave to enter  in  2007  under  the
    (then) relevant policy as the widow of a Gurkha servicemen who had died
    in service prior to 1 July 1997.

31. In SET 12 (dated 25 June 2009) the bulk of the  document  is  concerned
    with applications for settlement by former Gurkha servicemen and  their
    families following discharge on or after 1 July 1997.  However, Annex A
    deals with "discretionary arrangements for  former  Gurkhas  discharged
    before 1 July 1997".  This provides for settlement by a  former  Gurkha
    soldier based upon at least four years' service and also provides for a
    discretion to  permit  settlement  for  "dependants"  and  "widows  and
    orphans".  Provision for "dependants" is as follows:

         "Dependants

         Discretion will normally be exercised  and  settlement  granted  in
         line with the main applicant for spouses, civil partners, unmarried
         and same-sex partners and dependent children under the age of 18.

         Children over the age of 18 and other dependant relatives will  not
         normally qualify for the exercise of discretion in  line  with  the
         main applicant and would be expected to qualify for leave to  enter
         or  remain  in  the  UK  under  the  relevant  provisions  of   the
         Immigration Rules, for example under paragraph 317,  or  under  the
         provisions of Article 8  of  the  Human  rights  Act.   Exceptional
         circumstances may be considered on a case by case basis.  For  more
         information on the exceptional circumstances  in  which  discretion
         may be exercised see Section.13.2."

32. Annex A provides for "widows and orphans" as follows:

         "Widows and Orphans

         Applications from widows and orphans of former  Gurkhas  should  be
         considered in line with the guidance set out in Chapter 15  Section
         .2A.  Where an application for settlement in  the  UK  is  received
         from the widow, widower, civil partner, bereaved unmarried or same-
         sex partner or orphan of a deceased Gurkha and where  the  latter's
         death occurred in connection  with  operation  service,  discretion
         will normally be exercised to grant settlement.

         Where  the  former  Gurkhas'  death  was  not  in  connection  with
         operation service their dependants would not normally  qualify  for
         entry under the terms of this guidance and  would  be  expected  to
         qualify under another a category  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (for
         example, paragraph 317 if  they  have  close  family  in  the  UK).
         Exceptional circumstances may be  considered  on  a  case  by  case
         basis.  For more information on the  exceptional  circumstances  in
         which discretion may be exercised see s.12.3 and 13.5."

33. That document, IDI, Chapter 15, s.2A was updated in  March  2010  where
    Annex B deals  with  "discretionary  arrangements  for  former  Gurkhas
    widows whose husbands were discharged before 1 July 1997" as follows:

         "This scheme recognises the unique nature of the service  given  by
         the Brigade of Gurkhas and is offered  to  them  and  their  widows
         alone on an exceptional basis.

         Widows of former Gurkhas discharged prior to  1997  may  apply  for
         settlement.  The applicant should qualify for settlement if it  can
         be shown that her late husband and former Gurkha would have met the
         criteria set out at Annex A above.

         Where the deceased former Ghurkha was married to more than one wife
         under Nepalese law, UKBA will only recognise one widow of a  former
         Gurkha to be eligible to apply for settlement in the UK under  this
         concession and that will be the first wife recorded on the  Kindred
         Roll (British Army records).

         Where there is proof that the first widow  permanently  waives  her
         right, we may accept applications under this arrangement  from  the
         next in turn according to date in which they were married which can
         be verified by the details of  their  Kindred  Roll  (British  Army
         Records).

         If a widow who would otherwise have qualified under these  criteria
         has remarried they will not be eligible to apply to come to the  UK
         under this Discretionary Arrangement.

         This Discretionary Arrangement only applies to widows.  Children or
         other dependant relatives of former Gurkhas will have to  meet  the
         relevant  Immigration  Rules  or  other  appropriate  discretionary
         criteria.

         Widow and Orphans

         Applications for widows and orphans of former Gurkhas post  1  July
         1997 should be considered in line with  the  guidance  set  out  in
         Chapter 15 Section 2A.  Where an application for settlement in  the
         UK is received from the widow,  widower,  civil  partner,  bereaved
         unmarried or same-sex partner or orphan of a deceased  Ghurkha  and
         where the latter's death occurred in  connection  with  operational
         service, discretion will normally be exercised to grant settlement.

         Where  the  former  Gurkhas'  death  was  not  in  connection  with
         operational service their dependants  would  normally  qualify  for
         entry under the terms of this guidance and  would  be  expected  to
         qualify under  another  category  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (for
         example paragraph 317  if  they  have  close  family  in  the  UK).
         Exceptional circumstances may be  considered  on  a  case  by  case
         basis.  For more information on the  exceptional  circumstances  in
         which discretion may be exercised see s.12.3 and 13.5.

         Under the guidance it will only be possible for one Gurkha widow to
         come to the UK.

         Where the deceased former Gurkha was legally married to  more  than
         one wife under Nepalese law, this arrangement  will  apply  to  the
         first widow on the kindred role.

         Where there is proof that the first widow  permanently  waives  her
         right, we will accept applications under this arrangement from  the
         next in turn according to the order in which they  were  registered
         on the kindred role.

         For the purposes of this guidance UKBA would not regard anybody  as
         a widow if they had remarried."

34. Mr Hibbs accepted (as did  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  decision
    challenged in this appeal)  that  the  Claimant's  mother  was  granted
    indefinite leave to enter as the widow of a former Gurkha soldier.   It
    is, therefore, unnecessary to unpack  the  guidance  and  any  lack  of
    clarity as to its application to widows.  It seems both a sensible  and
    humane interpretation and conclusion that it applied to the  Claimant's
    mother (whether her husband died in service or after  discharge)  which
    if not right would run the risk of perpetrating a further injustice  to
    the family members of former Gurkhas.

35. For completeness, I should add that the policy guidance dated June 2015
    in Chapter 15, s.2A at  Annexes  A  and  B  was  not  suggested  to  be
    materially different.

36. It will be noted that in the  relevant  provisions  cross-reference  is
    made to "s.12.3 and 13.5" albeit in the context of  a  former  Gurkhas'
    death which was not in connection with operational service and there is
    an application by their dependants for settlement.  I was not  provided
    with s.12.3 and 13.5 of the guidance prior to that contained in Chapter
    15,  s.2A  in  effect  from  June  2015.   Those  sections  deal   with
    applications by former  Gurkha  servicemen  and  their  families.   The
    provisions dealing with widows is in s.12.3.   Again, it  provides  for
    discretion which will "normally be exercised to  grant  settlement"  if
    certain criteria are satisfied, and, in the case of  a  spouse's  death
    not  in  connection   with   operational   services   "in   exceptional
    circumstances".  S.13 deals with "children" and refers to the situation
    where

         "One parent...is being admitted for or being granted settlement  on
         the same occasion under the HM Forces Rule...and there are  serious
         and compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion
         of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made
         for the child's care",

    providing that the child is  under  the  age  of  18,  not  leading  an
    independent life or formed an independent family unit and there  is  no
    general  ground  for  refusal.    Importantly,   the   policy   states:
    "caseworkers should note the lack of any maintenance  or  accommodation
    requirements".

37. Dependents over the age of 18  are  dealt  with  in  s.13.2  and  adult
    children are dealt with in Annex K.   The latter sets out the  position
    for "settlement for adult children of former Gurkhas"  at  paras  9-27.
    It only applies to applications made on or after 5 January 2015.  I was
    not  taken  to  it  by  the  representatives.   It  does  not  directly
    contemplate an application by an adult child (such  as  the  appellant)
    relying upon her mother's settlement in the UK as a widow of  a  former
    Gurkha servicemen as opposed to settlement by the soldier himself.

38. The picture is not entirely clear in its detail and I  was  not,  as  I
    have  indicted,  taken  systematically  through  the   various   policy
    documents.   Mr  Hibbs  submitted,  and  Mr  Puar   accepted   in   his
    submissions, that the policy guidance did not explicitly deal with  the
    position of a child of a widow - such as the Claimant would  have  been
    following the death of her father in 1990.  The overall thrust relevant
    to the 'historic injustice' argument is, however, less opaque.

39. It was  the  Claimant's  case  before  the  judge  that  the  "historic
    injustice" arose because after her father's death in 1990,  her  mother
    as a  widow  of  a  former  Gurkha  soldier  would  have  been  granted
    indefinite leave to enter (absent that injustice) and that the Claimant
    would have been able to accompany her to the UK.  The judge, of course,
    found - and it is not challenged - that had that option been  available
    the Claimant's mother would have sought indefinite leave to enter  (and
    be granted it) after 1990 and  she  would  have  sought  to  bring  the
    Claimant (who was two years of age in 1990) with her.

40. As is clear, therefore, it is not contended that the Claimant's  mother
    would not have been  able  to  seek  settlement  after  1990  in  those
    circumstances nor that she would not in fact have successfully done so.
     The judge accepted that the Claimant would  also  have  been  able  to
    accompany her mother when she found, at para 17 of her determination:

         "all things being  equal,  had  the  respondent's  policy  guidance
         applied to the appellant prior to 2006 she would have been  granted
         entry clearance as a dependent child".

41. The Claimant was, of course, 2-years of age in 1990 and living with her
    mother.  Her dependence upon her mother could not be sensibly  gainsaid
    in those circumstances.  On the basis of the policy documents,  it  is,
    perhaps, unclear precisely what the position would be for  a  dependent
    child of a widow of a former Gurkha serviceman  who  has  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of her dead husband's  service.
    It requires an understanding both of what would have  been  the  policy
    position if a policy had applied in 1990 and also an assessment of  the
    factual position, now 28 years later.  As I have said,  it  was  common
    ground that the policies did not explicitly deal with the position of a
    dependent child of a widow.  It is, however, worth noting that  in  the
    case of children that "no maintenance  or  accommodation  requirements"
    apply.  The position would have been, in my judgment, either  that  the
    Claimant would have had to succeed under the  'child  settlement'  rule
    then in force in paras  52  and  53  of  HC  251  or  that  a  residual
    discretion would have been exercised in her favour.  Paras 52 and 53 of
    HC 251 (which preceded para 297 of HC 395  in  effect  from  1  October
    1994) do contain maintenance and accommodation requirements.  Given the
    antiquity of the factual enquiry, it is perhaps unsurprising  that  the
    matter of maintenance and accommodation in 1990 was  not  canvassed  by
    either party.  The position of the Claimant's mother was as a widow  of
    a former Gurkha soldier  with,  presumably,  a  pension.   It  was  not
    suggested before the judge that the Claimant's  mother  was  unable  to
    accommodate or maintain herself.

42. Mr Hibbs placed some reliance upon the findings (set out at para 11  of
    the  judge's  decision)  in  relation   to   the   Claimant's   earlier
    application, in particular her application in 2008 when  the  Secretary
    of State was not  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  would  be  adequately
    accommodated without recourse to public funds.  That  was  a  situation
    which, even if correct, arose sixteen years later.

43. In any event, given that in 1990 the Claimant was 2-years of  age,  her
    father was dead and her mother was coming to  the  UK  with  indefinite
    leave to enter, I find it difficult to conceive that an ECO  would  not
    have exercised discretion in the Claimant's  favour  to  accompany  her
    mother.  To suggest the contrary would result in  the  Claimant  having
    been left in Nepal with her mother in the UK and, so far as  the  facts
    before me disclose, a brother living in Nepal.

44. In my judgment, it was open to Judge Frazer to find that  but  for  the
    "historic injustice" the Claimant would have been able to accompany her
    mother to the UK following the death of her father  if  the  policy  in
    relation to widows of former Gurkha  servicemen  had  applied  at  that
    time.

45. In my judgment, therefore, Judge Frazer was entitled - if Art  8.1  was
    engaged - to take into account the "historic injustice"  which  through
    her parents was perpetrated upon the Claimant  in  not  being  able  to
    enter the UK accompanying her mother with  indefinite  leave  to  enter
    after her father's death in 1990.  I  see  nothing  in  Judge  Frazer's
    assessment at para 90 to indicate  that  she  gave  other  than  proper
    weight to that "historic injustice" in accordance with the approach set
    out by the Upper Tribunal in the Ghising case, namely "substantial"  or
    "significant" weight ([56]  and  [59])  such  that  it  is  "likely  to
    outweigh  [the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration
    policy]" in the absence of a "bad immigration history  and/or  criminal
    behaviour" (see [59] and [60]).   I do not accept Mr Hibbs'  submission
    that the 'historic wrong' has, so to speak,  been  purged  because  the
    appellant has been able  to  make  (albeit  unsuccessfully)  subsequent
    applications in 2006 and 2008.  To have determined the  merits  of  the
    applications by the (more  onerous)  rules  then  in  force  would,  of
    course, merely have been to perpetuate the "historic injustice"  rather
    than remedy it.  In the absence  of  any  bad  immigration  history  or
    criminal behaviour to counteract the powerful factors on the Claimant's
    side,  in   carrying   out   the   balancing   exercise   inherent   in
    proportionality the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the  "historic
    wrong" outweighed the public interest.

46. That then leaves the first ground concerning the judge's  finding  that
    there was "family life" established between the Claimant and  her  aunt
    and which would be sufficiently interfered with if  the  Claimant  were
    removed and so engaged Art 8.1.

47. It was common ground between the parties that the approach, in the case
    where an adult claims family life existed with another adult  relative,
    is set out by the Court of Appeal in the Kugathas case.   The  approach
    in Kugathas has been approved on numerous occasions  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal, most recently in R (Britcits) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368; Entry
    Clearance Officer, Sierra Leone v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 151 and SSHD  v
    Onuorah [2017] EWCA Civ 1757.

48. In Kopoi, Sales LJ set out the approach at [17] - [19] as follows:


         "17. The leading domestic authority on the ambit of  'family  life'
             for the purposes of Article 8 is the  well-known  decision  of
             this court in Kugathas v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31;  [2003]  INLR  31.   The  court
             found that a single man of 38 years old who had lived  in  the
             UK since 1999 did not enjoy 'family  life'  with  his  mother,
             brother and sister, who were living in Germany as refugees. At
             para. [14]  Sedley  LJ  accepted  as  a  proper  approach  the
             guidance given by the European Commission for Human Rights  in
             its decision in S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196, at 198:


                  'Generally, the protection of family life under Article  8
                  involves cohabiting dependents, such as parents and  their
                  dependent, minor children.  Whether it  extends  to  other
                  relationships  depends  on  the   circumstances   of   the
                  particular case. Relationships between  adults,  a mother
                  and her 33 year old son in the present  case,  would  not
                  necessarily acquire the protection of  Article  8  of  the
                  Convention  without  evidence  of  further   elements   of
                  dependency,  involving  more  than  the  normal  emotional
                  ties.'


                  He held that there  is  not  an  absolute  requirement  of
                  dependency in an  economic  sense  for  'family  life'  to
                  exist, but that it is necessary  for  there  to  be  real,
                  committed or effective support between family  members  in
                  order to show that 'family life' exists  ([17]);  'neither
                  blood ties nor the concern and affection  that  ordinarily
                  go with them are, by themselves or  together',  sufficient
                  ([19]); and the natural tie between a parent and an infant
                  is probably a special case in which there is  no  need  to
                  show that there  is  a  demonstrable  measure  of  support
                  ([18]).


         18.  The judgments of Arden LJ and Simon Brown LJ were  to  similar
             effect. Arden LJ also relied on S v  United  Kingdom  as  good
             authority and held that there is no presumption that a  person
             has a family life, even with members of his  immediate  family
             ([24]) and that family life  is  not  established  between  an
             adult child and his surviving parent or other siblings  unless
             something more exists than normal emotional ties, such as ties
             of dependency ([25]).


         19.  Kugathas remains good law: see e.g. R (Britcits)  v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 368, [61] and
             [74] (Sir Terence Etherton  MR),  [82]  (Davis  LJ)  and  [86]
             (Sales LJ).  As Sir Terence Etherton MR pithily summarised the
             position at [74], in order for family life within the  meaning
             of Article 8(1) to be found to exist, 'There must be something
             more than normal emotional ties'."

    That statement of the law was described as "authoritative" by Singh  LJ
    (with whom Sales and Gloster LJJ agreed) in Onuorah at [30].

49. In this case, Judge Frazer clearly had in mind that approach  when  she
    found that the ties between the Claimant  and  her  aunt  went  "beyond
    normal emotional ties".  She found that the  Claimant's  aunt  and  her
    cousin were "in effect  her  surrogate  family".   Earlier,  the  judge
    recognised that the position was that the Claimant was emotionally  and
    financially dependent upon assistance from her aunt in the UK since she
    entered as a student in October 2012.  Although  the  judge  recognised
    that the living arrangements were  that  the  Claimant  lived  away  at
    university during term time, she returned to live  with  her  aunt  and
    cousins in the holidays.  She noted, at para 13,  that  the  Claimant's
    "aunt and family have taken in the [claimant] as one of their  own,  so
    to speak."

50. The judge noted at para 14 that the Claimant had a brother in Nepal who
    had a wife and two children and was unable to  provide  for  her.   Her
    parents were both over 80 and in poor health.

51. In my judgment, it was not irrational or  perverse,  in  the  light  of
    evidence, for the  judge  to  conclude  that  although  an  adult,  the
    Claimant had formed a dependency upon  her  aunt,  both  financial  and
    emotional, that went beyond the ordinary ties between  an  adult  niece
    and her aunt.  The judge found, in effect at para 13 that the  Claimant
    had been taken in by the aunt as part of her family.  She was,  so  far
    as the evidence before the judge was concerned, wholly  dependent  upon
    her aunt and the arrangement of a student living at  university  during
    term time and living at home during holiday is  not  inconsistent  with
    family life existing if that individual has not formed  an  independent
    life of his or her own (see, e.g. Singh and Singh v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 630 at [24] per Sir Stanley Burnton).

52. I am satisfied, therefore, that the judge's finding  that  family  life
    existed between the Claimant and her aunt was properly open to  her  on
    the evidence.

53. The final point raised in the grounds, but not elaborated  upon  by  Mr
    Hibbs in his oral submissions, is that unlike the usual case  involving
    the family members of former Gurkha servicemen, here  the  Claimant  is
    not able to establish family life with either  of  her  parents.   They
    are, of course, both now dead.  The suggestion in the grounds is  that,
    therefore, there is no causative  connection  between  the  "historical
    injustice" and the interference with the Claimant's family life if  she
    were not allowed to remain in the UK.  I do not accept  that  argument.
    A "historic  injustice"  has  undoubtedly  been  perpetrated  upon  the
    Claimant through  her  (now)  deceased  parents.   Had  there  been  no
    "historic injustice", she would have been  in  the  UK  since  sometime
    after 1990 with her mother until her mother's death in 2009.  She would
    then, albeit 2-years plus of age, have been in no better position  than
    she was when she entered the UK in 2012.  Her only  family  in  the  UK
    would have been her aunt and who would have been  the  only  family  to
    which she could turn for support.   This  point  was  not  specifically
    raised by the respondent before Judge Frazer and it is, in my judgment,
    too late now to suggest an absence of causative connection based upon a
    series of hypothetical events dating back some 27 or 28 years.

54. This is not a case where the Claimant cannot establish any interference
    with "family life" in the UK and has to rely upon "private life"  where
    her claim based upon "historic injustice" would be somewhat weaker (see
    Pun (Nepal) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2106).  In this  case,  to  use  the
    word adopted by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Pun,  the  Claimant  has  an
    appropriate "peg"  upon  which  to  hang  her  "family  life"  and  the
    relevance of  the  "historic  injustice"  perpetuated  against  her  in
    assessing the proportionality of  any  interference  with  that  family
    life.  It seems to me that the inference of a causative link, given the
    antiquity of that "injustice", reasonably falls to be resolved  in  the
    Claimant's favour.

55. For these reasons, the judge did not materially err in law in  allowing
    the Claimant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

56. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the Claimant's appeal under
    Art 8 stands.

57. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                                              27, March 2018

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Frazer made a full fee award in the Claimant's favour and, as  I  have
dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal to this Tribunal, I see  no  basis
to do other than confirm that fee award.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              27, March 2018
