
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/14274/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 June 2019                          |On 25 June 2019                    |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                              MOHAMMED SULEMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Blackwood
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 10 October 1971 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 10  May
    2018, dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds against  a  decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 19 May 2017. For reasons which  I  will
    set out below, the Secretary  of  State  now  accepts  that  the  judge
    carried out her analysis on an incorrect basis and  that  her  decision
    should be set aside.

 2. I was assisted at the initial hearing by Mr Blackwood, who appeared  at
    short notice for the appellant by way of direct access. He had prepared
    a bundle of documents and a skeleton argument which  only  reached  the
    Upper Tribunal and the Secretary of State on  the  evening  before  the
    initial hearing. In the circumstances, I  gave  time  to  Mr  Mills  to
    consider the arguments raised in  the  skeleton  argument.  Before  the
    hearing was briefly  adjourned,  Mr  Blackwood  applied  to  amend  the
    grounds of appeal. There was a discussion in court regarding the nature
    of this to Blackwood's amendment following which I gave permission  for
    the grounds to be amended I took the view that the  proposed  amendment
    addressed an issue which arguably undermined the entirety of the First-
    tier  Tribunal's  decision.  I  wish  to  record  at  this  point   the
    considerable assistance provided to the Tribunal by both Mr  Mills  and
    Mr Blackwood. I am grateful  to  them  for  their  cogent  and  skilful
    submissions.

 3. Following the brief adjournment, Mr  Mills  provided  a  chronology  as
    follows. On 11 April 2017 at Nottingham Crown Court, the appellant  was
    convicted of two counts of sexual assault on a female. He was sentenced
    on the first count to 30 weeks imprisonment and on  the  second  to  22
    weeks making an aggregate sentence of 52 weeks  in  total.  On  19  May
    2017, the Secretary of State issued to  the  appellant  a  decision  to
    deport him pursuant to the UK Borders Act 2007 and the Immigration  Act
    1971. The second paragraph of the decision letter reads as follows:

    Paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules (as amended) provides that there
    is a presumption that the public interest  requires  deportation  of  a
    person who is liable to deportation. Therefore, the Secretary of  State
    had decided to make a deportation order against you under Section  5(1)
    of the Immigration Act 1971

 4.  Mr Mills told me that deciding to make a deportation order immediately
    after conviction was contrary to the  normal  process  adopted  by  the
    Secretary of State. Generally, an individual is served with a liability
    to  deportation  notice,  giving  him/her  an   opportunity   to   make
    representations, before any decision to deport is made. He told me that
    Home Office records indicated that a senior caseworker  had  noted  the
    error in August 2017. However, no action appears to have been taken and
    further problems arose when a second decision was made  on  25  October
    2017  to  refuse  the  appellant's   human   rights   claim   following
    representations made  by  the  appellant.  That  letter  contained  the
    following paragraph:

    Your deportation is conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public
    interest because you have been convicted an offence for which you  have
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four years  but
    at least 12 months. Therefore, in accordance with paragraph 398 of  the
    Immigration Rules, the public interest requires your deportation unless
    an exception  to  deportation  applies.  The  exceptions  are  set  out
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

 5.  However, the appellant is not a foreign criminal as defined in section
    117D of the 2002 Act:

    (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

    (a) who is not a British citizen,

    (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

    (c) who-

    (i) has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12
    months,

    (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm, or

    (iii) is a persistent offender.

    (3)...

    (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

    (a) ...

    (b) do not include a person who has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of  being  sentenced
    to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

    (c)...

    (d)....

    [my emphasis]

 6. The appellant had only been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 12
    months by virtue of being sentenced to consecutive sentences  amounting
    in aggregate to that length of time. The October  2017  letter  assumed
    wrongly that the appellant had received a sentence of 12 months.  There
    is nothing in the letter  to  indicate  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the appellant was a persistent offender  (although  the
    second offence was serious, he has  any  only  committed  two  offences
    whilst in the United Kingdom) or that  the  appellant's  offending  had
    caused serious harm. Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  appellant  second
    offence could fall within the serious harm category but he acknowledged
    nothing in the letter indicated that the Secretary of State  considered
    that it did.

 7. The consequence of the appellant not falling within the  definition  of
    foreign criminal is  that  he  also  fell  outside  the  provisions  of
    paragraph A398(a) and (b) of the Immigration Rules. The consequence  of
    the Secretary of State  not  having  informed  the  appellant  that  he
    considered him to be a persistent offender  or  that  his  offence  had
    caused serious harm was that the appellant fell outside  the  scope  of
    paragraphs 398 and 399 also. Unfortunately, none of these matters  were
    brought  to  the  attention   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   judge.
    Consequently, the judge made the false assumption that  the  paragraphs
    did apply with the result that her analysis proceeded on a false  legal
    basis.

 8. Mr Blackwood accepted that the no longer exists right to appeal on  the
    basis that a decision is not in accordance with the  law  (see  Charles
    (human rights appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 89 (IAC)). However, in a human
    rights appeal, the question of whether or not an  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of particular immigration rules may go to the question  of
    proportionality as may the legal soundness of a  Secretary  of  State's
    decision. Both representatives agreed that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision was fundamentally flawed and should be set aside. Mr Blackwood
    submitted that I should remake the decision,  allowing  the  appeal.  I
    declined to do so. Given that the decision is fundamentally flawed, the
    proper course of action is for the appeal to be returned to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for the Tribunal to remake the decision at or following a
    hearing. Mr Mills indicated that the Secretary of State will, prior  to
    the next hearing, seek to deal with the deficiencies  in  the  decision
    under appeal, whether by withdrawing  the  decision  or,  more  likely,
    issuing a supplemental decision. That is a matter for him. If  he  does
    so and the appellant objects, then that is an issue which will have  to
    be raised before the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 10 May  2018  is
    set aside. None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.  The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Gurung-Thapa)  for  the
    Tribunal to remake the decision at or following a hearing.




Signed                              Date 21 June 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




