
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/14084/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    | Decision sent to parties        |
|On 3 May 2018                             |On 11 May 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                 Jyoti Singh
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the respondent:    Ms Rhona Petterson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse her leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  on  18  May  2016.   The
   appellant is a citizen of India.

Permission to appeal

2. The grounds of appeal aver that the respondent had retained documents  of
   which the appellant had no copies, and that she had thereby been unfairly
   prejudiced.   The  appellant's  second  ground  is  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge 'did [not] seem to appreciate that under  the  Immigration
   Act 2014 the appeal could only be considered on the basis of human rights
   issues, and ...in determining the human rights issue  you  must  consider
   the Immigration Rules and determine if they are satisfied, it will  be  a
   weighty factor in determining the human  rights  issues'.  The  appellant
   relies on a longstanding relationship of more than 2 years with a British
   citizen, which she says engages not just Article 3  ECHR  but  Article  8
   ECHR.

3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Baker  on
   the basis that the First-tier Tribunal should not have decided the appeal
   as the respondent's bundle appeared to be incomplete and  an  adjournment
   had been sought to obtain the full bundle,  which  was  said  to  include
   specific medical evidence, report, prescriptions and information from the
   University where the appellant had been studying.  The  Judge  considered
   it arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  'not  considering,
   within the perspective of the Article  8  ECHR  grounds  of  appeal,  the
   appellant's position within the Immigration  Rules  as  asserted  in  the
   grounds'.


Rule 24 Reply

4. There was no Rule 24 Reply.

5. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.


Upper Tribunal hearing

6. The appellant did not appear, nor arrange representation  for  the  Upper
   Tribunal  hearing.   I  therefore  examined  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
   decision.  The Judge states at [13] that '[there] is  no  appeal  on  the
   ground that the respondent's decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
   Immigration Rules'.  It is unclear whether he means (correctly)  that  no
   such appeal can now be brought, or (erroneously) that the  appellant  did
   not bring an appeal on that ground, which as she  rightly  identifies  in
   her grounds, is no longer available to her.  in any  event,  he  did  not
   consider the appeal under the Rules.

7. Turning to the human rights appeal, the appellant has  not  produced  any
   medical evidence to show that she has more than the  symptoms  identified
   in a letter from her general medical practitioner, which was  before  the
   Tribunal.   Her  poor  health  (low  mood,  stress  symptoms,  and  lower
   abdominal pain) have prevented her completing  the  studies.   The  Judge
   considered whether it would breach the appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights
   to remove her on that basis and was unarguably right to conclude that  it
   would not.

8. The appellant's claimed relationship has not previously  been  mentioned.
   It did not form the basis of her application or of the grounds of  appeal
   to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appellant  has  the  option  of  making
   further submissions about her private life with her claimed partner,  but
   that cannot constitute any error of law in the present decision.


DECISION

9. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         4 May 2018                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


