
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14379/2015
                                                HU/14393/2015, HU/14397/2015
                                                HU/14402/2015, HU/14407/2015
                                                HU/14412/2015, HU/14415/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons            |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 1 February 2018                            |On 23 February 2018           |
|Determination prepared 1 February 2018        |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Bibi [A]
                                  Sara [A]
                                    [S A]
                                   [A S A]
                                    [A A]
                                   [Ab A]
                                   [Sb A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Coleman, of Counsel, instructed by Messrs Nandy
& Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against a  determination
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson, who in a  determination
    promulgated on 11 May 2017 allowed the  appeal  of  [Bibi  A]  and  her
    children against a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  Islamabad,
    who had refused  their  applications  to  join  the  first  appellant's
    husband, who is the father of the  other  appellants  in  Britain,  the
    father being [Iqbal A], who is  a  recognised  refugee  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The refusals were made under paragraphs 352A and 352D of  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.   In  brief,  it  was  not
    accepted by the Entry Clearance Officer Islamabad that  the  appellants
    were related as claimed to the sponsor.

2.   For ease of reference I will refer to the Secretary of State,  although
    she is the appellant before me,  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly, I will refer to [Bibi A]  and
    her children as the appellants as they were the appellants in the First-
    tier.

3.   [Iqbal A] arrived in Britain on 18 August 2011 and applied for  asylum.
     When interviewed he named his wife and all the children apart from the
    youngest, who had not  at  that  stage  been  born,  as  his  wife  and
    children.  However, it was not until 2015 that an application  for  his
    wife and children to join him in Britain was made.  The Entry Clearance
    Officer refused the applications on 16 November 2015.   In  brief,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer referred to the marriage  certificate  produced
    as well as the birth  certificates  and  stated  that  as  neither  the
    marriage certificate was issued at the time of marriage  nor  that  the
    birth certificates had been issued when the children had been  born  it
    was  not  accepted  that  those  documents  were  genuine.   Similarly,
    although family photographs had been produced it was stated that  these
    were relatively recent  and  there  were  no  photographs  showing  the
    history of the marriage from 1997 onwards.  It was stated that  it  was
    not unreasonable to expect  an  applicant  who  had  been  married  for
    eighteen years to be  able  to  produce  evidence  of  an  ongoing  and
    subsisting relationship  throughout  that  period  rather  than  a  few
    recently issued documents and some photographs taken shortly  prior  to
    the submission of the application.  It was therefore not accepted  that
    [Iqbal A] was married  to  the  first  appellant  nor  that  the  other
    appellants were his children.  The  application  was  also  refused  on
    human rights grounds.

4.   At the beginning of the hearing before the judge in the First-tier  the
    appellants' representative made an application for  an  adjournment  so
    that  DNA  evidence  could  be  obtained.   This  was  opposed  by  the
    Presenting Officer and the adjournment was refused.  The judge went  on
    to hear the evidence of the sponsor.  This he set out in some detail in
    paragraphs 7 onwards of the determination.  In  paragraphs  22  onwards
    the judge said that the appeals were based upon  the  Article  8  human
    rights of the  appellants  and  the  sponsor.   He  also  set  out  the
    submissions  of  the   Presenting   Officer   before   considering   at
    considerable length the evidence submitted on behalf of the appellants.
     He noted the photographs which had been taken  despite  evidence  from
    the sponsor that taking photographs of Afghani women was not culturally
    acceptable.  He considered that  that  was  a  potential  inconsistency
    which was potentially damaging to the credibility of the appellants and
    the sponsor.  He noticed that the documents  were  not  contemporaneous
    with the events which they showed.  He said that he did  not  find  the
    explanation given that birth certificates were not  usually  issued  on
    the same day as the birth to be particularly satisfactory  although  he
    stated that it was not wholly implausible.  He noted that all the birth
    certificates were in identical format  even  though  they  referred  to
    several births several years apart.  He said that he found the produced
    documentation to be documentation  on  which  little  weight  could  be
    placed.  However, he placed weight on the fact that  the  sponsor  when
    claiming asylum had mentioned the appellant as his wife  and  correctly
    gave her year of birth and that he referred to the five children having
    being born  at  that  stage.   He  considered  the  submission  of  the
    Presenting Officer that the  sponsor  in  the  photographs  which  were
    before him could be with people  not  related  to  him  in  the  manner
    claimed but he did not consider that that had any particular merit.  He
    noted, however, that the sponsor had travelled to Pakistan  to,  so  he
    claimed, visit his family.  He said that  he  had  had  opportunity  of
    seeing the sponsor and hear his oral evidence and that the sponsor  had
    presented as credible in the manner of his delivery.

5.   The judge concluded that  taking  into  account  the  totality  of  the
    available evidence  and  the  standard  of  proof  of  the  balance  of
    probability and even allowing for credibility concerns which  had  been
    raised by the respondent he was satisfied that the first appellant  was
    the sponsor's wife, that they had a genuine and subsisting relationship
    and that all six children were the  biological  children  of  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  He therefore stated that he  accepted  that
    the appellants met the requirements of the relevant  Immigration  Rules
    and that  they  would  also  qualify  for  leave  to  enter  under  the
    provisions of Article 8 as the decision of the respondent  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  He  therefore  said  that  the  decision  was
    disproportionate and allowed the appeals on human rights  grounds.   It
    was of course also the case that the appeals should succeed because the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.

6    The Secretary of State appealed, pointing to  the  various  credibility
    issues which had concerned the judge and in effect arguing that in  the
    absence of DNA evidence the judge must have applied a lower standard of
    proof than that of the balance of probabilities.  It was suggested that
    he had not applied rigorous scrutiny to the evidence. Mr Bramble relied
    on those grounds.

Discussion

7.   This is a detailed determination in which the judge considered all  the
    evidence in the round.  He properly said what evidence he accepted  and
    what evidence concerned him.   He,  having  weighed  up  the  evidence,
    concluded that the  appellants  were  the  wife  and  children  of  the
    sponsor.  I consider that that was a conclusion which was fully open to
    him and that was a conclusion  which  he  reached  having  applied  the
    correct standard of proof - that of the balance of probabilities -  and
    noting that the burden of  proof  lay  on  the  appellants.  There  was
    nothing irrational or perverse in his decision.

8.   I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge in the First-tier Tribunal and find that his
    decision to allow these appeals shall stand as  there  is  no  material
    error of law therein.

Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                         Date 19 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
