
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14429/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 February 2018                    |On 27 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                        Mr Sureshkanthi Ganeshalingam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 11
    June 1980.   There  is  a  considerable  history  to  this  case.   The
    appellant originally applied for entry clearance as  the  spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the UK.  That application was refused  by
    the respondent on 10 January 2013.  In a decision promulgated by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Sullivan, sitting  in  Hatton  Cross  on  31
    October 2013, the appellant's appeal was allowed.  However,  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Woodcraft  set
    aside that decision and dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of entry clearance.

 2. The appellant again applied for entry clearance, that application being
    refused  by  the  respondent  on  23  November  2015.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 26 April 2017, Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mark
    Eldridge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant appealed with permission on the following grounds:

      a) Ground 1

         The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred by refusing to grant  an
         adjournment despite the fact that the sponsor was admitted  to  A&E
         with chest pain the day before the hearing;

      b) Ground 2

         The judge erred  in  failing  to  give  any  consideration  to  the
         sponsor's witness statement and the other evidence  in  the  bundle
         which was produced to the Tribunal prior to the hearing, the  judge
         finding at [16] of the Decision and Reasons that:

             "There is no evidence in any form from the appellant.   It  is
             appreciated that being  in  Sri  Lanka  he  cannot  give  oral
             evidence but he could have provided  a  witness  statement  or
             similar and has not.  Similarly, there  is  nothing  from  his
             wife or  anyone  else  about  their  relationship.   There  is
             nothing before me to show whether they are  married  and  when
             they married or concerning her circumstances in this country."

      c) Ground 3

         It was argued that the judge erred when conducting  the  Article  8
         proportionality balance, particularly in light of the fact that the
         appellant's wife and child are now  British  citizens  and  it  was
         argued that there was inadequate consideration of the child's  best
         interests.

    Error of Law Discussion

 4. This is a case where the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  into
    consideration that  the  appellant's  then  legal  representatives  had
    written to the Tribunal the day before  the  hearing  on  20  April  to
    indicate that the sponsor had been taken  to  hospital.   Upon  further
    enquiries made by the Tribunal the legal representatives indicated that
    the family members and the sponsor had indicated that they did not need
    legal representation as the sponsor was unable to  attend.   The  judge
    directed himself in  relation  to  Rules  2  and  28  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014.  The judge took into consideration that there was
    no medical evidence confirming admission to hospital of the sponsor  or
    when this had occurred and took into consideration that it was  sixteen
    months since the lodging of the notice of appeal and five  and  a  half
    months since  notification  of  the  hearing  date  and  there  was  no
    explanation why there was  no  statement  from  the  appellant  or  the
    sponsor or any other evidence provided.  It  was  the  judge's  opinion
    that the "appellant had not engaged with  the  appeal  process  at  all
    beyond lodging a notice of appeal".

 5. The judge indicated that after he had disposed of the  case  a  further
    fax was received from the solicitors including a statement  of  fitness
    for work in respect of the sponsor which indicated that she had a  pain
    in her breast and chest pain.  It was noted that this  certificate  was
    issued on the day of the hearing.  The  Tribunal  drew  the  conclusion
    that the sponsor was well enough to attend her GP and that there was  a
    'clear possible distinction between fitness for work  and  fitness  for
    court attendance'.

 6. In relation to the fitness for work certificate however,  the  Tribunal
    failed to note that this certificate indicates that the  appellant  had
    attended A&E the previous day and that "still continues  to  have  left
    breast pain".

 7. Whilst the Tribunal's decision not to adjourn  the  case  was  arguably
    reasonable on the basis of the evidence before the  Tribunal,  that  is
    not the test to be applied.  When the  Tribunal  refuses  to  grant  an
    adjournment request,  it  must  be  considered  whether  this  decision
    deprives the affected party of their right  to  a  fair  hearing.   The
    question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    acted reasonably, but rather the test is one of fairness: was there any
    deprivation of the affected party's right to a  fair  hearing  (see  SH
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1284; and Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

 8. Although the Tribunal directed itself to the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
    2014 including the overriding objective at Rule  2  and  hearing  in  a
    party's absence at Rule 28, it is unclear whether the  Tribunal  turned
    its mind to considering whether it was in the interests of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing, particularly in light of the fact that  there
    was evidence provided to the Tribunal on the day of  the  hearing  that
    the sponsor had attended hospital on the day before the hearing and was
    still unwell.

 9. In addition I take into consideration that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration of the adjournment request was  influenced  by  the  fact
    that the Tribunal considered that there was no other evidence  produced
    despite sixteen months elapsing since the notice of  appeal.   However,
    that was incorrect.  The Tribunal file includes a bundle, albeit a very
    scant one, which includes passport copies,  family  photographs  and  a
    witness statement for the sponsor.  Although this does not address  the
    Tribunal's concern that there was no witness  statement  evidence  from
    the appellant, nevertheless it was incumbent on the Tribunal to  engage
    with the evidence  before  it  and  give  reasons  for  rejecting  that
    evidence if that was the case.  The documents in question were  stamped
    as being received by Harmondsworth hearing centre on 20 April 2017, the
    day before the hearing.  It may well be that these  documents  had  not
    reached  the  relevant  file,  given  that  the  Tribunal  specifically
    referred on a number of occasions to no other evidence being provided.

10. I am of the view therefore, and Ms Ahmad did not  forcefully  argue  to
    the contrary, that the appellant has been deprived of a  fair  hearing.
    Although given the paucity of evidence thus far the  appellant  has  an
    uphill struggle in his appeal, nevertheless I cannot say, as  a  matter
    of certainty, that such an appeal is  bound  to  fail.   Therefore  the
    error was material.

    Conclusion

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law.   The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  No findings are
    to stand,  Under section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and  Practice
    Statement 7.2, the nature and extent of judicial fact finding necessary
    for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to  reconsider  the  case  are  not  to  include  Judge
    Eldridge.

    Direction

    The following direction is made with the consent of the parties:    The
    respondent is directed to confirm, no later than two weeks prior to the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing, whether or not it  is  accepted  that  Sri
    Lankan citizens require a visa to reside in India.

    No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
