
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/14560/2018

                                                 HU/14566/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th March 2019                       | On 16th April 2019               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    F S O
                                I A E A M A-O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms C Robinson, instructed by Citizens Advice Bureau
                    Waltham Forest
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria. The first  Appellant  was  born
    in March 1977 and the second Appellant was born in February 2010.   The
    second Appellant is the first Appellant's son. They appeal against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla promulgated on  6  November
    2018 dismissing their appeals against refusal of  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Farrelly
    on 27 November 2018 on the following grounds: "An issue arising in  the
    appeal was the reasonableness of expecting the second Appellant  to  go
    to Nigeria with the first Appellant.  A large part of  the  appeal  was
    taken up with determining what connection and family  support  the  1st
    Appellant had in Nigeria.  At the appeal  there  was  evidence  from  a
    social worker about the 2nd Appellant and his life in the  UK.  In  the
    circumstances it is arguable that the position of the 2nd Appellant was
    not adequately considered, particularly now in  light  of  the  Supreme
    Court decision of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53."


Submissions

3.   Ms Robinson relied on the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to take into account evidence from the associate  head
    teacher at the second Appellant's school and from his social worker. It
    was clear from that evidence that it was not in the second  Appellant's
    best interest to  leave  the  UK.  The  judge's  finding  that  it  was
    reasonable for him to go  to  Nigeria  with  the  first  Appellant  was
    irrational. There was no engagement with the evidence from  the  school
    or from the social worker and the judge had erred in law in failing  to
    specifically deal with it.  Had  the  judge  properly  considered  this
    evidence he  could  not  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was
    reasonable for the second  Appellant  to  leave  the  UK.  The  judge's
    failure to refer to 117B(6), although not  a  material  error  of  law,
    demonstrated the judge's failure  to  adopt  the  correct  approach  in
    relation to reasonableness. The judge was over concerned with the first
    Appellant's immigration history which he  set  out  and  relied  on  at
    paragraph 24.

4.   Ms Jones relied on the case of JG (s117B(6): "reasonable to leave"  UK)
    Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072  (IAC)  in  which  the  President  found  that
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    required a court or Tribunal to hypothesise that the child in  question
    would leave the UK even if this was not likely to be the case  and  ask
    whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  do  so.  She
    submitted that the judge was entitled to adopt the  view  that  he  had
    taken for the following reasons.

5.   The first Appellant's credibility was at the centre  of  the  case  and
    this was accepted by the Appellants' representative before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The first Appellant was not believed with regard to  her
    situation in Nigeria.  The Appellants  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    taken against the first Appellant and this had infected the rest of the
    decision. However, it was clear  from  paragraphs  24  and  26  of  the
    decision that the judge had assessed the situation in the  real  world.
    The judge did not accept that there were no family members  in  Nigeria
    and found that the first Appellant had family and  friends  there.  The
    first Appellant was fit and well and could obtain employment.



6.   The judge's failure to refer to the letters from the social worker  and
    the associate head teacher was not material because they  were  written
    on the basis that the  Appellants  would  return  to  Nigeria  with  no
    support. The letters accepted the first Appellant's  account  that  she
    was a single parent and there was nobody to look after  her  son.  This
    evidence had  to  be  balanced  against  the  rejection  of  the  first
    Appellant's oral evidence that she had no family and no one to  support
    her in Nigeria. Any lack of reasoning in the decision was not material.
    The first Appellant could look after the second Appellant  and  it  was
    reasonable for him to return with her.  The  judge's  finding  was  not
    irrational.

7.   Ms Jones referred to page 44 of the Appellants' bundle, a  letter  from
    the assistant pastor, and submitted that some of the hardship affecting
    the second Appellant was caused by his mother's immigration status  and
    her inability to work in the UK.  However, should the second  Appellant
    return with his mother to Nigeria,  she  would  be  able  to  work  and
    support him. The judge's finding that it was reasonable for the  second
    Appellant to return to Nigeria was open to him on the  evidence  before
    him.

8.   In response, Ms Robinson submitted  that  the  second  Appellant  would
    experience anxiety if he moved to Nigeria and it would not  be  in  his
    best interests. The letters from the social worker  and  the  associate
    head teacher showed a change in the second Appellant's  behaviour  when
    he risked losing his home and the anxiety caused by  any  such  change.
    The letters were written in the context of the second Appellant's  lack
    of knowledge of Nigeria. It was clear that his best interests  were  to
    remain here in the UK and the judge's credibility findings in  relation
    to the first Appellant did not impact on this.

9.   Ms Robinson referred to an updated letter  in  the  Appellants'  bundle
    submitted for this  appeal  hearing,  but  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, maintaining that the second Appellant's best  interests  were
    to remain in the UK. In the letters and reports before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and those recently submitted  to  update  the  situation,  the
    social worker and the school  were  of  the  opinion  that  the  second
    Appellant's ties to the UK and the disruption to his  progress,  caused
    by a forced return to Nigeria, would not be in his best  interests.  Ms
    Robinson accepted that the second Appellant's situation has not changed
    since the First-tier Tribunal hearing and submitted that the judge  had
    failed to deal with the evidence from the social worker, the  associate
    head teacher and evidence from the second Appellant as  to  his  wishes
    and feelings.

10.  In summary, the second Appellant had a very strong private life in  the
    UK. It was unreasonable to disrupt his ties and this was apparent  from
    the evidence of the social worker and the school.  It was clear on that
    evidence that it would be unreasonable to require him to leave and  the
    judge's finding to the contrary amounted to an error of law.

Discussion and Conclusions

11.  The first Appellant came to the United Kingdom in June 2008 on a  false
    passport.  The second Appellant was born in 2010. The  judge  made  the
    following undisputed findings of fact.  The second Appellant was not in
    contact with his father, he was living with his mother and she  is  his
    sole carer. He had resided in the UK for more than seven years.  He did
    not have status in the UK. There was a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship between the Appellants. The second Appellant was not at  a
    critical stage in his education and there were no health problems.

12.  The judge  concluded  that  it  was  in  the  second  Appellant's  best
    interests to remain with his mother, the first  Appellant,  and  go  to
    Nigeria where she would be able to care for him. Ms Robinson  submitted
    this finding was not open to the judge on the evidence contained in the
    letters from the social worker, the  associate  head  teacher  and  the
    second Appellant's handwritten letter.

13.  The letter from the social worker dated 3  October  2018  states  "[The
    first Appellant] has advised me that  she  does  not  have  any  family
    remaining in Nigeria." The social worker then acknowledges  the  second
    Appellant will be nine years old in February 2019 and states:
         "He has spent all of his life so far in the UK and as  such  he  is
         fully integrated in life  in  the  UK:  he  has  attended  [primary
         school] since reception and attends an after school  club  attached
         to the school where he sees friends. He has spent all of  his  life
         in north east London and the family are well integrated  in  Church
         life where [the first Appellant] is part  of  the  choir.  As  [the
         second Appellant] has not known any life other than this, I am  not
         of the opinion that a removal from the UK would  be  reasonable  at
         his age or stage of development.

14.  The social worker noted a change in the  second  Appellant's  behaviour
    as  a  result  of  anxiety  caused  by  an  unstable  home   situation,
    contemporaneous with the family's  eviction.  She  states:  "Given  the
    above information about the impact of instability  and  change  on  his
    development, I am not of the opinion that a forced removal from the  UK
    is in the second Appellant's best interests."

15.  The associate head teacher, in her letter of 3 October 2018, is of  the
    opinion that  "It  would  not  be  in  [the  second  Appellant's]  best
    interests and would be detrimental to his wellbeing if he had to  leave
    the country and begin a new life in Nigeria." She states:
         "We understand that [the first Appellant]  is  very  anxious  about
         returning to Nigeria as she has no support network there - she  had
         no close relatives  or  extended  family  living  in  Nigeria  (her
         parents and siblings are all deceased).  As  an  only  child  of  a
         single  parent  we  have  noted  that  the  second  Appellant  gets
         distressed and emotional when his mother is distressed and  we  are
         concerned about the impact on his emotional wellbeing that  a  move
         to Nigeria will have given these circumstances.   Moving  him  from
         his life in the UK to Nigeria at this stage in his education  would
         have a detrimental effect on  the  second  Appellant's  educational
         progress and his emotional wellbeing."


16.  In his handwritten note, the second Appellant's states: "I do not  want
    to go to Nigeria because I won't fit in and it  is  difficult  with  no
    friends. I don't understand the language.  The only home I have is here
    in the UK. My life started in the UK. I go  to  school  here  and  feel
    comfortable in my school. I have friends in school and church  here  in
    London."

17.  There was also evidence from  the  senior  youth  support  worker  with
    Hackney Marsh Partnership that a move from the UK was likely to have  a
    significant impact on the  second  Appellant's  continued  development,
    confidence, mental and social health.

18.  It is apparent from paragraph 11 of the decision that  the  judge  took
    into account the evidence in the Appellants' bundle. Although the judge
    did not specifically refer to the letters set out  above,  his  finding
    that it would be reasonable for the second Appellant to go  to  Nigeria
    with the first Appellant was open to him on the evidence before him for
    the following reasons.

19.  The evidence contained in the  letters  did  not  demonstrate  that  it
    would be unreasonable  for  the  second  Appellant  to  leave  the  UK.
    Applying  KO  (Nigeria)  (paragraph  80),  the  situation  had  to   be
    considered in the real world. The judge considered  the  evidence  from
    the first Appellant and concluded that she was not a credible  witness.
    He rejected her evidence that she would have no support in Nigeria were
    she to be returned there. The real world situation is  that  the  first
    Appellant will be returning to Nigeria where she lived until the age of
    31. She has been in the UK illegally for ten years  and  she  would  be
    returning to family and friends who could support her there.

20.  Given that background, the judge then  assessed  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for her child, who was 8 years old at the  time,  to  return
    with her. The judge did not put in the balance  the  first  Appellant's
    poor immigration history, but assessed whether it was reasonable in the
    context of the situation that the Appellants find themselves in.

21.  Notwithstanding the social worker and the associate  head  teacher  are
    of the opinion that it is in the second Appellant's best  interests  to
    remain in the UK, the judge's  conclusion  that  it  was  in  his  best
    interests to remain with his mother was open to him on  that  evidence.
    The second Appellant is now nine years  old.  The  main  focus  of  his
    family and private life is  with  his  mother.  Whilst  he  has  formed
    friendships at school and is very settled there, it could not  be  said
    that his private life and his ties to the UK were  so  strong  that  it
    would be unreasonable for him to accompany his  mother  and  return  to
    Nigeria. I am not persuaded the judge's finding, that it was reasonable
    for the second Appellant to go to Nigeria with the first Appellant, was
    irrational.

22.  Looking at the judge's factual findings and applying the relevant  law,
    in particular KO, the  judge's  conclusion  was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him. The failure to specifically set out  or  refer  to
    the letters from the social worker and the associate head  teacher,  in
    the judge's findings and conclusions, did not mean the judge had failed
    to take that evidence into account.  The judge looked at  the  case  in
    the round. The judge's findings were consistent with that evidence  and
    it was open to the judge  to  attach  appropriate  weight  to  it.  His
    failure to specifically refer to it was not material to the decision.

23.  This case could not succeed  on  its  facts  taking  the  case  at  its
    highest. On the evidence in the letters referred to above, it would not
    be unreasonable for the second Appellant to leave the UK.  Accordingly,
    I find that there is no error of law in  the  judge's  decision  and  I
    dismiss the Appellants' appeals.


Notice of Decision

Appeals dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
