
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14512/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th August 2017                   |On 5th September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  Mrs H T N
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Counsel, instructed by Chambers of
Celia Record
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Vietnam  born  in  December  1988  and
    appealed against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  her
    human rights claim dated 13th  June  2016  maintaining  a  decision  to
    deport the appellant from the United Kingdom.  On 14th March  2009  the
    appellant was notified of the decision  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against  her  and  directing  her  removal  to  Vietnam  following  her
    conviction at Isleworth Crown Court for producing a class C  controlled
    drug, for which she was sentenced  to  thirteen  months'  imprisonment.
    The respondent made a deportation order  against  the  appellant  under
    Section 32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 on 17th December 2009.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Herlihy  dismissed  the  appellant's  human
    rights appeal and the appellant lodged her grounds  of  appeal  on  the
    basis that the appellant was in a relationship with a  British  partner
    and had a British child.  She was convicted and sentenced  to  thirteen
    months' custodial sentence in 2008 but was 20 years old at the time  of
    the offence and since that time had not reoffended.   She  had  entered
    into a relationship with a refugee from Vietnam who was naturalised  as
    a British citizen and the couple had a  child  together  born  on  15th
    April 2013 who was a British national.

 3. Since her application the appellant had repeatedly contacted  the  Home
    Office and asked for consideration  of  her  position  in  the  UK  and
    instructed the solicitors to make enquiries and eventually  a  judicial
    review application was settled by consent on 30th June  2015.   It  was
    submitted that the Home Office did not respond with a decision until  a
    formal complaint was lodged by the appellant's solicitors.  During this
    three year period the appellant signed and reported to the Home Office.

 4. It was submitted that  the  judge  erred  in  approach  to  the  public
    interest and applied AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 but  that  case
    did not involve delay on the part of the Home Office and accordingly it
    was submitted that the judge erred in applying the case.

 5. During the period when the appellant signed on she had bonded with  her
    child  and  strengthened  her  family  unit.   The  significant   delay
    militated against deportation in  the  case.   The  husband  would  not
    relocate as he was  a  recognised  refugee  and  the  family  would  be
    separated if the deportation were to proceed.

 6. The appeal engaged the Immigration Rules paragraphs 398 and 399 but did
    not meet the exceptions as set  out  in  the  Rules,  namely  that  the
    appellant's partner could take care of her child.   The  appellant  had
    not  lived  in  the  UK  for  fifteen  years  with  leave  to   remain.
    Accordingly there needed to be an 'exceptional' case as set out  in  MF
    Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

 7. It was submitted that the judge erred in her  approach  to  the  public
    interest by failing to consider the evidence of delays.  The  appellant
    had actively pursued her application and signed on at the Home  Office.
    The  delays  were  significant  and  should   have   been   considered,
    particularly in relation to the appellant's child.  The refusal  letter
    was silent about the issue of delay.  Given there was a family  with  a
    very young child the judge erred in failing to consider the  effect  of
    the delay on the family unit.

 8. Permission was granted on one ground only and that was in  relation  to
    the issue of delay in the assessment of Article 8.  It  is  clear  that
    this point was raised in the grounds  of  appeal  and  also  raised  in
    respect of the submissions made by Ms Record to the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge.

 9. At the hearing before me Ms Record submitted that  the  respondent  had
    accepted that there was family life between the appellant and the child
    but that is not in issue.  She confirmed that the  application  against
    the Deportation Order was made in 2013 and the delay goes to the issues
    of the Rules and in respect of Article  8.   I  specifically  requested
    that Ms Record outline how  precisely  the  delay  was  to  affect  the
    appellant's claim and  she  stated  that  it  was  the  impact  on  the
    appellant and her child.

10. Mr Armstrong submitted that any error was not material.  The judge  was
    aware of the chronology.  The appellant came to the  UK  illegally  and
    entered on 25th October 2008.  She was convicted on 18th February  2009
    and sentenced to thirteen months' imprisonment.  She  neither  appealed
    the conviction nor the  sentence  and  was  served  with  a  Notice  of
    Liability to Automatic Deportation on 14th March 2009, prior to  having
    her child.  Mr Armstrong pointed out that the appellant  was  convicted
    of cultivating and producing cannabis and that she absconded  in  2010,
    giving birth to a daughter on 15th April 2013.  The issue of delay  was
    not material and did not raise the  countervailing  compelling  factor.
    The appellant had been put on notice that she was liable to removal and
    had absconded.  She recontacted the Home  Office  when  she  wanted  to
    regularise her stay and had a child  after  a  deportation  notice  was
    served.

Conclusions

11. Guidance is given at Paragraph 38 of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016]  UKSC  60
    in relation to the approach to be taken in deportation cases:

         "38.     The implication of the new rules is  that  rules  399  and
             399A identify particular  categories  of  case  in  which  the
             Secretary of State accepts that the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of the offender is outweighed under article  8  by
             countervailing factors.  Cases  not  covered  by  those  rules
             (that is to say, foreign offenders who have received sentences
             of at least four years, or  who  have  received  sentences  of
             between 12 months and four years but whose private  or  family
             life does not meet the requirements of  rules  399  and  399A)
             will be dealt with on  the  basis  that  great  weight  should
             generally be given to the public interest in  the  deportation
             of such offenders, but that it can be outweighed,  applying  a
             proportionality test, by  very  compelling  circumstances:  in
             other words, by a very strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put  it
             in SS (Nigeria).  The countervailing  considerations  must  be
             very compelling  in  order  to  outweigh  the  general  public
             interest in the deportation of such offenders, as assessed  by
             Parliament  and  the  Secretary  of  State.   The   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence indicates  relevant  factors  to  consider,  and
             rules 399 and 399A provide  an  indication  of  the  sorts  of
             matters  which  the  Secretary  of  State  regards   as   very
             compelling.  As explained at para 26 above, they  can  include
             factors bearing on the weight of the public  interest  in  the
             deportation of the particular offender, such  as  his  conduct
             since the offence was committed, as well as  factors  relating
             to his private or family life.  Cases falling within the scope
             of section 32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest  in
             deportation is outweighed, other than those specified  in  the
             new rules themselves, are likely to be a very  small  minority
             (particularly  in   non-settled   cases).    They   need   not
             necessarily involve any circumstance which is  exceptional  in
             the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel for the Secretary
             of State accepted, consistently with Huang [2007]  2  AC  167,
             para 20),  but  they  can  be  said  to  involve  'exceptional
             circumstances' in the sense that they involve a departure from
             the general rule."

That paragraph specifically states that cases not covered by the  Rules  399
    and 399A will be dealt with on  the  basis  that  great  weight  should
    generally be given to the public interest in the  deportation  of  such
    offenders but that it can be  outweighed,  applying  a  proportionality
    test, by very compelling circumstances.  The case emphasises  the  fact
    that the countervailing considerations  must  be  "very  compelling  in
    order to outweigh the general public interest  in  the  deportation  of
    such offenders, as assessed by Parliament and the Secretary of  State".
    There was also a reference to  the  fact  that  cases  outweighing  the
    public interest in deportation  are  likely  to  be  in  a  very  small
    minority, particularly in non-settled cases,  of  which  this  is  one.
    This appellant came to the  UK  illegally  and  has,  as  Mr  Armstrong
    pointed out, proceeded to establish her family life having entered  the
    UK illegally, remained unlawfully, having been convicted and imprisoned
    and having a deportation Order signed  against  her.   The  judge  took
    those facts into consideration together with the fact that she had  not
    re-offended since her conviction.  The only factor,  it  was  asserted,
    that the judge had not had regard was delay.

12. I specifically address the issue of delay and the guidance  EB (Kosovo)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41:

         "14.     It does not, however, follow that delay in  the  decision-
             making process is necessarily irrelevant to the decision.   It
             may, depending on the facts, be relevant in any one  of  three
             ways.  First, the applicant may during the period of any delay
             develop closer personal and social ties and  establish  deeper
             roots in the community than he could have shown earlier.   The
             longer the period of the delay, the likelier  this  is  to  be
             true.  To the extent that it is true,  the  applicant's  claim
             under article 8  will  necessarily  be  strengthened.   It  is
             unnecessary to  elaborate  this  point  since  the  respondent
             accepts it.

         15.      Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way.   An
             immigrant without leave to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
             precarious situation, liable to be removed at any  time.   Any
             relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely  to
             be, initially, tentative, being entered into under the  shadow
             of severance by administrative order.  This is the  more  true
             where the other party to the  relationship  is  aware  of  the
             applicant's precarious position.  This  has  been  treated  as
             relevant to the quality of the relationship.  Thus in R (Ajoh)
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  EWCA  Civ
             655, para 11, it was noted that 'It was reasonable  to  expect
             that both [the applicant] and her husband would  be  aware  of
             her  precarious  immigration  status'.   This   reflects   the
             Strasbourg  court's  listing  of  factors  relevant   to   the
             proportionality of removing an immigrant convicted  of  crime:
             'whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he
             or she entered into  a  family  relationship'  see  Boultif  v
             Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR  50,  para  48;  Mokrani  v  France
             (2003) 40 EHRR 123, para 30.  A relationship so  entered  into
             may well be imbued with  a  sense  of  impermanence.   But  if
             months pass without a  decision  to  remove  being  made,  and
             months become years, and year  succeeds  year,  it  is  to  be
             expected that this sense of impermanence  will  fade  and  the
             expectation will grow that if the authorities had intended  to
             remove the applicant they would have taken  steps  to  do  so.
             This  result  depends  on  no  legal  doctrine   but   on   an
             understanding of how, in some cases, minds may work and it may
             affect the proportionality of removal.

         16.      Delay may be relevant, thirdly,  in  reducing  the  weight
             otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of firm and  fair
             immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result of
             a   dysfunctional   system   which    yields    unpredictable,
             inconsistent and unfair outcomes.  In  the  present  case  the
             appellant's cousin, who entered the country  and  applied  for
             asylum at the same time and whose position is not said  to  be
             materially different, was granted exceptional leave to remain,
             during the two-year period which it  took  the  respondent  to
             correct its  erroneous  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant's
             application on grounds of non-compliance.  In the case  of  JL
             (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court of Appeal at the same  time
             as the present case, there was a somewhat similar  pattern  of
             facts.  JL escaped from Sierra Leone with her half brother  in
             1999, and claimed asylum.  In 2000 her claim  was  refused  on
             grounds of non-compliance.  As in the  appellant's  case  this
             decision was erroneous, as the respondent recognised  eighteen
             months later.  In February 2006 the half brother  was  granted
             humanitarian protection.  She was not.  A system so  operating
             cannot be said to be  'predictable,  consistent  and  fair  as
             between one applicant and another' or as yielding 'consistency
             of treatment between one aspiring immigrant and another'.   To
             the extent that this is shown to be so, it may have a  bearing
             on  the  proportionality  of  removal,  or  of  requiring   an
             applicant to apply  from  out  of  country.   As  Carnwath  LJ
             observed  in  Akaeke  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department [2005] EWCA Civ 947, [2005] INLR 575, para 25:

             'Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on  the  part  of
                  the Secretary of State is  capable  of  being  a  relevant
                  factor,  then  the  weight  to  be  given  to  it  in  the
                  particular case was a matter for the Tribunal'",

13. It is clear that delay may be relevant.  That  said,  EB  (Kosovo)  was
    decided in a non-deportation case and even in that case  the  relevance
    and strength of such a factor depends on the facts.  First,  I  am  not
    persuaded that there was specific delay in this particular  case  which
    would have prejudiced  the  appellant.   She  was  well  aware  of  the
    Deportation Order, absconded between 2010 and 2013 and having  had  her
    deportation decision then proceeded to have a child  and  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain  in  July  2013.   The  fact  that  she
    submitted a judicial review on 31st October 2014 does  not  assist  her
    case as that application was refused.  She then appeared  to  submit  a
    further judicial review on 3rd December 2015 which  was  subject  to  a
    consent order  to  make  a  decision.   That,  to  my  mind,  does  not
    specifically accept delay on the part of the Secretary of State, merely
    an acceptance that a decision should be  made  promptly.  There  is  no
    doubt that the Secretary of State has a wealth of decisions to make and
    decisions relating to those  subject  to  a  Deportation  Order  engage
    serious and weighty matters.   In  the  scheme  of  the  administrative
    responsibilities, two and half years is not such an extensive delay  as
    to be a countervailing factor.  Despite the  complaint  letter  by  the
    solicitors I am not persuaded that there was delay on the part  of  the
    Secretary of State such that it was a requirement to  take  delay  into
    account in the proportionality assessment.

14. The judge was fully aware of the chronology and the background and  the
    strength of ties between the appellant, her husband and  the  child  at
    the point of the hearing and,  even  if  there  was  delay,  I  am  not
    persuaded, further, that it  would  be  a  sufficiently  countervailing
    factor to constitute a compelling circumstance.

15. It was argued in EB (Kosovo) that delay may be relevant  in  a  second,
    less obvious, way  in  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  that  the
    applicant and her husband would be aware of her precarious  immigration
    status and that a relationship so entered into may  be  imbued  with  a
    sense of impermanence but if months and years pass without  a  decision
    to remove being made, and months become years, and year  succeeds  year
    it is  to  be  expected  that  the  impermanence  would  fade  and  the
    expectation would grow that the authorities had decided not  to  remove
    the applicant.

16. That is clearly not the case in this instance.  The decision  had  been
    made to deport the applicant and she can have been  under  no  illusion
    that this was anything other than  the  case.   As  I  have  identified
    above, the representations by the solicitors are not an acknowledgement
    one way or the other by the Secretary of State that  there  was  indeed
    delay, particularly when they  are  dealing  with  a  great  number  of
    applications.

17. Nonetheless the judge was aware of the circumstances of  the  appellant
    and the circumstances of her child at the date of the hearing,  and  as
    she was bound to do, made a full assessment of her human rights and the
    best interests of the child.  I am not persuaded that  the  application
    of AJ (Zimbabwe), with which the judge noted that the facts  were  very
    similar, was misguided.

18. As set out in paragraph 17 of AJ (Zimbabwe), Rule 399(a) identifies the
    particular circumstances where it is accepted that the interests of the
    child will outweigh the public interest in deportation.  The conditions
    are onerous and will only rarely arise.  They include  the  requirement
    that it would not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK and  that
    no other family member is able to look  after  the  child  in  the  UK.
    Clearly the father is in the UK.

19. As such I am not persuaded that the delay in this  instance,  which  in
    fact I do not find a delay, is  an  additional  feature  affecting  the
    nature and quality of the relationship which take the case out  of  the
    ordinary.  The judge recorded that although the father  was  a  refugee
    from Vietnam, he had in fact returned there in 2015 to visit his family
    there [18] and the family spoke Vietnamese and were culturally familiar
    with Vietnamese life.  The judge  addressed  the  relevant  factors  in
    relation to Section 117, recorded that the husband was aware  from  the
    outset (they met at the end of 2011) that she was in the UK  illegally.
    At paragraph 28 the judge concluded, after analysis, and at the date of
    the hearing, that there would not be any significant  hardship  if  the
    partner and daughter decided to accompany her to Vietnam.  Moreover, at
    paragraph 29 having explored the relevant factors, as at  the  date  of
    the hearing and having considered the  relationship  of  the  appellant
    with her daughter, the judge concluded, that it  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh for her daughter to remain in the UK without her.  In my view  it
    cannot be said that delay was a material factor in this matter and  the
    error of law has not been made out.

Notice of Decision

20. As such I find there is no error of law and the decision shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction as the decision involves a minor child.



Signed Helen Rimington                             Date 31st August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

