
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14725/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2017                      |On 21 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Mehwish Saif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barr, instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mehwish Saif, was born on 5  September  1987  and  is  a
    female citizen of Pakistan.  The  appellant  cohabits  with  an  Afghan
    national who has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The
    couple's child was born in the United Kingdom and,  in  consequence  of
    his father's settled status, is a British citizen.  Judge  Parkes  (who
    dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her  human
    rights  claim)  found  that   whilst   "nationality   was   a   weighty
    consideration it is not a determinative factor.  The  question  clearly
    has to be what the benefits of British citizenship is  the  appellant's
    son enjoying that he would be deprived of on that there is no  evidence
    and so no apparent loss to him from  living  in  Pakistan"  [22].   The
    judge concluded at [25] that the appellant's  failure  to  observe  the
    immigration laws contributed to  a  powerful  public  interest  in  her
    removal. He found that the appellant could  either  leave  the  country
    with her son and apply for  entry  clearance  from  Pakistan  or  leave
    permanently with her child to live  in  Pakistan.   If  she  chose  the
    former option then there is "nothing in the evidence  to  suggest  that
    would be an unreasonable burden".  The judge found that  the  appellant
    was "not a victim of circumstances but has created  the  situation  she
    finds herself in with the consequences set out above".

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Mills, for the respondent, told  me  that
    the Secretary of State agreed that the appeal  should  be  allowed  and
    that the decision should be  remade  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the immigration decision.  Mr Mills acknowledged (as had  Judge
    Gibb, who granted permission to appeal) that, whilst the  jurisprudence
    may have moved on from Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano -
     Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048(IAC), the Secretary of State's directions to
    her officers maintained that it would not be in the public interest  to
    remove a British child (and, by extension, his or her carer)  from  the
    European Union  in  cases  which  did  not  involve  criminality.   The
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in SF (Guidance, post-2014  Act)  [2017]
    UKUT 120 (IAC) confirms that:

         "even in the absence of a "not in accordance with the  law"  ground
         of appeal, the Tribunal ought to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
         guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome
         in the instant case. Only in that way can consistency  be  obtained
         between those cases that do, and those  cases  that  do  not,  come
         before the Tribunal."

    In the circumstances, Mr Mills submitted that Judge Parkes had erred in
    law by not allowing the appeal.  I agree.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  4  April
2017 is set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   I  have
remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights
grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 18 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
