
                               [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/14414/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11th June 2019                       | On 25th June 2019                 |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                         MR CAESAR RAMON GODOY ORTIZ
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Jegede (Legal representative)
For the Respondent:     Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Cameron)  (FtT)  promulgated
    on 25th February 2019 in which the  appellant's  application  on  human
    rights grounds was dismissed.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Paraguay born  on  6th  July  1976.   He
    entered the UK in February 2007.  He married his wife on 18.2.2011. His
    wife has leave as an EEA resident until 30.11.2022, his stepson aged 12
    years is a British citizen and his daughter  aged  7  years  has  leave
    until 30.11.2022.  It was accepted that the appellant entered the UK on
    the date given.

Grounds of appeal

3.     In grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the FtT erred by

    a)  making  a  flawed  assessment  under  section  55  regarding  "best
    interests of the child";
    b) failing to give sufficient weight to the fact that the children  and
    his  wife  were  lawfully  resident,  in  considering  if  there   were
    exceptional circumstances;
    c) making a flawed assessment  of  section  117B  2002  Act  and  under
    section 117B(6) as to reasonableness;
    d) failing to correctly interpret the judgment in KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]
    UKSC 53.

Permission to appeal

4.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted by  FTJ  PJM
  Hollingworth on 26.4.2019.   Permission was granted on all grounds.

5.   The respondent produced a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

Submissions

6.    At the hearing before me Mr Jegede representing the  appellant  relied
    on the detailed grounds of appeal. He emphasised that the FtT failed to
    consider the position that the appellant was the primary carer for  the
    children and  did  not  explore  the  possible  circumstances  for  the
    children if either the appellant left the UK or if all the family  left
    with him.

7.    In response Ms Isherwood for the Respondent, contended  that  the  FtT
    had properly considered all the relevant evidence.  The FtT  ought  not
    to given weight to the appellant's inability to meet the Rules  in  the
    event of an out of  country  application  being  made.   There  was  no
    evidence submitted as to the stepson's special needs, other than he was
    a high achiever. It was accepted that another Tribunal  may  well  have
    reached a different decision but there was no material  error  of  law.
    The FtT followed the approach in KO at the time  of  the  hearing.  The
    best interests of the children was not a trump card and the  FtT  found
    that the children could reasonably have learned Spanish in Paraguay.

8.    Mr Jegede submitted that MT & ET  was  decided  at  the  time  of  the
    determination.  The FtT found that it was in the best interest  of  the
    children to remain in the UK with both parents.


Discussion and conclusion

9.     I found that there were material errors of law in  the  decision  and
    reasons which I set aside.  The FtT accepted that  both  children  were
    qualifying children under section 117B; one as a  British  citizen  and
    the appellant's daughter had resided in the UK for over 7  years  [17].
    The FtT failed to place sufficient weight on the fact  that  one  child
    was a British citizen and the other had valid leave  until  2022.   The
    latter would be in a position to apply for citizenship in 2021. The FtT
    appeared to be confused and contradictory as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's wife and children would be "required" to leave the UK  with
    the appellant.  Clearly as  the  FtT  then  points  out  they  are  not
    required to leave as they have rights to remain or British  citizenship
    [33].

10.   The FtT failed to  consider  the  starting  point  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a British child to leave the UK, as incorporated
    in the  respondent's  guidance.   The  FtT  failed  to  carry  out  any
    assessment of the impact on the children  leaving  the  UK  or  of  the
    appellant having to leave in terms of where the best interests  of  the
    children lie.  The  FtT  despite  making  findings  favourable  to  the
    appellant (set out at paragraph 13 of the grounds of  appeal)  appeared
    then not to have taken  them  into  account  in  assessing  the  public
    interest factors under section 117B(6).  Having set out all the reasons
    why it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK,
    the FtT  then  focused  on  matters  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    immigration history and concluded that it would not be unduly harsh  to
    expect the family to relocate and that the interests  of  the  children
    failed to outweigh the public interest.  Such an approach is manifestly
    an error in law in the application of section 117B(6).  The grounds  of
    appeal are made out.

11.     There is a material error of law in the decision which shall be  set
    aside.  The findings of fact were not challenged and are preserved.   I
    heard brief submissions from both representatives prior  to  re  making
    the decision.  I allowed the appeal and now give my reasons.


Re making

12.   I go on to remake the decision and allow the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The FtT found that the two children had lived  all  of  their
    lives in the UK [22] and accepted that the appellant's step  son  is  a
    high achiever and  that  it  is  important  that  he  remains  suitably
    challenged and supported by his family [25], for whom the appellant  is
    the primary carer.  It  was  found  that  it  was  in  both  children's
    interests to remain in the UK [25 & 32 & 42] with both  parents.   None
    of the family save for the appellant is a national  of  Paraguay  [35].
    There would be considerable disruption to  the  children's  lives  were
    they required to leave with the appellant [38]. None  of  the  children
    has lived in Paraguay and spent their entire lives in the UK.

13.  In applying the respondent's own  guidance  (Family  migration  App  FM
    January 23 2019) the starting point is that the children would  not  be
    expected to  leave  because  they  are  qualifying  children.  This  is
    supported by MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 5093 which reflects  the
    current jurisdiction.   The FtT found that it was in the best interests
    of the children to remain in the UK with both parents having taken into
    account relevant factors.  The FtT also found that  the  appellant  had
    lived in the UK since 2007, was the only father figure to his step  son
    who he had known since the age of 2 years and they had  a  close  bond.
    On the facts as found by the FtT I am satisfied that  there  is  family
    life in the UK and Article 8 is engaged. The decision was lawful as the
    appellant failed to meet the Immigration Rules. The appellant  was  the
    primary carer for the children as  his  wife  worked  full  time.   The
    appellant's removal would be an interference in the family  life  which
    it was accepted by the FtT would be "disrupted". In considering section
    117B factors I find that the appellant speaks English,  is  financially
    dependent on his wife and is the primary carer for the children.  There
    would be no additional recourse to  public  funds.   I  find  that  the
    appellant has made a number of applications to regularise his stay. The
    Suitability requirements are met [10]. In applying section 117B (6) the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with two qualifying
    children.  The findings as set out above establish that it would not be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK.   The  interference
    was not proportionate  having  regard  to  the  best  interest  of  the
    children which is a primary consideration. There is no public  interest
    in removal of the appellant where section 117B(6) applies.

Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Signed
                             Date 19.6.2019


GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NO FEE AWARD




Signed
                           Date: 19.6.2019




GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








