

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: HU/14065/2015

                                                         HU/14066/2015

                                                         HU/14067/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


      |Heard at Kings Court, North Shields      |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 27 April 2017                         |        On 28 June 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before


                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between




                            MASPS & Three Others
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation

For the Appellants:           Mr A Jafar, of counsel, instructed by Lyon
             Legal Limited
For the Respondent:           Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
             Officer


                                  ANONYMITY

      Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI2008/269)  I  make  an  Anonymity  Order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court orders otherwise, no report of  any  proceedings  or
      any form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify
      the original Appellant. This prohibition applies to,  amongst  others,
      all parties.





                                  DECISION

   1. For the reasons elaborated in our ex tempore  judgment  given  at  the
      conclusion of the hearing, this appeal succeeds to the extent that the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") is set aside  and  the
      appeal is remitted to a differently constituted FtT for the purpose of
      rehearing and fresh decision.


   2. Taking as read  both  the  decision  of  the  FtT  and  the  grant  of
      permission to appeal, our reasons for  thus  deciding  can  be  stated
      succinctly.  The central error of law which we have diagnosed  in  the
      decision of the FtT is a failure to properly engage with  the  medical
      evidence.  Such evidence consisted of two reports of Mr  Henman  FRCS,
      Consultant  Orthopaedic  Surgeon  and  Dr  Perera,  Senior  Consultant
      Orthopaedic Surgeon.   There  are  two  salient  deficiencies  in  the
      Judge's consideration of the medical evidence:


       a) First, in identifying the medical evidence, the  Judge  failed  to
          even acknowledge Mr Henman's main report, the initial  one,  which
          is dated 01 October 2015.


       b) Second, the Judge gave determinative weight to a  short  quotation
          from an unspecified medical source contained in the  Secretary  of
          State's detailed grounds  of  defence,  dated  26  June  2015,  in
          anterior judicial review proceedings  brought  on  behalf  of  the
          family.



   3. It is plain from the decision that  the  Judge  did  not  source  this
      quotation.  If this exercise had been performed, the Judge would  have
      been bound to engage with the fact that the brief quotation originates
      in a laconic letter written by Mr Henman FRCS to the family's  General
      Medical Practitioner and the date thereof viz 08  January  2014.   The
      Judge would have had to  balance  this  brief  letter  with  the  more
      detailed and more recent medical evidence which came into existence in
      2015 and 2016.  There was a manifest failure to do so.


   4.  For these two reasons, the decision of the FtT is unsustainable.




   5. We turn next to the issue of the best interests of the three year  old
      child of the family and the Secretary of State's duty under section 55
      of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.   Mr  McVeety
      accepted, correctly, that this is a continuing duty.  This  means,  in
      practice, that the  Secretary  of  State  must  be  receptive  to  new
      evidence  and  representations  and,  where  these  eventuate,  should
      normally be prepared to make a fresh decision.  We accept that no  new
      case was made to the Secretary of State in advance of the FtT hearing.
       However, it is evident that the new medical evidence was duly served.
       The indelible fact is that the Secretary of  State  did  not  make  a
      fresh decision.  We make clear that no one is  to  be  criticised  for
      this. However, one of the consequences of this was that  the  FtT  did
      not have available to it a fresh decision encompassing a  revised  and
      updated best interests assessment.  In this respect, the framework  of
      the appeal before the FtT was deficient.


   6. For the reasons explained in this Tribunal's decisions in MK  (Section
      55 - Tribunal Options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) and R (HN) -
      v - Secretary of State for the Home Department (JR - Scope - Evidence)
      IJR [2015] UKUT 437 (IAC)  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the  primary
      decision maker in cases of this kind and it is  undesirable  that  the
      tribunal, whether at first instance or on appeal, should  find  itself
      evaluating evidence  which  has  not  first  been  considered  by  the
      Secretary of State in the context of making  an  original,  or  fresh,
      decision.  Furthermore, as emphasised in MK and JO (Section  55  Duty)
      Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517 (IAC), the Section 55 duty  imposed  upon  the
      Secretary of State has, per section  55(2),  an  important  procedural
      dimension which the tribunal itself cannot easily replicate.


   7. Thus the effect of a setting aside and remittal order will enable  the
      Secretary of State to consider all of the evidence in its totality and
      to make a fresh decision. This will operate to repair  the  imbalances
      and deficiencies in the extant framework.  Indeed, it could give  rise
      to a withdrawal of the decision  under  appeal  and  the  substitution
      thereof, with all the consequences which would  flow  therefrom.   The
      important point is that the tribunal, whether in the context  of  this
      remitted appeal or some future appeal or, indeed, a   judicial  review
      challenge, would be confronted with a completed and  updated  decision
      making exercise. While we are not empowered to order the Secretary  of
      State to make a fresh decision, we have no doubt that the  public  law
      duty to do so which has materialised will be duly recognised.


Decision and Order

   8. Giving effect to the foregoing:


       a) The decision of the FtT is set aside.


       b) The appeal is  remitted  to  a  differently  constituted  FtT  for
          rehearing and fresh decision.


       c) The Secretary of State's representative will  copy  to  the  Upper
          Tribunal any fresh decision of the kind contemplated above.


       d) The Appellants' representatives shall, within 28 days of any  such
          fresh decision, compose a "position" letter to  the  Secretary  of
          State's representative, copy to the FtT.




   9. We are satisfied that no more prescriptive order is required.  The FtT
      will, in the events envisaged above, take such procedural steps as  it
      considers appropriate.








                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                               27 April 2017

