
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14475/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2019                  |On 25 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE NICOL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               TIJAN CHHANTYAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Balroop, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Iqbal sent on 12 June 2019,  dismissing  his
         appeal on human rights grounds.





Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born in 1971.  His application
         for entry clearance as an  adult  dependent  child  of  his  mother
         ('M'), a widow of a former  Gurkha  soldier,  was  refused  by  the
         respondent in a decision dated 13 June 2018.

Appeal proceedings

      3. The FTT heard oral evidence  from  M  and  took  into  account  the
         written evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant.  The FTT  made
         two key findings: (i) there was no family life for the purposes  of
         Article 8, ECHR between the appellant and M; (ii) in any event, the
         interference with that family life was  not  disproportionate.  The
         FTT  therefore  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8
         grounds.   The  appellant  relied  upon  two  grounds  of   appeal,
         challenging each of these findings.

      4. FTT Judge  O'Brien  granted  permission  to  appeal,  observing  in
         relation to (i) that there was an  arguable  contradiction  in  the
         FTT's findings on  family  life;  and  (ii)  that  when  addressing
         proportionality the FTT left out of account the relevant factor  of
         historic injustice.

      5. The respondent filed a helpful Rule 24 notice.  Significantly,  the
         respondent conceded that, as submitted by the appellant  in  ground
         (ii), in  omitting  historic  injustice  from  the  proportionality
         exercise, the FTT erred in law but the  SSHD  submitted  that  this
         error was not material because the FTT  was  entitled  to  find  an
         absence  of  Article  8  family  life.   The  respondent  therefore
         continued to resist the appeal in relation to ground (i).

Hearing

      6. At the hearing before us,  Mr  Balroop  accepted  that  the  appeal
         entirely turned on whether ground (i) was made out.  He relied upon
         a skeleton argument that sought to amplify the grounds  of  appeal.
         However Mr Balroop accepted that in essence ground (i) relied  upon
         two submissions: the FTT took irrelevant matters into account  when
         considering whether family life  exists  and  applied  too  high  a
         threshold to the determination of family life.

      7. Ms Jones relied upon a rule 24 notice.  This conceded  that  ground
         (ii) contained an error of law.  The  FTT  failed  to  take  proper
         account of  the  'historic  injustice'  involved,  when  addressing
         proportionality.  Ms Jones submitted that this  error  of  law  was
         immaterial because the FTT made no error of  law  regarding  family
         life.

      8. We reserved our decision, which we now provide with reasons.

Error of Law Discussion

      9. The FTT carefully considered  all  the  available  evidence  before
         reaching findings of fact entirely open  to  it.   Mr  Balroop  was
         correct to place no reliance upon the observation in the  grant  of
         permission to appeal decision that there was a contradiction in the
         FTT's findings on family life.  At [35]  the  FTT  was  considering
         Article 8(2) on the alternative basis that it was wrong in reaching
         the conclusion at [31] in relation to Article 8(1).

     10. The FTT properly directed itself to Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA  Civ  320
         and other relevant authorities at [19]-[21],  and  the  appropriate
         approach to the determination of family life  pursuant  to  Article
         8(1), ECHR.  We do not accept that the  FTT  required  a  threshold
         that was overly high or that irrelevant matters played any material
         role in the family life assessment.  Whilst the FTT noted that  the
         appellant's mother made an active choice to remain in the  UK  that
         was not its focus.  Rather, the FTT holistically considered all the
         factors in support of and against there being family life.  The FTT
         summarised the evidence at [22]-[26] with  the  findings  following
         from [27].  That does not mean that the FTT did not  take  all  the
         relevant evidence into account when reaching the ultimate  decision
         on family life.  At [31] the FTT made it clear that  "the  totality
         of the evidence" was considered.  The FTT was  aware  of  and  took
         into account the following matters:

          a) the appellant's father died in 2002 when he was only 18 and as
             such M was his only parent after this - see [1] and [24];

          b) M provided general support through regular  communication  and
             visits, together with financial support - see [25]-[26];

          c) the appellant's age (34) and history of  independent  study  -
             see [27] and [31];

          d) the  nature  and  extent  of  the  claimed  financial  support
             provided by M to the appellant.

     11. Contrary to the submissions in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  FTT
         carefully considered the oral evidence provided  by  M  (see  [12]-
         [14]) and was  entitled  to  find  that  there  was  a  paucity  of
         independent evidence of financial support.  It cannot  be  properly
         said that the FTT left out of account bank statements from  a  bank
         account in Nepal (containing M's widow pension payments)  when  the
         FTT expressly noted these at [29].  In addition, the FTT was  fully
         aware that M gave evidence that she provided financial  support  to
         the appellant via friends through the Hundi system but was entitled
         to be concerned that there was an absence  of  supporting  evidence
         from friends in relation to this.

     12. Significantly, the FTT did not  accept  that  M  provided  entirely
         reliable evidence.  The FTT was entitled to draw adverse inferences
         at [30] from the mother's vague answer to why she had  been  unable
         to assist the appellant to set up a business in Nepal.

     13. Having considered all the  evidence  in  the  round,  the  FTT  was
         entitled to conclude that the appellant was living  an  independent
         life from his mother and there were no more than  normal  emotional
         ties between them.  In reaching this finding, the FTT  clearly  had
         the guidance in Rai in mind i.e. the support  needed  to  be  real,
         committed or effective  (and  not  necessarily  exclusive),  having
         directed itself to those principles at [20].  The  FTT  simply  did
         not accept the claimed dependency on the evidence available and did
         not accept that  notwithstanding  the  difficult  circumstances  in
         Nepal, this particular 35  year  old  educated  man  was  genuinely
         dependent upon M in any real or effective manner. In an enquiry  as
         highly fact-sensitive as this  one  (see  Ghising  (family  life  -
         adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) at  [62],  the  FTT
         was entitled to reach the conclusion that in this  particular  case
         there was not family life for the purposes of Article 8(1).

Conclusion

     14. Mr Balroop has been unable to identify any material error of law in
         the FTT's decision, and the appeal must therefore be dismissed.



Notice of decision

     15. The FTT's decision does not contain a material error of law and  we
         do not set it aside.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 21 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
