
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14036/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 May 2019                     |On 05 June 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                AKTAR HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H B Semega-Janneh (counsel) instructed by Shah
                    Jalal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVetty, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Garratt promulgated on 11 February 2019, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3. The Appellant was born on 4 May 1974 and is a national of Bangladesh.  On
20 April 2017 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK.  On  13
June 2018 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Garratt ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 19  March  2019  Judge  Keith
granted permission to appeal stating

         "2.      The grounds assert that the Judge erred  in  applying  the
         wrong  standard  of  proof  -  while  the  Judge   considered   the
         appellant's appeal, including by reference to articles 2 and  3  of
         the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  ("ECHR"),  as  well  as
         article 8, the Judge referred, at [29] to  the  standard  of  proof
         being the "balance of probabilities", which was  inconsistent  with
         the authority of HKK (article 3:  burden  and  standard  of  proof)
         Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 386 (IAC)


         3. In an otherwise well-reasoned determination, it appears that the
         Judge assessed the appellant's appeal, including  by  reference  to
         articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, when he referred  to  both  of  those
         articles at [36] of the reasons; and to  "serious  harm"  at  [40].
         However, it is potentially unclear what standard of proof the Judge
         applied in assessing the appeals under articles 2 and  3,  so  that
         the Judge arguably erred in applying too high a standard."


The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Semega-Janneh moved the grounds of  appeal.  He
told me that the Judge applied the wrong standard of  proof  in  considering
articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds of appeal. He took me to [29] of the  decision
where the  Judge  identifies  the  standard  of  proof  as  the  balance  of
probabilities. He relied on Kacaj (Article 3 -  Standard  of  Proof  -  Non-
State  Actors)  Albania   [2001]   UKIAT   00018   and   HKK   (Article   3:
burden/standard of proof) Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 00386(IAC).

(b) I drew Mr Semega-Janneh's attention to the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
First tier Tribunal, and asked if he could identify whether any  grounds  of
appeal were pled other than article 8. He told me that paragraph 21  of  the
grounds of appeal raise (at least implicitly) articles 2 and 3 ECHR  grounds
and that, in any event,  at [36] the Judge finds that the grounds of  appeal
encompass articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 convention.

(c) Counsel for the appellant told me that the correct standard  is  a  real
risk or substantial grounds for believing that article 3 would be  breached,
and that the Judge applied a higher standard of proof. He asked  me  to  set
the decision aside.

6. For the respondent, Mr  McVetty  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material or otherwise. He told me that  the  original
application proceeded on article 8 ECHR grounds only, and that  the  grounds
of appeal to the First-tier tribunal  raises  only  article  8  grounds.  He
reminded me that after the grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  the  appellant
could only amend the grounds of appeal and introduce new  matters  with  the
consent of the respondent. He told me that  no  attempt  had  been  made  to
either amend the grounds of appeal or to seek the  respondent's  consent  to
extending the grounds of appeal to a new matter. Mr  McVetty  told  me  that
[29] of the decision is correct and that the Judge has applied  the  correct
standard of proof because the only matter competently before the  Judge  was
an appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Analysis

7. In HKK (Article 3: burden/standard of proof) Afghanistan [2018] UKUT  386
(IAC) it was held that (1) It has long been  a  requirement,  found  in  the
case  law  of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  ("ECtHR"),  for  the
government of a signatory state to dispel any doubts  regarding  a  person's
claim to be at real risk of Article 3 harm, if that person adduces  evidence
capable of proving that there are substantial  grounds  for  believing  that
expulsion from the state would violate Article  3  of  the  ECHR;  (2)  This
requirement does not mean the burden of dispelling  such  doubts  shifts  to
the government in every case where  such  evidence  is  adduced,  save  only
where the claim is so lacking in substance as to be clearly  unfounded;  (3)
Article 4.5 of the Qualification Directive  (Council  Directive  2004/83/EC)
provides that, where certain specified conditions are met,  aspects  of  the
statements of  an  applicant  for  international  protection  that  are  not
supported by documentary or other evidence shall not  need  confirmation;(4)
The effect of Article 4.5 is that a person who has otherwise put  forward  a
cogent case should not  fail,  merely  because  he  or  she  does  not  have
supporting documentation. Nowhere in the Directive is it said that a  person
who has documentation which, on its face, may be said to  be  supportive  of
the claim (e.g. an arrest warrant or witness summons), but  whose  claim  is
found to be problematic in other respects, has nevertheless made  out  their
case, so that the burden of disproving it shifts to the government.

8. In Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of  proof)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT
00040 (IAC) the Tribunal held that it is for a claimant  to  establish  that
the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met  or  that  an  immigration
decision would be an interference with  established  family  life.  In  both
cases, the relevant standard for establishing the facts is  the  balance  of
probabilities.

9. In Lamichhane v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA
Civ 260 the Court of Appeal held that a failure of the respondent  to  serve
a section 120 did not render a decision unlawful. An appellant  on  whom  no
section 120 notice has been served may not raise  before  the  Tribunal  any
ground for the grant of leave to remain different from that  which  was  the
subject of the decision of the Secretary of State appealed against.

10. In FG v Sweden App No 43611/11 ECtHR Grand  Chamber  the  Appellant  did
not  pursue  a  claim  that  he  was  at  risk  because  of  converting   to
Christianity  before the Migration  Board,  but  later  sought  to  rely  on
Articles 2 and 3. It was held that (in the case  of  Articles  2  and  3  at
least) national courts must be alive to obvious  human  rights  points  even
when they are not adverted to or relied  on  by  a  claimant.   The  Swedish
court should have known it was required to carry out an  assessment  of  all
potential ECHR arguments, analogous to the Robinson obvious test.

11. Section 85 of the 2002 Act prevents  the  Tribunal  considering  a  "new
matter" unless the respondent gives consent. In  Mahmud  (S85  NIAA  2002  -
"new matters") [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC) it was held that (i) Whether  something
is or is not a 'new matter' goes  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal in the appeal and the First-tier Tribunal must therefore  determine
for itself  the  issue;     (ii)     A  'new  matter'  is  a  matter  which
constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in section 84,  as  required
by section 85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting a ground of appeal  means
that it must contain a matter  which  could  raise  or  establish  a  listed
ground of appeal.  A matter is the factual substance of a claim.   A  ground
of appeal is the legal basis on which the facts in any  given  matter  could
form the basis of a challenge to the  decision  under  appeal; (iii)    In
practice, a new matter is a factual matrix which  has  not  previously  been
considered by the Secretary of State in  the  context  of  the  decision  in
section 82(1) or a statement made by the appellant under section 120.   This
requires the matter to be factually distinct from that previously raised  by
an appellant, as opposed to  further  or  better  evidence  of  an  existing
matter.  The assessment  will  always  be  fact  sensitive.   Examples  were
given.  Where a relationship had previously been relied  on  and  considered
by the SSHD then the fact the couple had married would be new  evidence  but
not a new matter.  Conversely the fact the couple had a child was likely  to
be a new matter.  Actual consideration in  a  decision  letter  of  the  new
factual matrix relied upon is required  for  a  matter  not  to  be  a  "new
matter".

12. In AK and IK (S.85 NIAA 2002 - new matters) Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  67  it
was held that if  an  appellant  relies  upon  criteria  that  relate  to  a
different category of the Immigration Rules  to  make  good  his  Article  8
claim from that relied upon in his  application  for  LTR  on  human  rights
grounds or in his s.120 statement such that a new judgment falls to be  made
as to whether or not he satisfies the Immigration Rules, this constitutes  a
"new matter" within the meaning of s.85(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 which requires the Secretary of State's consent even  if
the facts specific to his  own  case  (for  example,  as  to  accommodation,
maintenance etc) remain the same.

13.  The  appellant's  application  was  submitted  under   cover   of   his
solicitors' letter dated 20 April 2017.  In  the  second  paragraph  of  the
covering letter the appellant's  solicitors  identified  to  bases  for  the
application,

         (i)      Article 8 ECHR.


         (ii)     compassionate grounds.


Neither the application nor the covering letter mentioned articles 2  and  3
ECHR, however in the last sentences at the end of  the  second  page  &  the
start of the third page of that covering letter, the appellant's  solicitors
say that the appellant fears persecution because of his  membership  of  the
BNP and that he has received threats from his estranged wife's family.

14. Grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  framed  by  the
appellant's solicitors. The form IAFT-5 (the notice  of  appeal)  says  that
supporting documents vouching a fear of persecution will  be  produced.  The
grounds of appeal do not mention articles 2 and 3 ECHR, but at paragraph  21
say that the  appellant  has  a  fear  of  persecution  because  of  a  poor
relationship with his estranged wife's family and because of  his  political
opinion.

15. Both the letter submitting the application and in the grounds of  appeal
to the First-tier tribunal the reference to  persecution  and  ill-treatment
is pled on the basis that there are insurmountable  obstacles  in  terms  of
paragraph EX.1 and that there are significant obstacles  to  integration  in
terms of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

16. In the appellant's witness statement, the appellant says that he was  an
active BNP supporter in Bangladesh, and he fears of persecution because  his
estranged wife's brother is a  local  Awami  league  leader.  The  appellant
produces documents said  to  be  an  FIR  and  a  false  charge  of  illegal
possession of a firearm and ammunition.

17. What is beyond dispute is that the appellant has not made  a  protection
claim. At [26] & [27] the Judge correctly records  that  the  appellant  has
not claimed international protection and  that  his  appeal  is  limited  to
human rights grounds. At [29] the Judge correctly  identifies  the  standard
of proof for article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal. Between  [29]  and  [32]  the
Judge correctly directs himself in law. At [34] the  Judge  gives  clear  (&
sustainable)  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
requirements of appendix FM and that paragraph  EX.1  is  not  engaged.  The
Judge then turns to consideration of the appellants article 8  private  life
claim.

18. The Judge then refers to the appellant's claim that articles 2 and 3  of
the 1950 convention are engaged & the Judge correctly  considers  each  part
of the appellant's evidence,  and  gives  good  reasons  for  rejecting  the
evidence. The Judge manifestly  considered  whether  or  not  the  appellant
discharges the burden of proving that there are very  significant  obstacles
to reintegration. The Judge gives  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
evidence and finding that such obstacles do not to exist.

19. The Judge's decision is a decision on article 8 ECHR grounds  of  appeal
only. It was only  article  8  ECHR  which  was  argued  before  the  Judge.
Although the appellant uses the language of persecution  and  ill-treatment,
he did so in the  context  of  trying  to  establish  either  insurmountable
obstacles are very significant obstacles. The correct standard of proof  for
such cases is a balance  of  probabilities.  The  Judge  correctly  directed
himself at [29] of the decision.

20. At [36] the Judge records that  the  appellant  introduces  an  argument
that articles 2 or 3 of the 1950 convention are engaged,  but  in  the  next
sentence the Judge identifies the correct standard of proof  for  article  2
or 3 grounds of appeal. The Judge succinctly says that the  appellant  fails
to produce sufficient evidence to establish a real risk of either article  2
article 3 harm.

21. The Judge deals with articles  2  and  3  in  two  short,  but  correct,
sentences, which is just a reflection of the paucity  of  evidence  produced
by the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal. The was no need for  the  Judge
to say more.

22. The application made by the appellant was not a  protection  claim.  The
application was made on article 8 ECHR grounds. The  appellant  argued  that
there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  and  very
significant obstacles to  integration.  It  is  likely  that  the  appellant
solicitor's focused on the words  insurmountable  and  obstacles,  and  took
those words out of context, but  the  truth  is  that  the  application  was
submitted on article 8 ECHR grounds, the respondent's decision reflects  the
reasons given for the application. The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier
Tribunal plead article 8 ECHR only.

23. It is to the Judge's credit that he succinctly  dealt  with  articles  2
and 3 before focusing on the only matter that  was  competently  pled.  This
appeal  is  not  directed  against  the  Judge's  article  8  decision.  The
appellant has not yet made a protection claim.

24. In any event,  in  the  third  sentence  of  [36]  the  Judge  correctly
identifies the standard of proof in cases involving articles 2  and  3  ECHR
grounds of appeal.

25.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

The  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal,
promulgated on 11 February 2019, stands.





Signed
                        Date 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

