
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/14062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th January 2019                          |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 KAREEM [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Mupara of Counsel instructed by Reiss Edwards


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Flynn made following a hearing at Taylor House on 31st May 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born on  19th  January  1999.   He
    applied to come to the UK to join his father but  was  refused  on  2nd
    November 2015 because the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied
    that his father had had sole responsibility for his upbringing or  that
    there were serious and compelling family or other  considerations  that
    made his exclusion from the UK undesirable  and  suitable  arrangements
    had been made for his care.

 3. The Entry Clearance  Officer  initially  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    claimant was related to  the  sponsor  as  claimed  but  following  DNA
    evidence it was accepted that the sponsor is the claimant's father.

 4. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor who  was  unrepresented.
    He explained the family circumstances  which  led  to  the  application
    being made and the judge accepted that he had given credible  evidence.
    The judge found that the claimant had not lived with his  mother  since
    2012, three years before  the  date  of  his  application.   There  was
    nothing to show that she  had  exercised  any  responsibility  for  his
    upbringing since  that  date  and  the  judge  accepted  the  sponsor's
    evidence that she had taken no interest in  his  schooling,  concluding
    that the claimant's mother ceded all responsibility for his  upbringing
    to his paternal grandparents.

 5. The judge was  satisfied  that  the  claimant's  father  had  had  sole
    responsibility  for  his  upbringing  and  that  the  requirements   of
    paragraph 297(i)(e) were met.  She said that  she  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  She also allowed the appeal on Article  8
    grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of
    different grounds.  First, the judge had given insufficient reasons for
    concluding that the sponsor had given credible evidence and that he had
    had sole responsibility for  his  son.   In  particular,  she  had  not
    engaged with the evidence from the claimant himself.

 7. Second, the Presenting Officer in his minute stated that the  sponsor's
    wife was disruptive in the hearing but there was no  reference  to  her
    behaviour in the body of the determination.

 8. Next, the judge purported to allow the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules but the grounds of appeal were human rights only and it  was  not
    open to the judge to do  so.   In  any  event,  her  considerations  in
    relation to Article 8  were  flawed  in  that  she  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof suggesting that the standard of proof was lower  than
    the normal civil standard; moreover she misunderstood the date at which
    to consider the evidence.

 9. Finally, she said that she was mindful of her  duty  under  Section  55
    although the claimant was not a child at the date of the hearing.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth for the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 24th January 2018.





Submissions

11. Mr Walker relied on his grounds. In particular, the judge had failed to
    mention a key letter written by the claimant on 12th July 2015 when  he
    specifically said that he was supported by his father  and  his  mother
    and his grandparents. He quite properly did not pursue  the  allegation
    made in the  grounds  of  procedural  unfairness  since  there  was  no
    supportive evidence with the grounds to demonstrate a prima facie  case
    that the judge had not acted fairly.

12. Mr Mupara defended the determination, submitting that  the  credibility
    findings were open to the judge and  that  adequate  reasons  had  been
    given.

Consideration as to whether there is an Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law.  Credibility was central to
    this appeal and it is quite clear from paragraph 61 that the judge  was
    applying the lower standard of  proof  rather  than  the  normal  civil
    standard, namely  the  balance  of  probabilities.   Moreover,  it  was
    incumbent upon her to engage with the evidence from the claimant  which
    appeared to show that responsibility for him  was  shared  between  his
    father, his mother and his grandparents.  Finally, it was not  open  to
    her to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

14. The decision is set aside.

15. It was agreed between all parties that it would be possible to  re-make
    this decision since the sponsor was present and able to give  evidence.



16. Accordingly, I allowed a short adjournment so that a witness  statement
    could be taken from him, which he adopted at the start of his evidence.

The Evidence

17. [LG] said that he started a relationship with  his  former  partner  in
    1997 and his son was born on 19th January 1999.   In  March  1999  when
    Kareem was 2 months old the couple separated, his  mother  leaving  the
    matrimonial home and his son  remaining  in  his  care.   She  did  not
    support him in any way.  The sponsor looked  after  Kareem  until  2010
    with the help of his parents.  They had migrated to Florida in 2003 and
    his son spent the summers with them.

18. In 2010 the sponsor moved to the UK.  The plan was to bring  Kareem  to
    join him and for a fairly brief period  the  claimant  lived  with  his
    mother.  However, things proved difficult and he knew  deep  down  that
    the arrangement would not work.  After about sixteen months,  in  2011,
    Kareem went to Florida to live with his paternal grandparents.

19. In 2016 Kareem developed behavioural issues at the  same  time  as  his
    grandfather became unwell and his grandmother, who was caring  for  her
    husband full-time was not able to control him.  The  sponsor  sent  him
    back to Jamaica where he lived with his uncle, the  sponsor's  brother.
    He overlapped with his mother for a period of just a couple  of  weeks.
    However she said that she had signed him over to his father and she did
    not want to end up back with him.  She herself was not planning to stay
    in Jamaica and indeed a few weeks later she left for the USA.

20. The sponsor was asked to comment on the letter which Kareem had sent in
    2015.  He had appeared to suggest that he was financially supported  by
    his father and grandparents and his mother but the sponsor said that in
    fact his mother has never given him any money and all of  the  receipts
    were for monies sent by him save for a single present of  cash  on  his
    birthday.

Submissions

21. Mr Walker acknowledged the strength of the oral evidence  and  accepted
    that the sponsor had clarified the issues under  appeal.   He  accepted
    that the sponsor had chosen the school  which  the  claimant  attended,
    that he saw the school reports, that he had supported  him  financially
    throughout, and that he was in weekly contact with him.   As  he  said,
    the evidence spoke for itself.

22. Mr Mupara submitted that the appeal ought to be allowed on human rights
    grounds since the evidence clearly pointed to the claimant meeting  the
    substantive Immigration Rule.

Findings and Conclusions

23. It is clear that the original judge accepted  the  credibility  of  the
    oral evidence given to her and having heard the sponsor myself, I quite
    understand why she did so.  Indeed,  none  of  the  evidence  has  been
    challenged by the Presenting Officer.

24. I accept that the sponsor has been solely  responsible  for  his  son's
    upbringing.  He has looked after him since he was 2 months old when his
    mother ceased to support him financially or indeed, in any  other  way.
    She does appear to have had some involvement until 2011 when she looked
    after him for a time, before signing a grant of legal  guardianship  to
    the grandparents  so  that  Kareem  could  go  to  school  in  Florida.
    However, aside from that she appears to have shown little  interest  in
    him.

25. I accept the evidence that Kareem has been depressed and  it  could  be
    that he  finds  it  difficult  to  accept  that  his  mother  has  been
    neglectful.   Certainly,  there   is   no   documentary   evidence   to
    substantiate his remark in the letter of 12th July 2015 that  she  gave
    him financial support.  The money transfer receipts solely emanate from
    his father.

26. Sole responsibility is demonstrated by the decision  in  2011  to  send
    Kareem to live with his paternal grandparents.  If there had been joint
    responsibility and his mother had wished to continue to look after him,
    no doubt she would have done so from 2010 when the sponsor moved to the
    UK.  In fact, he went to live with his paternal grandparents  for  five
    years and only returned to Jamaica when they were  no  longer  able  to
    care for him.  I accept the now unchallenged evidence that  his  mother
    refused to take him in in 2016, that she very soon thereafter  went  to
    live with her boyfriend in the USA, and that Kareem is now in the  care
    of his paternal uncle.

27. Mr Walker accepted that the claimant meets the substantive  Immigration
    Rule, namely paragraph 297(i)(e).

28. In TZ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1190 the court  stated  that  where  a  person  satisfies  the
    Immigration Rules this would be positively determinative on an  Article
    8 appeal providing of course that the appeal engages Article 8.

29. In this case there is no doubt that Article  8  is  engaged  since  the
    claimant enjoys family life with his father with whom he is  in  weekly
    contact.  The refusal of entry clearance interferes with his  right  to
    enjoy family life.  Since he satisfies the relevant  Immigration  Rules
    there can be  no  public  interest  in  his  not  being  granted  entry
    clearance and it would be disproportionate not to do so.

Notice of Decision

30. The Immigration Judge erred in law.  Her decision is set aside.  It  is
    re-made as follows.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 8 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


