
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/14870/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd August 2018                      |On 8th October 2018                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                           mr Ismail Cem Demirkaya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 16th March 1978 is  a  citizen  of  Turkey.   The
    Appellant had made application for  further  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2013.   His  application  had  been  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 20th May 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Widdup  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  11th
    August and 22nd September 2017.   The  judge  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 3.  The  Respondent  had  made  application  for  permission  to   appeal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 16th March 2018.  It was said that  it  was  arguable  the
    judge had misdirected himself by failing to give adequate  reasons  why
    he found there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter.  Directions were issued  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal to firstly decide whether an error of law had  been  made  and
    the matter came before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Howells raised submissions in line with the Home Office  application
    for grounds to appeal.   It  was  submitted  the  judge  did  not  have
    sufficient reasons for concluding there was a  genuine  and  sufficient
    subsisting relationship and it was further an  error  of  law  for  the
    judge to have found that the daughter was British.  In that respect  it
    was said that the judge had speculated on that matter.   It  was  noted
    that the judge had given weight to a purported witness statement  which
    was only on the Appellant's phone at the hearing with the author of the
    report not being present.  There  were  further  conflicts  within  the
    evidence referred to me in those submissions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. The Appellant was unrepresented.  In order to assist him  in  terms  of
    submissions I referred him to the matters raised by  the  Home  Office.
    The Respondent said that the letter that he wrote on 1st November  2013
    to the Home Office was truthful.  He confirmed that his witness, namely
    his ex-partner had attended the first date of the  appeal  hearing  but
    did not attend on the second date.  He suggested that  potentially  the
    barrister had said that she did not need to attend.  He  said  that  he
    had attended himself as his lawyer wanted too much money.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the documents  and
    submissions raised.  I now provide my decision with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge had noted at paragraph 1 that the Appellant had first arrived
    in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  His asylum claim was  appeal
    rights exhausted by September 2005.  Thereafter  he  had  made  various
    applications prior to being granted discretionary leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of family  life  with  his  partner  Ms  A,  an  EEA  citizen
    (Spanish).  That leave expired on 26th November  2013  and  the  appeal
    before the judge was the  refusal  of  his  application  made  on  13th
    November 2013 for further leave to remain.   The  Respondent's  refusal
    was based upon evidence of the breakdown of that relationship with Ms A
    and the lack of evidence that  he  continued  to  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the child of that relationship.

 8. Paragraph 2 of the judge's decision indicates that  the  Appellant  had
    thereafter presented further evidence in support of his right to remain
    in the UK, but that was in respect of a different  feature  namely  his
    claimed relationship with a Ms C.  At the initial hearing date on  11th
    August  2017  the  judge  had  been  presented  with   an   adjournment
    application to allow the Appellant to essentially advance three further
    claims; firstly a retained right of  residence  under  EEA  Regulations
    deriving from his former  relationship  with  Ms  A,  issues  allegedly
    arising under the Ankara Agreement and potentially issues arising  from
    contact with his son by Ms C.

 9. Initially the judge had declined the adjournment request but kept  that
    decision under review and as  noted  at  paragraph  18  had  agreed  to
    adjourn the case part-heard until 22nd September to give the  Appellant
    the opportunity to file a full witness statement from Ms  A,  file  his
    own witness statement and present any documents that  he  relied  upon.
    The Appellant had therefore been given sufficient time,  even  at  that
    late stage to present all the  evidence  he  sought  to  rely  upon  in
    respect of any or all of the matters that he had raised.

10. The judge at paragraphs 19 to 39 had in summary form noted the evidence
    provided in this case.  He had correctly  identified  at  paragraph  41
    that essentially there was no application under the EEA Regulations  or
    the Ankara Agreement, and the summary of evidence disclosed that in any
    event there was no evidence in support of those matters  even  if  they
    were before the judge on appeal.  Essentially, the appeal rested on the
    basis of family life.

11. In that respect the core of that which the Appellant claimed rested  on
    his alleged genuine and subsisting relationship with his daughter by Ms
    A and a son by a Ms C.

12. The judge had identified at paragraphs 48 to 49 the lack of evidence to
    demonstrate any family life with his son by Ms C and  at  paragraph  50
    the fact that he had no family life with  a  partner.   The  judge  was
    entitled to reach those decisions.  Essentially therefore the judge was
    focused on whether the Appellant had a family life with his daughter by
    Ms  A  and  whether,  if  it  existed,  the  question  of  whether   an
    interference with that family life was proportionate to the  legitimate
    aim.

13. The judge had correctly, firstly considered, whether the Appellant  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules in this respect.

14. The evidence available to the judge in respect of his family life  with
    his daughter by Ms A was, despite the passage of time in the  adjourned
    part-heard hearing, limited.  Essentially, that which was available  to
    the judge could be summarised as follows:

      a) Letter from the Appellant dated 1st November 2013 stating  that  he
         split from Ms A in 2011  and  whilst  initially  he  had  seen  his
         daughter (born 2009) he had been stopped from seeing her.

      b) Appellant's witness  statement  (undated)  within  the  Appellant's
         bundle stating his daughter had  dual  Spanish/British  nationality
         and  that  he  was  involved  in  her  upbringing   and   regularly
         financially supported his daughter through Ms A.

      c) Copy daughter's Spanish passport and her birth certificate.

      d) Unsigned witness statement from Ms A received on 11th  August  2017
         and containing blank spaces.

      e) A signed copy of that witness statement seen by the  judge  on  the
         Appellant's mobile phone on 22nd August 2017.

15. The judge concluded from the evidence available that the Appellant  met
    the requirements of Appendix FM  EX.1.(a)  as  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his daughter.  The judge had further noted
    at paragraph 74 however that the crucial question to succeed under EX.1
    in this case was whether she was a British citizen.  He gave reasons at
    paragraphs 74 to 75 why he found that to  be  the  case  and  therefore
    found all aspects of EX.1 met and allowed the appeal under Appendix  FM
    of the Rules.

16. The judge was required to give adequate reasons  for  concluding  there
    was a genuine and subsisting relationship and that the daughter  was  a
    British citizen and therefore the Appellant fulfilled the  requirements
    of EX.1.  Within the decision the judge had noted what was absent  from
    the body of evidence available to assist him in  reaching  a  decision.
    He did not have any independent evidence  concerning  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his daughter such as school, medical or other
    individuals providing any form of witness or documentary evidence.   Ms
    A had never given evidence, although she appeared at the first  hearing
    on 11th August 2017.  She did not appear at the renewed hearing date on
    22nd September 2017.  The Appellant had  not  produced  as  directed  a
    signed witness statement from  her  and  the  draft  witness  statement
    produced in August 2017 had not been signed by her  in  hard  copy  but
    only, it  would  appear,  on  the  Appellant's  mobile  phone  on  22nd
    September 2017 but on a time when she was not present.

17. Further, there appeared  inconsistencies  between  the  date  when  the
    parties separated.  The Appellant had claimed that to be  2011  and  by
    2013 (when he wrote his letter to the Home Office) he had been  stopped
    having contact with his daughter by Ms A.  Her draft witness  statement
    however suggested the relationship  ended  in  2013  but  had  kept  in
    regular contact for the sake of the daughter with no suggest  that  she
    had prevented the Appellant having contact at any stage.

18. In terms of nationality  the  daughter's  passport  had  been  produced
    (issued in 2009 and expired in 2011) and that was a  Spanish  passport.
    No  other  passport  or  identity  document  had  been  produced.   The
    Appellant and Ms A had both  described  the  daughter  as  having  dual
    Spanish/British nationality in statements.   The  judge  had  noted  at
    paragraph 74 the Appellant's oral evidence  that  his  daughter  was  a
    British citizen  (no  reference  to  dual  nationality)  and  that  the
    Appellant had based his assertion for that fact upon the fact that  his
    daughter be born in the UK.  Therefore, the judge had at  paragraph  75
    said as follows,

         "It would also appear that she had lived in the UK  since  2006  or
         earlier.  If she had been exercising treaty rights for long  enough
         to obtain permanent residence rights her daughter would be British.
          I find therefore that the Appellant's evidence of this is credible
         and I accept that the daughter does have British citizenship".

19. The core issues for the judge to determine in light of his finding that
    the Appellant was entitled to remain under EX.1.(a) was whether he  had
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  daughter,  whether  she
    was a British citizen (given she had not lived  in  the  UK  for  seven
    years at the date of application), and whether it could  be  reasonable
    to expect her to leave the UK.

20. In respect of the first two questions  the  judge  was  presented  with
    little  or  no  independent  evidence  and   further   presented   with
    conflicting evidence from the Appellant and  his  ex-partner.   He  was
    missing key and one would have thought  easily  obtainable  documentary
    evidence, (particularly given the time allowed to  the  Appellant)  and
    the absence of the mother as a key witness.  In all  the  circumstances
    the reasons given by the judge in respect of the  first  question  were
    not adequately  set  out.   In  respect  of  the  second  question  the
    conclusion reached by the judge was based to a large, if not  exclusive
    extent, on speculation rather than evidence.

21. The lack of adequate reasoning in a  case  of  this  nature,  when  set
    alongside the ample opportunity given to  obtain  evidence,  does  mean
    that a material error  of  law  was  made  by  the  inadequacy  of  the
    reasoning provided by the judge such that the decision  is  unsafe  and
    does require to be made afresh.

Notice of Decision

22. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and direct that
    a fresh decision should be made in the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed     J. Lever                              Date 1/10/2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


