
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/14081/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On: 12th April 2018
  On: 16th April 2018
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                NABEEL SALIT
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:  Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For Mr Salit:                Mr Turner, Counsel instructed by Burney Legal
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan born  in  1991.  On  the  24th
    October 2017 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Quinn) allowed  his  appeal
    on human rights grounds. The Tribunal found that although Mr Salit  had
    failed to rebut allegations of his involvement in the 'ETS fraud',  and
    had attempted to rely on false payslips in the course  of  the  present
    appeal, the refusal to grant  him  leave  to  remain  was  nevertheless
    disproportionate, having regard to the  significant  impact  that  this
    would have on his British wife and son.   On  the  21st  February  2018
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department permission to appeal that decision, on the grounds that
    in reaching its decision the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to  have
    adequate regard to the public interest.




    The Secretary of State for the Home Department's Appeal


 2.  The  Secretary  of  State  submits   that   in   its   assessment   of
    proportionality the First-tier Tribunal failed to have  regard  to  its
    own findings on poor conduct of Mr Salit.


 3. In respect of the 'ETS' fraud the Secretary of State had discharged the
    evidential burden in that the test results Mr Salit had relied upon had
    been shown to be 'questionable'. Mr Salit had  given  evidence  to  the
    Tribunal about his attendance and participation in the  test  that  had
    been found to be "vague" to the point that he had failed to provide  an
    innocent explanation.  The Tribunal's conclusion about his evidence  on
    this point had given rise to "doubts about his credibility", the result
    of which was  that  the  Tribunal  could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
    suitability requirements in Appendix FM were met. The Tribunal went  on
    to assess the evidence in respect of funds, and found that the payslips
    produced by Mr Salit as evidence of his employment  were  not  genuine,
    and that Mr Salit was lying when he had said in evidence that he worked
    in a kebab shop as claimed.


 4. It is not apparent that any of those negative matters  are  weighed  in
    the balance when the Tribunal turns to assess proportionality,  and  in
    particular in its application of s117B(1) (maintenance  of  immigration
    control) and s117B(2)  (financial  independence).  In  respect  of  the
    latter the determination simply notes "I took  into  account  the  fact
    that both the appellant and his wife were working".


 5. The Secretary of State submits that  the  failure  to  weigh  in  these
    significant public interest factors renders the  determination  flawed.
    I am invited to set the decision aside and remit it to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for remaking.




    The Response


 6. On behalf of Mr Salit Mr Turner urged me to read the determination as a
    whole, and to find that the  Judge  must  have  had  her  own  negative
    findings in mind when she came to make her final decision,  given  that
    she had only just made them. Whilst he agreed that it was difficult  to
    discern where  the  Judge  had  applied  the  framework  in  s117B,  in
    particular in  respect  of  the  assessment  of  'reasonableness',  the
    ultimate conclusion was one open to the Tribunal to make.




    Discussion and Findings


 7. I do not doubt that it was rationally open to a  Judge  to  allow  this
    appeal. Mr Salit now has two British children and their best  interests
    must be carefully assessed; in  accordance  with  the  guidance  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 'strong reasons' must be shown as to why
    it would be 'reasonable' to expect these children to leave the country.
     The question at the heart of the appeal was whether the conduct of  Mr
    Salit provided those 'strong reasons'.  It is  not  apparent  from  the
    determination before me that this was the approach taken by the Judge.


 8. I am unable to accept that the adverse findings made  were  weighed  in
    the balance  in  the  final  reckoning,  since  reference  to  them  is
    strikingly absent in the scant reasoning on the  public  interest.  Nor
    can I be satisfied that it was open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  Mr
    Salit's wife and child would be "badly" affected by his removal,  since
    there appeared to be no evidence or findings on the point.  I  am  also
    concerned that in its assessment  of  the  'ETS'  matter  the  Tribunal
    appears to have assumed that the Secretary of State had discharged  the
    evidential burden, thus 'pushing' the  burden  onto  Mr  Salit  as  the
    determination found it was at paragraph 23.   I  cannot  see  that  the
    Secretary of State had produced prima facie evidence that Mr Salit  had
    used a proxy test taker.   At its highest the  evidence  summarised  at
    paragraph 16 of the determination showed that TOIEC had  withdrawn  his
    test result on the grounds that it  was  'questionable'  since  it  had
    occurred at a centre where fraud had been found to be  widespread.   As
    far as I am aware there was for instance no  'look  up  tool'  evidence
    before the Tribunal directly linking Mr Salit to any fraud.


 9. Having considered all of those matters I find, with the consent of both
    parties, that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside
    for errors of law: in particular failing to  make  clear  findings  and
    failing to take material matters into account.




       Decisions


10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.


11. The decision is remitted  for  rehearing  de  novo  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


12. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             12th April 2018
