
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14092/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 May 2021                       |On 27 May 2021                       |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 UBARAQ RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Moriarty


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1984  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Nepal. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the
    respondent dated 10 July 2019  refusing  him  entry  clearance  as  the
    dependant  child  of  his  mother,  Mrs  Parbai  Rai  (hereafter   'the
    sponsor'). The First-tier Tribunal, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3
    February 2021, allowed the appeal. the Secretary of State now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  26  May  2021,  Mr
    Moriarty, who appeared for the appellant, told me  that  the  appellant
    accepts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  such  that  its
    decision should be set aside. The appellant acknowledges that the judge
    had assessed the credibility of the evidence  without  reference  to  a
    previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 27 October 2016  AND
    contrary to the principles set out in Devasseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702*.

 3. I am grateful to both advocates  for  their  helpful  approach  to  the
    appeal and for their submissions regarding disposal. The appeal has had
    a lengthy litigation history but I am not satisfied that  it  would  be
    appropriate the determine the appeal by way of a resumed hearing in the
    Upper Tribunal. Whilst it is the case that one of the main  credibility
    findings which the Tribunal made in 2016 (that the appellant had relied
    on false evidence of employment) is now accepted by both parties, there
    remain other findings from 2016 which should be considered as  part  of
    of a holistic assessment of all the evidence; in  my  opinion,  justice
    will be most readily  achieved  by  a  de  novo  consideration  of  the
    evidence. That consideration will be most effectively  carried  out  in
    the First-tier Tribunal to which the appeal is  now  returned  for  the
    decision to be remade.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.


Signed                              Date 26 May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.











