
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14257/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 19th November 2018    On 29th November 2018

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                             MISS LOVETH AGUDWA
                        (No Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Claimant:      Mr Fripp (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Greasley promulgated on  the  25th  May  2018,  in
      which he allowed the Claimant's Human Rights appeal, having found that
      pursuant to paragraph EX.1 and EX.2 of  the  Immigration  Rules  under
      Appendix FM that there would be very significant difficulties faced by
      the Claimant or her partner in continuing their family  life  together
      outside the United Kingdom and which could not be overcome  or  entail
      very serious hardship for the Claimant or their partner.

   2. The Secretary of State seeks to appeal that decision for  the  reasons
      set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  This is a matter of record  and
      is therefore not repeated in its entirety here, but in summary  it  is
      argued in ground 1 that the  Judge  failed  to  take  account  at  the
      starting point the findings  of  fact  which  had  been  made  by  the
      Tribunal previously in respect of the Claimant's asylum claim and that
      the previous determination made findings against  the  Claimant  which
      may have included facts  about  her  family  in  Nigeria  and  it  was
      incumbent upon the Judge to have this before him.  The Judge had  made
      a determination without having the complete factual matrix.   However,
      Ms Pal indicated to the Tribunal orally before me today, that although
      there had  been  a  previous  decision  of  Immigration  Judge  Tamara
      promulgated on the 21st July 2008, that decision had not been  in  the
      Secretary of State's bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  Mr
      Fripp, although knowing that there had been a previous  decision  made
      by the Secretary of State was himself wholly  unaware  of  a  previous
      Tribunal decision by a previous Immigration Judge.   I  accept  having
      heard from Mr Fripp that he did not know that there was  any  previous
      decision by Immigration Judge Tamara and no criticism can be  made  of
      him of not having produced that decision that he was unaware of to the
      Tribunal, particularly, when that decision was made in 2008,  some  10
      years before the decision being  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Greasley, and before the Claimant had entered  into  the  relationship
      with Mr Porter, that formed the basis of the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Greasley.  Ms Pal indicated in any event that  she  was
      not pursuing the ground of appeal seeking to argue that the Judge  was
      wrong in failing to consider  the  previous  determination.   As  that
      ground is not being pursued by the Secretary of State, I do  not  need
      to make a finding in that regard.

   3. In respect of the second ground of appeal the Judge erred  in  finding
      that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  on  the  basis  that  the
      Claimant's partner would be at risk if he went  to  Nigeria  and  that
      although the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  evidence  showed  the
      possibility of kidnapping there was nothing to suggest the  Claimant's
      partner could not have taken steps to reduce such a risk or  why  such
      steps would be insurmountable, and that given the threat of  terrorist
      incidents worldwide including the UK the Judge had failed to  identify
      why this was an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  family  life.   It  was
      further argued that there was absolutely no  evidential  basis  for  a
      finding that the Claimant's partner could not obtain work  beyond  the
      "wild speculation" of the Claimant and that the Judge  had  failed  to
      give adequate reasons for finding in the  Claimant's  favour  in  that
      regard.

   4. Ms Pal relied upon the original Grounds of Appeal and the new  Grounds
      of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal, both of  which  I  have  fully  taken
      account of.  In addition, in her oral submissions she argued that  the
      Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  showed  a  general  possibility  of
      kidnapping and violence, but  nothing  to  show  that  the  Claimant's
      partner could not go to Nigeria and  that  the  Claimant  herself  had
      spent more than half her life there and that  he  would  be  returning
      with her to a country  that  she  knew  well.   She  argued  that  the
      threshold EX.1 is a high one, as confirmed by the Supreme Court in the
      case of Agyarko, as argued within the renewed Grounds of Appeal.   She
      argued that effectively the Judge  was  saying  that  no  non-Nigerian
      could  go  back  to  Nigeria.   She  argued  that  the   Foreign   and
      Commonwealth Office evidence was  that  over  100,000  people  visited
      Nigeria and most visits were trouble free and the  Claimant's  partner
      was  a  Nigerian  national.   She  argued  the  Judge  had  failed  to
      adequately assess why there were insurmountable obstacles to a  family
      life in Nigeria and that  the  Claimant  herself  was  a  national  of
      Nigeria who speaks the language which would lessen  the  risk  on  her
      partner.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   5. I accept the submissions made by Mr Fripp that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge has properly set out the  advice  given  to  travellers  by  the
      Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at paragraphs 31 to 37  the  Judge
      took account of the areas to which the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
      were advising against travelling, and  the  areas  to  which  all  but
      essential travel was advised.  The Judge properly noted  at  paragraph
      32 that the advice went on  to  state  that  travellers  should  avoid
      places where crowds  gather  including  places  of  worship,  markets,
      shopping malls, hotels, bars and restaurants and that attacks could be
      indiscriminate and could western interests and that there was  a  high
      risk  of  kidnap  throughout  Nigeria  which  could  be  motivated  by
      criminals or by terrorists or for financial gain and that a number  of
      kidnaps included foreigners.  The Judge had also taken account of  the
      fact that although recent terrorist kidnaps  had  occurred  mostly  in
      Northern Nigeria they could occur anywhere  and  that  travellers  had
      been advised by the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  to  avoid  large
      crowds and public demonstrations and  that  although  117,000  British
      nationals had visited Nigeria and were most trouble free  professional
      security advisors were often recommended and that visitors had  to  be
      vigilant at all times and that there was often a curfew in many  parts
      of Nigeria and that British nationals were increasingly being targeted
      by scam artists operating in Western Africa including Nigeria.

   6. The Judge found that the sponsor, Mr Porter would be easily identified
      as a  westerner  in  Nigeria,  and  it  was  clear,  having  seen  the
      photographs referred to by Mr Fripp of Mr Porter contained within  the
      bundle, that he would be easily identified  as  a  Caucasian  male  as
      someone who is likely to be a foreigner and that was a finding open to
      the Judge on the evidence.  The Judge found that Mr Porter would  face
      potential  very  serious  and  significant  difficulty  as  an  easily
      identifiable westerner both in terms of  prospective  criminality  and
      potential ill treatment.

   7. Although it is argued by the Secretary of State that there was nothing
      to suggest that the Claimant's partner could not have taken  steps  to
      reduce such a risk or why such steps would be insurmountable, although
      as the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted the decision in Agyarko  v  The
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department  had  indicated  that  the
      insurmountable  test  was  a  stringent   test,   pursuant   to   EX.2
      insurmountable difficulties consisted of very significant difficulties
      which would be faced by the Claimant or their  partner  in  continuing
      their family life together outside the UK which could not be  overcome
      or would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the  Claimant  or  their
      partner.  In this case, Mr Porter had as the Judge accepted, had never
      lived or visited Nigeria at paragraph 31 of the decision and had never
      worked there as he found at paragraph 37.  The Judge found further  at
      paragraph 37 that there would be very  significant  security  concerns
      arising if he would attempt to do so in terms of living and working in
      Nigeria.  I accept that was  a  finding  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
      evidence.  This was not a  finding  that  all  non-national  Nigerians
      could not go and live and work in Nigeria, it was a  specific  finding
      based on the sponsor himself  that  he  would  face  very  significant
      difficulties.  In circumstances where in addition  to  the  kidnapping
      risk advice that travellers  should  not  go  to  places  of  worship,
      markets, shopping malls, hotels, bars and even  restaurants,  and  for
      someone who although returning with his wife  who  is  a  national  of
      Nigeria, Mr Porter himself from the evidence had never visited Nigeria
      let alone lived or worked there as the Judge found,  the  findings  of
      the Judge in relation to EX.1  and  EX.2  were  open  to  him  on  the
      evidence.

   8. Although it is clear that the Judge did in fact err in finding that it
      was extremely unlikely that Mr Porter would be able to gain employment
      in Nigeria as a plumber or heating engineer and  that  it  was  highly
      unlikely that his training,  expertise  and  qualifications  would  be
      easily transferrable skills, at paragraph 35 of the decision,  on  the
      basis that there is no actual evidential basis put  before  the  Judge
      for such findings, in light of the fact that  the  Judge  had  already
      concluded that Mr Porter would easily be identified as a westerner and
      that  he  personally  would  face   very   serious   and   significant
      difficulties as an easily identifiable  westerner  both  in  terms  of
      prospective criminality and potential ill treatment, I find  that  the
      Judge  had  already  concluded  that  there  were   very   significant
      difficulties for the purposes of EX.2 which could not be  overcome  or
      would entail very serious hardship for the Claimant or her partner and
      that the Judge's error in respect of the employment situation  is  not
      material, given his findings in respect  of  the  other  risks  to  Mr
      Porter personally.  The second ground of  appeal  therefore  does  not
      reveal a material error of law.

   9. In the third ground of appeal it is argued that the Judge should  have
      gone on to consider the reasonableness of temporary separation for the
      purposes of entry clearance  if  the  Judge  had  properly  found  the
      Claimant's case could not succeed  under  the  Rules.   However,  that
      ground was not pursued by Ms Pal at the appeal  hearing,  and  in  any
      event, the Judge did properly find that the criteria of EX.1 and  EX.2
      were met.

  10. It was not argued within the Grounds of Appeal that the Judge erred in
      considering the appeal under the Immigration Rules, but even if  there
      was an error in that regard, given the date of  the  decision  on  the
      23rd May 2016, as the decision on Human Rights grounds would  have  to
      be considered through the lens of the Immigration Rules, as the  Judge
      was entitled to find on the evidence presented that  the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules were met, any such error in that  regard  was
      not material.

  11. However, again, I repeat that that was  not  argued  as  a  ground  of
      appeal before me nor in the Grounds of Appeal submitted.

  12. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley does not  reveal  a
      material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  does  not  reveal  a
material error of law and is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made in this case, none having been  made  by  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge and none having been sought before me.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 19th November 2018


