
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14413/2017
     HU/14415/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 September 2018                   |On 25 September 2018                  |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                Rubina Begum
                                 Abdul Maruf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr O Sobowale, Counsel instructed by Samad & Co
                    Immigration (Witton)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants, who are nationals of Bangladesh, are twins born  on  23
    January 2000.  They arrived in the United Kingdom on 21  February  2010
    accompanied by their parents with entry clearance as visitors  for  six
    months.  Their parents then departed for Bangladesh leaving them in the
    care of their sister Jasmine.  The Appellants made  an  application  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of their  family  life  on  4
    April 2010, which was refused with no right of appeal  on  26  November
    2012.  The Appellants then made  a  subsequent  application  for  leave
    which was refused in a decision dated 24 October 2017, with  the  right
    of appeal.

 2. The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Moore  for
    hearing at Birmingham on 18  May  2018.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 29 May 2018, the judge dismissed the appeal.  Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that the  judge
    had erred materially in failing to apply the law correctly in  that  at
    [23] the judge held "There are in my view no powerful reasons as to why
    the Appellants should not be removed".  It was asserted  secondly  that
    the judge had failed to provide reasons in support of his  decision  in
    light of his acceptance that the Appellants were not to blame  for  the
    choices made by their parents that led to their presence in the UK  and
    bearing in mind there was no adverse conduct  on  the  part  of  either
    Appellant.  Reference was made to  the  decision  of  the  presidential
    panel in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).

 3. Permission to appeal was granted in a decision dated 13  July  2018  on
    the basis that the grounds were arguable.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Sobowale sought to rely on
    the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that the judge had misapplied  the
    law.  There were no powerful reasons as to why  the  Appellants  should
    not be  removed  but  this  was  a  flawed  approach  given  that  both
    Appellants were qualifying children at the date of decision and the law
    states that leave should be granted unless there are  powerful  reasons
    why the Appellants should not be granted leave.  The judge accepted the
    Appellants were not at fault due to their parents' decision  and  there
    were no adverse findings as to their conduct.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge has effectively inverted the test.  Mr Sobowale submitted that MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [46] to [49]  makes  clear  that  the
    best interests of the Appellants would be for them  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom given that they had resided continuously for over  seven
    years.  He submitted that nowhere in the decision and reasons does  the
    judge give any reasons relating to the specific  Appellants  and  their
    private life which showed he had failed to consider  private  life  and
    the reasons why the Appellants should be removed.

 5. In his submissions, Mr Whitwell submitted that there were a  number  of
    reasons put forward by the judge at [19] that the parents  deliberately
    tried to circumvent  the  Immigration  Rules  in  order  that  the  two
    Appellants could get a better education and more  comfortable  life  in
    the UK.  At [20] both Appellants are now adults aged 18 years  of  age;
    they lived in Bangladesh until the age of 10  and  have  been  educated
    there.  The Appellants speak both English and Bengali, which  would  be
    an attribute if they returned to Bangladesh and sought to further their
    education or  secure  employment.   The  Appellants'  parents,  in  the
    absence of evidence to the contrary, continued  living  in  the  family
    home and there were other family members in Bangladesh  who  might  not
    only be able to provide accommodation but also offer financial or other
    assistance upon their return.  At [23] the Judge found that the parents
    should be willing and able to care for the Appellants although they are
    now of adult age upon return to Bangladesh and  that  it  would  be  in
    their best interests to live with their parents as  part  of  a  family
    unit.  Mr Whitwell submitted that whilst at [23] the judge says  remove
    rather  than  grant  in  relation  to  the  test,  that  this  may   be
    typographical and in any event is not material in  that  the  judge  is
    quite clear  in  respect  of  the  principle  that  he  was  trying  to
    enunciate.

 6. Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  simply  a
    disagreement with the findings of fact which were open to the judge  on
    the evidence.  He submitted that in the decision  of  the  presidential
    panel in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC) the circumstances were  very
    different in that key to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  was  the
    level of education reached by that Appellant at [30] and [31]  and  the
    absence of any experience  of  her  home  country.   This  was  clearly
    distinguishable in that these Appellants lived in Bangladesh until they
    were the age of 10 and are now 18 and adults and have  completed  their
    education as children.   Mr  Whitwell  acknowledged  that  a  different
    Tribunal may  have  reached  a  different  outcome  but  there  was  no
    substance to the submission on behalf of the Appellants that the  judge
    had not provided reasons for his findings.

 7. In reply, Mr Sobowale drew attention to the fact that at [16] and  [19]
    of the decision, the judge expressly found that the Appellants were not
    at fault.  He submitted that powerful reasons to justify  removal  have
    to be laid out but were not in this case.  There was a lack of  clarity
    and this is why the judge fell into error.  Mr Sobowale submitted  that
    there are similarities between these Appellants' appeals and the  cases
    of MT and ET (op cit). The judge had paid lip service to this  but  had
    paid no attention to the private life established by the Appellants  in
    the UK and why it was justifiable to remove them.

     Findings

 8. I find no material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, who took the relevant jurisprudence into account and as
    Mr Whitwell identified, provided reasons for his finding that there are
    no powerful reasons as to why the Appellants  should  not  be  removed.
    Whilst this is a variation of the test set out in  MA  (Pakistan)  (op.
    cit.) and endorsed by the presidential panel in MT  and  ET,  which  is
    that there ought to be powerful reasons why a child should be  removed,
    I do not consider that this is a material error.  That is  because  the
    judge has identified a number of reasons which  when  considered  as  a
    whole amount to powerful reasons in favour of removal.  Those  are  the
    reasons identified by Mr Whitwell in his submissions at [5] above.

 9. Of particular note is the fact that the Appellants are now adults, they
    lived in Bangladesh until the age of 10 and they do have their  parents
    and siblings who continue to reside  in  Bangladesh.   The  judge  made
    express findings in that respect, rejecting the evidence that there had
    been no contact with the parents since they left the children in the UK
    in 2010.  The judge was entitled to take account of the fact  that  the
    parents had effectively sought to circumvent immigration control having
    essentially run into financial difficulties  by  taking  out  loans  to
    support the student visa in relation to the Appellants'  older  brother
    [AM].  I find that the judge was also entitled to take account  of  the
    fact there was an absence of evidence from this brother [AM]: see  [16]
    and [19].

10. I further find that the judge's decision  is  in  accordance  with  the
    jurisprudence in that it is clear the case is not on all fours  on  its
    facts with the decision in  MT  and  ET  and  I  accept  Mr  Whitwell's
    submission that the key to the Tribunal's finding in that case was  the
    age the Appellant had reached having resided in the UK since the age of
    4, she was now 14, was integrated into school and was at a key stage in
    her education.  That is not the same as  the  two  Appellants  in  this
    particular case, who have completed their initial education  at  least.
    Moreover, it is clear from the decision in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705 that whilst following the decisions  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4 and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, the children cannot  be  blamed  for
    the actions or poor immigration history of their parents, this is still
    a material factor in the  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision as a whole.

11. Moreover, whilst the factors identified by the Judge, set  out  at  [5]
    above would not normally or necessarily amount to powerful reasons  why
    the Appellants should be removed, in light  of  the  examples  of  such
    reasons set out in the Home Office guidance on Family and Private Life:
    10 year route, updated on 22 February 2018, the distinguishing  feature
    in this case is that  it  is  clear  from  the  jurisprudence  and  the
    guidance that the removal of a child is envisaged. In this case, whilst
    only young adults, the Appellants are no longer children  and  thus  at
    the date of hearing, which is the relevant  date  for  the  assessment,
    their best interests are no longer in play. Despite  that,  notably  at
    [23] the First tier Tribunal Judge did consider their best interests.

12. In conclusion, I find that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moore  made
    no material errors of law in dismissing the appeals.  He gave  adequate
    reasons for finding that removal of the Appellants  on  the  particular
    facts of their appeal was justified.

13.  The appeal is dismissed with the effect that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 20 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
