








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14914/2016
                                                               HU/14931/2016
                                                               HU/14933/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated On:     |
|On 21st August 2018               | On 26th September 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                                    P S G
                                     I G
                                    H S G
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr M Rana, counsel, instructed by S S Basi & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants
      are granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
      or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
      direction applies both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings.

   2. The first  and  second  appellants  are  husband  and  wife,  and  are
      nationals of  India,  born  on  2  April  1978  and  3  February  1980
      respectively. The children are twins, born in the  UK  on  22  October
      2009. Their third child, was born in the UK on 13 September 2011.

   3. The appellants appeal with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  6  February  2018  refusing  their
      applications for leave to remain in the UK. In her decision the  Judge
      noted that the third  and  fourth  appellants  had,  at  the  date  of
      hearing, lived continuously in the UK for eight years.  This  occurred
      whilst the first two appellants breached the conditions of their visas
      as overstayers.

   4. She stated that the children will be returning to India with  both  of
      their parents as part of the family unit. There is nothing exceptional
      in their circumstances. It was asserted that the appellants  would  be
      unable to return to India as  the  Indian  High  Commission  does  not
      recognise them as being Indian due to them having arrived  in  the  UK
      for over five years [20]. The appellant contended that he is unable to
      return to India as the High Commission does not recognise his children
      as Indian and therefore he and his partner are unable to return  there
      without their children.

   5. She considered the claim that the children are said  to  be  stateless
      and cannot be returned to India with their parents. She had regard  to
      the written evidence from her parents that they  have  chosen  not  to
      apply to register the birth of their children  with  the  Indian  High
      Commission and they have no intention of doing so [85].

   6. She stated that had the parents approached the Indian Consulate  there
      is no reason why the children could not have been registered as Indian
      citizens [88]. The "statelessness" of the minor appellants is a matter
      of choice made by their parents. She stated that 'given that the  crux
      of this application is that the children  will  not  be  given  Indian
      citizenship, I do not find that the evidence  before  me  leads  to  a
      conclusion that this is so' [91].

   7. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
      noted that while the Judge's decision does give reasons for dismissing
      the argument that the children were stateless in India, the provisions
      of s.117B(6) are not directly addressed by the Judge. It might be said
      to constitute an arguable error of law.

   8. Mr Rana, who represented the appellants at the  hearing,  stated  that
      the children at the date of hearing were eight years old and therefore
      were "qualifying children".

   9. He submitted that the Judge accepted at [75] of the determination that
      the  best  interests  of   the   children   are   determined   without
      consideration of their parents. She "must have erred in  law"  because
      it cannot be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK if they
      are stateless, either with or without their parents.

  10. Nor did the Judge give sufficient and clear reasons in her decision as
      to why the appellants were not entitled to succeed  in  their  appeals
      having regard to the effect of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

  11. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow  accepted  that  there  were  a
      number of issues raised  in  respect  of  the  children  and  that  an
      assessment of their best interests has not been  properly  undertaken.
      One of  the  issues  raised  was  that  the  children  were  receiving
      education.

  12. The Judge had no regard to the reports and letters in respect  of  the
      children produced from pages 5-59 of the bundle. Nor has there been  a
      proper assessment of the contention that the children  are  stateless,
      which affects the proportionality of the  proposed  decision.  In  the
      circumstances, Mr Tarlow accepted that the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal should be set aside and re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.




      Assessment

  13. As noted by Judge  Lambert  in  granting  permission  to  appeal,  the
      provisions of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act  were  not  addressed  by  the
      Judge.

  14. Although the First-tier Judge stated at [25] that she  had  considered
      'well known' authorities such as MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, it
      is not clear why she concluded that it would  be  reasonable  for  the
      children to leave the UK with their parents.

  15. In the circumstances, I accept the concession made by Mr  Tarlow  that
      there has not been an  adequate  assessment  of  the  children's  best
      interests for the purpose of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

  16. The parties agreed that in the circumstances, it would be  appropriate
      for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
      hearing to take place. I am satisfied that the extent of judicial fact
      finding  which  is  necessary  for  the  decision  to  be  re-made  is
      extensive.




      Notice of Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.  The appeal is  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal, Hatton Cross, for a fresh decision to be made
      by another Judge.

      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                              18 September 2018

