
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14485/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th June 2019                    |On 08th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                  Usman Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Lewis Moore, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Usman Ali against the decision of Judge Samimi  to
    dismiss his appeal, made on human rights grounds, against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse his application for leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom by reason of his long  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. For reasons that I explain at paragraph 11 (below)  I  decided
    to hear this appeal in the  absence  of  the  appellant.  An  anonymity
    direction was not made in the First-tier Tribunal and I  consider  that
    little purpose would be achieved by making one now.

 2. The application had been made under paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration
    Rules which, it will  be  recalled,  requires  the  Appellant  to  meet
    certain requirements concerning his character and immigration  history,
    as well as requiring him to prove that he has been lawfully resident in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at least ten years.

 3. The Respondent refused that application on the basis  that,  whilst  it
    was accepted the appellant had proved that  he  had  been  continuously
    resident in the United Kingdom since his arrival in 2006, he had failed
    to prove that the period of his residence since 2010 was lawful.

 4. The Appellant claimed his residence since 2010 was  lawful  because  he
    had retained a right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  former
    spouse of an EEA national who, at all material times, was a  "qualified
    person" under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  The Respondent challenged that  claim  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's marriage had been one of convenience.

 5. Judge Samimi found that there was "credible evidence ... to  show  that
    the Appellant had been a party to a marriage of convenience", which the
    appellant had failed to rebut by  way  of  an,  "innocent  explanation"
    (paragraph 15), and that he  had  thus  failed  to  show  that  he  had
    acquired a period of ten years' lawful residence in the United  Kingdom
    (see paragraph 16).  The judge thus concluded that the  Appellant  had,
    "... not satisfied the requirements of  the  long  residence  Rules  in
    accordance with paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules".  The  judge
    thereafter dismissed his appeal on this sole ground.

 6. The Grounds of  Appeal  are  principally  based  upon  various  factual
    inaccuracies in the decision including, by way of example,  incorrectly
    stating the Appellant's date of birth and, more seriously, cutting  and
    pasting a paragraph that related to an  entirely  different  appeal  at
    paragraph 6 of the present decision.  The grounds were drafted  by  the
    Appellant himself.

 7. The application for permission to appeal on those grounds was initially
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever, who said that the judge had
    set out in some detail the evidence in the  case  and  had  found,  for
    reasons that were sustainable, that the Appellant had been a party to a
    marriage of convenience.  Judge Lever added that this  was  a  reasoned
    decision based on the evidence available and had reached  a  conclusion
    clearly open to him on that evidence.

 8. The Appellant renewed his application, on  the  same  grounds,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  In a  decision  dated  22nd  May  2019,  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain said as follows -

         "It is arguable that the judge has failed to apply anxious scrutiny
         to the Appellant's case given her recitation of incorrect facts  at
         paragraphs 1  and  6  relating  to  the  Appellant's  marriage  and
         immigration history.  It is also arguable that, in  dismissing  the
         appeal under the Immigration Rules, the judge erred in law  as  the
         only right of appeal is on human rights grounds.   It  is  arguable
         that she erred in failing to consider Article 8."

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain went on to  say  that  she  was
    less impressed by the arguments challenging the finding in relation  to
    the Appellant's allegedly sham marriage. Thus, the matter  came  before
    me.

 9. I should begin by observing that the principal ground on  which  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain granted permission to appeal  was  not
    one that was explicitly  raised  by  the  Appellant.   However,  in  my
    discussion with Mr Moore during his well-presented arguments,  he  said
    that he did not take any point on this.  In my judgment  he  was  right
    not to do so.  The reason for this is that the only  Ground  of  Appeal
    that was open to the Appellant under Section  84  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was  that  the  decision  was  unlawful
    under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act as being contrary to his rights
    under the Human Rights Convention.  That being the case, the judge  was
    required as a matter of law to  determine  the  appeal  on  that  basis
    irrespective of whether the Appellant specifically addressed it at  the
    hearing of his appeal.

10. The judge gave no consideration whatsoever to the question  of  whether
    the decision would lead to a breach of the appellant's right to respect
    for  private  and  family  life  under  the  Human  Rights  Convention.
    Instead,  she  focused  entirely  upon  the  question  of  whether  the
    Appellant had established that he had lawfully resided in the UK for  a
    continuous period of ten years under paragraph 276B of the  Immigration
    Rules.  However, her finding in this regard was by no means dispositive
    of the appeal, which ultimately depended upon whether  the  appellant's
    removal in consequence of the decision would unlawful under  section  6
    of the 1998 Act as being incompatible with the appellant's rights under
    Article 8 of the 1956  Convention.  Having  made  her  finding  on  the
    lawfulness of the appellant's residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  her
    focus should therefore have shifted from paragraph  276B  to  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules, for it is the latter rather  than  the
    former provision that represents the Secretary of State's view  of  the
    operation of Article 8 in relation to the right to respect for  private
    life.  That is not to say that  the  question  of  the  period  of  the
    Appellant's lawful residence in the United Kingdom  was  irrelevant  to
    the Article 8 issue; it was not.  It was, however, but one of a  number
    of factors that fell to be weighed  in  the  balance  when  considering
    whether the  public  interest  required  the  Appellant  to  return  to
    Pakistan. I will come to what other factors should have been considered
    in a moment. However, it will suffice for  present  purposes  to  state
    that the failure  to  consider  the  one  Ground  of  Appeal  that  the
    Appellant could lawfully bring against the decision is  so  fundamental
    that the decision of Judge Samimi must be set aside.

11. Before considering the appropriate procedure for re-making the decision
    in this appeal, I should first  mention  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    appear at the hearing  before  me  by  reason  of  illness.   This  was
    evidenced by my  clerk,  who  had  not  only  witnessed  the  Appellant
    vomiting outside the hearing room, but had arranged for an ambulance to
    take him to hospital. By the time I was informed of these facts, I  had
    already formed a provisional view that the  decision  of  Judge  Samimi
    could not stand. It therefore seemed to  me  that  there  would  be  no
    procedural unfairness in conducting the 'error of law' hearing  in  his
    absence.

12.  Mr  Moore  submitted  this  was  the  type  of  case  where  I could
    satisfactorily substitute my own decision on the question of Article  8
    for that of the First-tier Tribunal without remitting it for a complete
    rehearing. However, there are a number of reasons why I  do  not  think
    that this is appropriate.

13. The first and most obvious reason is that this is not a case in which I
    can simply substitute my own decision for an erroneous decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge given that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  not
    made any decision at all upon the single Ground of Appeal that was open
    to the Appellant.  It follows  from  this  that  a  decision  upon  the
    compatibility of the Respondent's  decision  with  the  rights  of  the
    Appellant under Article 8 of the Convention remains outstanding. It  is
    therefore only right and proper, as a matter  of  principle,  that  the
    first port of call in this regard is to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Secondly, and related to the first reason, is that  there  are  a  very
    considerable number of consequential primary findings of fact that need
    to be made before any sensible decision can be made upon  the  question
    of whether the Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would breach
    his fundamental right to respect for  private  and  family  life.  This
    includes (but is not limited to) the question of whether the  Appellant
    continues to  have  any  social,  cultural  or  family  connections  to
    Pakistan of which he is a citizen,  and  the  extent  to  which  he  is
    integrated into the society  of  the  United  Kingdom.   There  are  no
    findings of fact about any of these things.  I accept Mr Moore's  point
    that it may well be that no evidence was advanced about  those  matters
    at the hearing.  Nevertheless,  given  the  restricted  nature  of  the
    appeal, it was in my judgement incumbent upon  the  Presenting  Officer
    and, if necessary the judge herself, to enquire into these matters.  It
    is difficult to see how it  would  otherwise  be  possible  to  make  a
    sensible decision as  to  whether  there  would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles to integration" in Pakistan under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules.

15. Thirdly, when looking at the matter outside the Rules, the Tribunal was
    legally required (but failed) to have  regard  to  the  factors  listed
    under Section 117B of the  2000  Act.  These  include  the  Appellant's
    facility in the English language and the extent to which (if at all) he
    is financially independent of the state. Indeed, the only  matter  that
    the judge did address under section 117B (seemingly by accident  rather
    than  by  design)  was  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  had
    established his private life in the UK at a time when his  presence  in
    the United Kingdom was unlawful.

16. I am not in any event satisfied that the judge's  finding  on  the  one
    matter that she considered, namely the lawfulness  of  the  Appellant's
    residence in the UK, is entirely sound. This is because she appears  to
    have approached the question of the burden and  standard  of  proof  as
    though this were an appeal against the  refusal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State to issue the appellant with an EEA Residence Card in  recognition
    of his rights of free movement under the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations, whereunder the burden of proving that  his  marriage
    was one of "convenience" would have been upon the Respondent.  However,
    given that this was an appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse his human rights claim, it is at least arguable that the correct
    approach was to consider whether the Appellant had proved all  relevant
    primary facts, including the question of whether his private  life  was
    established at a time when he was lawfully in the  United  Kingdom,  as
    were necessary to establish the basis  of  his  claim  that  his  human
    rights would be contravened by his removal from the United Kingdom.  Be
    that as it may, even if the judge's finding in  this  regard  could  be
    viewed as satisfactory, there remain  a  significant  number  of  other
    factual findings that need  to  be  made  before  this  appeal  can  be
    properly determined.

17. Fourthly, it is not practical for me to  embark  immediately  upon  the
    necessary fact-finding exercise given that the Appellant  is  currently
    indisposed by reason of illness.

18. So, for all of the above reasons, I conclude that the most  appropriate
    course is to set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and to  remit
    this matter to be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal before any  judge
    other than Judge Samimi.

Notice of Decision

19. The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set
    aside and the appeal is remitted to be heard completely afresh  by  any
    judge other than Judge Samimi.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 3rd July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly





