
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14197/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 April 2019                     |On 22 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J L Blair (Counsel), Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of SM, as I will refer  to  him  since  I  think  an
    anonymity application was made in the skeleton argument and I  can  see
    the reasons for that, against refusal to  revoke  a  deportation  order
    which involved the assertion of a human rights claim.

2.   The appellant came to the United  Kingdom  at  the  age  of  13  having
    endured an abusive childhood  and  subsequently  having  been  sexually
    abused in a Young Offenders' Institution in Algiers.  He  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in April 1995, worked for  a  few  years,  and  after  a
    relationship began with Ms [P], a British citizen, in 2000, they had  a
    daughter born in May 2006 but sadly she died at  birth.   This  had  an
    impact on the appellant who seems not to have worked thereafter  during
    the years since that time.  That relationship broke down  subsequently.
    He then formed another relationship with Ms [R], having had twin  girls
    with his previous partner, and they had a daughter also  in  this  most
    recent relationship in 2015.  The  judge set out the  criminal  history
    of the appellant describing it as  a  significant  number  of  criminal
    convictions in  this  country,  fifteen  convictions  for  30  offences
    between March 2000 and July 2016 of various types, the most recent ones
    I think being a conviction in July 2016 for eleven separate  counts  of
    theft and he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment and this  led  to
    the deportation order.  That was made on 6 December 2016 and then  came
    subsequent applications to revoke the order, the refusal to do  so  and
    the hearing against that refusal.

3.   The judge  noted  the  evidence  before  him  including  a  psychiatric
    assessment by Dr Reddy and the best interests of a child report from Dr
    Pagella.  There was an OASys Report, a risk assessment report and there
    were witness statements also, and  he  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant and also from Ms [R].  The judge in the circumstances of  the
    psychological and psychiatric assessment of the appellant decided  that
    he should be treated as a vulnerable witness and approached the  matter
    accordingly and there is no criticism of his approach in  that  regard,
    and then he set out the evidence in summary noting the submissions also
    that were made including a reference in the respondent's submissions to
    the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder and  schizophrenia  and
    the highlighting by the  respondent  that  the  only  medication  being
    administered was Diazepam  and  noting  the  argument  that  there  was
    treatment available in Algeria and the appellant  had  relatives  still
    living in Algeria, he had gone back for his aunt's funeral in  I  think
    2008.

4.   The judge then set out the  relevant  legal  provisions  and  concluded
    that the test under paragraph 399A(c) of there being  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Algeria had not been  met
    by him and he dealt with  this  in  essence  at  paragraph  66  of  his
    decision, noting the relationship with the family and the psychological
    problems and psychiatric condition but did not consider there were very
    significant obstacles to his integration in that he retains significant
    family members in Algeria, numerous siblings and his mother, and he had
    been able to work in the past.  The judge  said  he  had  focused  very
    carefully on the medical aspect of the case because  he  was  aware  of
    previous suicide attempts and  the  psychological/psychiatric  analysis
    was one that was extremely valuable to the judge in trying to  make  an
    overall assessment and on that specific  question  he  concluded  there
    would not be  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.   Then  he
    considered matters outside the Rules including the impact on the family
    members but these did not amount to such circumstances as  to  outweigh
    the public interest given his criminality and the appeal was dismissed.



5.   Permission to appeal was sought and granted and this morning I  granted
    permission to add a ground of appeal to which I will come shortly.

6.   The main challenge is to paragraph 66 and as it is said the failure  by
    the judge to take proper account of  the  medical  evidence,  and  that
    evidence is to be found in the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, a
    detailed report from Dr Reddy which starts at page 85.  The  report  at
    paragraph 4 summarises the appellant's primary psychiatric  illness  as
    being paranoid schizophrenia and the fact that he  also  seemed  to  be
    experiencing a major  depressive  disorder  and  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder, and also in the summary it was the  doctor's  view  that  the
    appellant's psychological wellbeing would undoubtedly worsen were he to
    be re-detained and deported to Algeria.  This was well evidenced in his
    case as he had tried to commit suicide on a number of occasions.  There
    is more detail then later on in the report, for  example  at  paragraph
    35, in which it was recorded he still  gets  flashbacks  of  a  varying
    degree and the  thought  of  returning  to  Algeria  being  a  dominant
    trigger.  And then at paragraph 33 there is reference to poor cognitive
    functioning, slow decision-making, poor concentration and anxiety  with
    loss of interest in certain hobbies and impaired memory and  low  self-
    esteem, and given the recently assessed depressed state it  would  seem
    that his state of mind is indeed unstable and given  the  diagnoses  of
    schizophrenia and depression with PTSD it would  seem  that  he  is  at
    elevated risk in the longer  term  were  he  to  be  deported  back  to
    Algeria.  This may cause him to act in  an  impulsive  and  potentially
    irresponsible manner, and then there is reference to past and potential
    suicide attempts, and then there are also issues identified at page 102
    at paragraph 46 as to the difficulties that  might  be  experienced  in
    putting safeguards in place for returning him.  He  would  represent  a
    significant flight risk in the absence of these kind of safeguards that
    Dr Reddy identified and the long term in effecting his removal in  such
    a manner would result in a  much  poorer  prognosis  in  terms  of  his
    suicidality and self-harm.

7.   I find it troubling that none of this detail was really  gone  into  by
    the judge.  There is the brief description of what the  medical  issues
    were and the extreme value that he said he obtained from the  analysis,
    but there are specific points here which as it seems to me needed to be
    referred to in more detail by the judge and Mr Avery accepts that there
    could have been greater detail but says, well, there was sufficient but
    I think that  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  problems  has  a  real
    materiality to the issue of significant obstacles  to  integration,  in
    particular bearing in mind his  evidence  about  the  circumstances  in
    which he left Algeria, the fact that he did not feel able  to  rely  on
    family support there, and the lack of really  any  ongoing  support  or
    proper connection with the family.   The  judge  simply  said  that  he
    retains significant family members in Algeria in the form  of  numerous
    siblings and his mother, but the fact  of  their  existence  and  their
    ability to provide support are two very different matters.  Equally  he
    has shown a capacity to be able to work, that was until a few years ago
    since when his significant mental health problems have arisen.  So,  as
    it seems to me, the  judge  did  err  materially  in  paragraph  66  in
    assessing the issue  of  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.
    There needs to be a much fuller and more careful  engagement  with  the
    medical evidence in the application of that test.

8.   Ground 2, the new ground, is with regard to the issue of a  failure  to
    assess  within  the  Rules  the  issue  of  undue  harshness  and   the
    implications for the children, in particular of the appellant's removal
    to Algeria should  that  happen.   The  judge  addressed  this  briefly
    outside the Rules at paragraph 69 concerning the impact upon Ms [R] and
    upon her daughter, there will also be a lesser impact  upon  the  twins
    given the history that I have heard.  None  of  these  factors,  either
    viewed individually or collectively, amount to sufficient circumstances
    to outweigh the public interest,  given  the  appellant's  criminality.
    Again it is argued on behalf of  the  respondent  there  is  really  no
    materiality to this but again, as it seems to me there are issues  here
    particularly given the judge's failure in that context to  address  the
    best interests report of Dr Pagella.  It was listed in the evidence but
    was not addressed in considering the undue harshness test which was not
    considered in the proper context at all and it was  not  considered  at
    all either in regard to the consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  So, I find an error of law in that regard also.  It seems to me
    that given the extent of the errors of law in this case it is going  to
    be necessary for this to go back for a full  rehearing  in  the  First-
    tier.  So, since there is no objection to that I think the extent of re-
    making is such that it would properly be re-done in the  First-tier  so
    this will have to go back for a rehearing  at  Taylor  House  before  a
    judge other than Judge Cockrill.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date     29 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




