
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14886/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 17 March 2021                 |On 29 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AJ
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction:



      1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Hanlon)
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")  who  dismissed  her  human
         rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the 16 December 2019.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances that refer to  issues  that
         may be relevant to a protection claim although within a claim  made
         on human rights grounds. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
         directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of
         these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  her.  This
         direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 17 March 2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant so that she could listen and observe the
         hearing. There were no issues regarding  sound,  and  no  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:


      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.



      5. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. She lived with her  mother
         in Pakistan. Her parents were separated and her father had moved to
         Saudi Arabia. He was married for a  second  time  and  was  not  in
         contact with the family in Pakistan. On 9 May 2008 in Pakistan  she
         married a British citizen and they lived there as a married couple.
         Shortly after the marriage he returned to the United Kingdom.

      6. The appellant applied to enter the United Kingdom in November  2008
         as a spouse.

      7. Whilst waiting for a decision on that  application,  the  appellant
         received a communication from  her  husband  containing  a  divorce
         certificate issued by the Sharia Islamic Council dated  19  January
         2009. There was only one line written in the communication  stating
         that he was sorry and he could not continue with the marriage.

      8. The appellant's account is that following this divorce, her  family
         were against her and her mother. It is said a large amount  of  her
         mother's savings which she had saved had  been  exhausted  and  the
         dowry that had been provided was not returned.

      9. On 16 February 2009, the appellant's mother was said to be "curious
         to know the reason of divorce" and decided to come  to  the  United
         Kingdom. She wanted to find out the reason for the divorce and  ask
         about the amount of dowry given to the husband.  However  when  she
         entered the United Kingdom she found that  the  appellant's  former
         spouse and his mother had relocated to another address  in  the  UK
         without leaving a forwarding address.

     10. The appellant informed the authorities that she was no longer in  a
         relationship with a British citizen and it appears that her spousal
         visa was cancelled.

     11. In 2009, the appellant was in Pakistan and her mother  was  in  the
         United Kingdom. It is said that there was a "suffocated  atmosphere
         everywhere created by maternal and paternal families  in  by  other
         extended families". It is said that there was no one left who could
         support  our  protector  from  family  members  who   were   always
         criticising her over the sudden breakup of her  marriage".  It  was
         claimed that members of the family forced her time and again to get
         a second marriage but she refused.

     12. On 12 September 2012, the appellant came  to  United  Kingdom  with
         entry clearance as a student valid until 12 September 2016.

     13. The appellant's mother, after entering the United Kingdom,  married
         a settled person the United Kingdom. The appellant lived  with  her
         mother and her stepfather.

     14. On 25 May 2016, the appellant's leave was curtailed so as to expire
         on 24th of July 2016.

     15. On 24 May 2019, the appellant made  a  human  rights  claim  in  an
         application for leave to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  her
         private life. Accompanying the application was a  letter  from  her
         solicitors dated 21 May 2019.

     16. In that letter, there was a section entitled  "statement  of  facts
         and background" which made reference to her factual history as  set
         out above. The basis of the application was the appellant could not
         return to Pakistan she did not have any family,  friends  or  other
         relatives who are residing in that country. It  was  said  that  if
         "she had not come to the UK and are chosen to live in Pakistan, she
         had been forced to second marriage." It was said that "she  had  no
         qualifications or experience to earn subsistence and no  property".
         It was claimed that she was living in the United Kingdom  with  her
         mother and stepfather and that she has spent a substantial part  of
         her life in the UK.

     17. The respondent refused her claim in  a  decision  letter  dated  22
         August 2019.

     18. The decision set out her immigration  history  and  considered  her
         application under the private life rules under  Paragraph  276  ADE
         (1) noting that she was a national of Pakistan who entered  the  UK
         on 12 September 2012 and therefore had lived  in  the  UK  for  six
         years and eight months. She was over the age of  18  but  not  aged
         between 18 and under 25  years  and  therefore  could  not  satisfy
         paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii), (iv) or(v).  It  was  also  considered
         that there were no very significant obstacles to her integration if
         required to leave the UK because at the time of the application she
         was 28 years of age and in the absence of any evidence this was the
          country she had spent most of the  first  21  years  of  her  life
         living in Pakistan. It was considered that she would still have the
         social and cultural ties to assist her integration into life  there
         which had been a significant period including all of her  formative
         years and the start of her adult life.

     19.  As  to  whether  there  were  any  circumstances  which   resulted
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for her, the respondent took  into
         account her claim that she feared return to Pakistan as her  family
         would not support her due to her previous  marriage  to  a  British
         citizen which had ended. The respondent took into account her claim
         that she was residing with her mother in the UK that she would  not
         have any source of livelihood through which to survive if  returned
         to Pakistan or any qualifications to enable her to earn a living.

     20. The respondent considered that in relation to her claimed  fear  on
         return, she had been provided, along with her representative  on  8
         August 2019, details to enable her to  make  a  claim  for  asylum.
         However she  had  not  made  any  claim  or  attended  a  screening
         appointment therefore her claim were not assessed on that basis.

     21. The respondent considered there was nothing to show she  could  not
         return to Pakistan and live as an  independent  adult  in  her  own
         right and would be able to obtain employment and  accommodation  to
         support herself in Pakistan. She entered the UK as a student  on  a
         temporary basis with no legitimate expectation that  she  would  be
         able to remain in the UK  indefinitely.  Thus  she  could  use  the
         knowledge and experience gained during her time  in  the  UK  as  a
         student to assist in finding employment in order to support herself
         in Pakistan will stop the  respondent  considered  that  she  could
         reside separately from any other family members in Pakistan if they
         would not support. Her claim was therefore refused.

     22. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT (Judge O'Hanlon) on
         the 27 November 2019. In a decision promulgated on 16 December 2019
         he dismissed her appeal.

     23. Whilst the appellant had been represented  by  solicitors,  at  the
         hearing before  the  FtTJ  the  appellant  was  unrepresented.  The
         solicitors had provided an appellant's  bundle  containing  witness
         statements for the appellant and her mother  and  copies  of  other
         documents.

     24. The FtTJ heard evidence from the appellant and her mother  both  of
         whom confirmed that the contents of their witness  statements  were
         correct and relied upon those statements.  They  were  also  cross-
         examined by the presenting officer.

     25. At paragraph 16 (a)- (o) the FtTJ set out the appellant's  case  as
         followed by the respondent's case.

     26. The FtTJ's analysis and factual findings are set out at  paragraphs
         [20]- [32]. They can be summarised as follows:-

         1) The FtTJ found  that  the  documents  sent  by  the  appellant's
            representatives were unclear and that the application  form  had
            set out that the appellant was applying for an extension of  her
            stay in  the  UK  "outside  the  immigration  rules  because  of
            compassionate  and  compelling  circumstances"  and   that   the
            covering letter  said  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
            requirements for leave to remain on the grounds of private  life
            under paragraph 276 ADE. However, he noted that the  grounds  of
            appeal  paragraph  8  referred  to  there   being   "significant
            obstacles  to  integration".  Notwithstanding  this,  the  judge
            reached the conclusion that in fairness, her appeal  before  the
            Tribunal should  be  considered  both  in  accordance  with  the
            immigration rules and outside the rules.

         2) The appellant could not satisfy the requirements leave to remain
            on the grounds of family life under Appendix FM; she is an adult
            and does not have a partner or child (at [22]).

         3) The appellant cannot meet paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii) , (iv) (v)
            of the immigration rules on grounds of either age or  length  of
            residence in the United Kingdom. The appellant is aged 29  years
            of age.

         4) As to paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) and  whether  there  were  very
            significant obstacles to her integration into  Pakistan  if  she
            were required to leave the United Kingdom, the judge found  that
            she was 28 years of age at the time of the application  and  had
            come to the UK in 2012 and therefore spent the first 20 years of
            her life in Pakistan. She therefore spent the  significant  bulk
            of her life including her formative years and her early years as
            a young adult in Pakistan. On the basis  of  the  evidence,  the
            appellant had undergone some education Pakistan.  There  was  no
            information to say that she had any  significant  health  issues
            and that she been brought up in the culture of Pakistan although
            she had been in the UK since 2012. The judge found that  he  did
            not consider that the period of departure would  mean  that  she
            lost contact with the culture of Pakistan. She spoke Urdu as was
            shown by her requirement for interpreter at  the  hearing  (  at
            [23]).

         5) The FtTJ also considered that she would be returning to Pakistan
            as a  single  divorced  woman.  Whilst  the  appellant  and  has
            suggested that she would be at risk in the event  of  return  to
            Pakistan, the judge noted that she had not made  any  protection
            or asylum claim in that respect nor did she do so when she first
            entered the  United  Kingdom  in  2012.  The  judge  stated  "in
            considering this aspect, I note that the appellant  stated  that
            her problems began following her divorce in 2009  but  that  she
            had continued to reside in Pakistan until  entering  the  United
            Kingdom on a student Visa in 2012. Although the appellant stated
            she was pressured by  members  of  the  family  to  marry  other
            people, I do not consider that the appellant's concerns in  this
            respect will be sufficient to amount  to  something  significant
            obstacles to  her  integration  to  Pakistan  in  the  event  of
            return."

         6) The judge considered the Home  Office  country  information  and
            guidance- Pakistan: women fearing gender-based harm/violence  of
            February 2016, paragraph 3.1.2 which stated  that  there  is  in
            general, effective state protection likely to be  available  for
            women fearing gender-based violence.

         7) The judge concluded that having considered all of these factors,
            he did not find that they would be very significant obstacles to
            the appellant's integration into Pakistan in the event of return
            and found that she did not satisfy the requirements for  private
            life seemed paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) (at [23]).

         8) The FtTJ went  on  to  consider  the  application  applying  the
            structured assessment in Razgar.

         9) The FtTJ took into account that the appellant had established  a
            private life having been resident in  the  UK  for  seven  years
            although he noted that he had not received any details as to the
            extent of that private life but  was  prepared  to  accept  that
            having lived in the UK for seven years  it  will  have  "in  all
            likelihood  have  resulted  in   establishing   behaviours   and
            relationships consistent with the  establishment  of  a  private
            life to some degree."

        10) As to family life, the judge found that  the  appellant  was  an
            adult. The FtTJ found that it was clear from  the  evidence  and
            that of her mother that there was a close  relationship  between
            the appellant and other, when applying the decision of  Kugathas
            v SSHD [2003] INLR 170, found that there was a degree of  family
            life between the appellant and her mother. The appellant came to
            the United Kingdom  in  2012  following  her  divorce  from  her
            marriage in 2008. The appellant  was  still  residing  with  the
            mother and the FtTJ found that the ties between them went beyond
            those which an adult child normally would have with a parent and
            accordingly he found an  element  of  family  life  between  the
            appellant and her mother. (at [25]).

        11) When considering the issues of proportionality, the FtTJ applied
            the section 117 public interest considerations.

               . He found as a strong factor against the appellant that she
                 could not meet the requirements of the immigration rules.

               . In accordance with section 117B little weight was given to
                 the  private  life  of  the  appellant  as  it  had   been
                 established after her leave to remain was curtailed as  to
                 expire on 24 July 2016.

               .  As  to  her  language  abilities,  whilst  she  had  some
                 understanding of English, it was necessary for to her have
                 the assistance of a court interpreter which suggested that
                 the appellant was not yet fluent in her understanding  and
                 speaking of English (s117B(2).

               . Little evidence had been put before the  tribunal  by  the
                 appellant  of  establishment  of  a  private   life;   the
                 appellant is not  currently  studying  and  there  was  no
                 evidence about a circle of friends. The judge concluded on
                 the basis of information received, that any  private  life
                 the appellant may have established would be closely linked
                 to her family life (at [28]).

        12) The FtTJ set out his conclusions at [29]-[32] as follows:

               . The maintenance of effective immigration control is in the
                 public interest.

               . Although the appellant may be speak some  English  it  was
                 clear  by  her  request  an  interpreter  that   she   has
                 difficulties in speaking/and/or understanding English.

               . She came to the United Kingdom as a student and  therefore
                 had not been given any expectation of a right to remain in
                 the UK.

               . The appellant is not financially independent. Although the
                 bundle  contains  details  of  the  appellant's   mother's
                 husband's finances, no information been provided as to the
                 appellant's  financial  situation.  There  is  nothing  to
                 suggest that she is financially independent.

               . Although she been in the United Kingdom in 2012, the  bulk
                 of her life had been spent in Pakistan.

               . In all of the circumstances, he concluded the weight to be
                 attached to the public interest outweighed the appellant's
                 rights under article 8 of the ECHR.

               . The judge considered the compassionate circumstances which
                 were put forward namely the closeness of the  relationship
                 with the mother  and  other  members  of  the  appellant's
                 mother's husband's family in the UK. The judge found  that
                 there were not sufficient compelling compassionate reasons
                 to justify  grant  of  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
                 immigration rules.

               . He concluded that the refusal of her application for leave
                 to  remain  would  not  result  in   unjustifiably   harsh
                 consequences for  the  appellant  and  the  weight  to  be
                 attached to the public interest outweighed the appellant's
                 qualified rights.

               . He therefore dismissed the appeal.

     27. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was refused by  FtTJ
         Easterman but on renewal was granted by the Upper Tribunal   on  10
         June 2020 for the following reasons;

         "The appellant is represented and with that in mind  I  have  given
         the grounds their widest possible reading.

         I grant permission because it is arguable  that  the  tribunal  has
         failed to take all material evidence into account when reaching the
         conclusion (at its 23] that forced marriage would not constitute  a
         "very significant obstacle to integration"  because  the  appellant
         could avail herself of the  general  protection  of  the  Pakistani
         state. It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  has  failed  to
         consider whether such protection, in the  particular  case  of  the
         appellant would be forthcoming."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     28. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of  the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-
         to-face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties. I am
         grateful for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     29. Mr O'Ryan of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant and relied
         upon the written grounds of appeal and the written submissions.

     30. In his oral submissions, he submitted that the FtTJ considered  the
         issue of pressure placed upon the appellant  to  undergo  a  forced
         marriage at [23]. In doing  so,  he  made  reference  to  the  CPIN
         guidance note 2016 and quoted from one  paragraph  at  3.1.2  which
         stated that there is in general, effective state protection  likely
         to be available for women fearing gender-based violence.

     31. He submitted that UTJ considered the grounds of appeal giving  them
         the widest possible meaning and granted  permission  on  the  basis
         that it was arguable that the tribunal failed to take into  account
         all material  evidence  on  reaching  the  conclusion  that  forced
         marriage would not constitute a very significant obstacle.

     32. In this respect, the appellant's case is that the  judge  erred  in
         his consideration of the evidence. Firstly, he  erred  by  electing
         himself to make reference to the CPIN which had not  been  provided
         by the parties but relied on only one passage  from  that  document
         when  there  were   other   aspects   pointing   to   a   different
         interpretation  as  set  out  at  paragraph  20  of   the   written
         submissions. References are made there  to  paragraph  2.3.1,  that
         Pakistan is ranked as the third most dangerous place in  the  world
         for women, and one of the most unequal, violence against  women  is
         widespread, be domestic violence, sexual abuse and harassment, acid
         attacks, forced marriages, forced conversion and honour  killings."
         Further reference is made to  2.3.5  where  reference  is  made  to
         violence against women including diary disputes, kidnappings, child
         marriage, acid and bird attacks and forced marriages.

     33. Mr O'Ryan relied upon his written submissions that  made  reference
         to the relevant CG decisions set out in detail at paragraphs 20 and
         21 which included the decision  in  SM  (lone  women  -  ostracism)
         Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 67. In reference to this, he submitted that
         where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in a  home  area
         for single woman there may be an internal relocation option to  one
         of Pakistan's largest cities depending on the  family,  social  and
         educational situation of the woman in question.

     34. He submitted that the judge was an error by failing  to  take  into
         account all material evidence when  reaching  the  conclusion  that
         forced marriage would not constitute a very significant obstacle to
         integration for the appellant because she could  avail  herself  of
         the general protection of the Pakistani state.

     35. In reaching that conclusion, the judge  referred  to  the  CPIN,  a
         publicly available document but having done so he was selective  as
         to what elements of that evidence he decided to take into  account.
         Thus by referring only to one passage and 3.1.2, the judge erred in
         law in failing have to regard to  other  passages  a  report  which
         strongly pointed to a conclusion opposite to the one reached by the
         judge; i.e. passages pointing to a  significant  risk  of  harm  to
         single/divorced women by way of forced marriage and that there  was
         no effective protection from the risk (relying on paragraphs 2.3.1,
         2.3.5, 2.4.1 - 2.4.3, 5.11, 7.3.1).

     36. He submitted that the CPIN also directed attention to the  relevant
         country guidance as to the risk of harm to lone women in  Pakistan,
         including from forced marriage or other gender-based violence ( see
         SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT  67,  but  that
         the FtTJ failed to have regard to the relevant considerations as to
         the assessment of such risk, set out in the headnote.

     37. He submitted that the FtTJ erred in law by failing to look  at  the
         wider evidence and whilst this was not a protection  appeal  but  a
         human rights appeal the claim advanced is based on there being very
         significant obstacles to reintegration and thus  the  consideration
         of a forced marriage and the circumstances were  relevant  to  that
         issue that the judge had not considered them adequately.

     38. Mr O'Ryan also submitted that the FtTJ had erred in law by  failing
         to make findings of fact determining what level of risk  of  forced
         marriage would occur and if there was a risk, he erred  in  law  in
         misdirecting himself by finding that any such risk did  not  amount
         to a significant obstacle to integration.

     39. There were initial written submissions  issued  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent  dated    relied  upon  by  Mr  Avery.  Much  of   those
         submissions were directed to the point raised that  permission  had
         been granted for a reason not advanced  by  the  appellant  on  the
         grounds nor based on a submission advanced before the FtTJ  in  the
         substantive hearing.

     40. As to the merits of the appeal themselves, it  was  submitted  that
         the FtTJ cited paragraph 3.1.2 of the CPIN and the finding was  not
         a perverse finding when seen in the light of the other five factors
         considered at paragraph 23 for example that she spent the first  20
         years and I have in Pakistan, she was educated in  Pakistan,  there
         are no health issues, she spoke Urdu and there  was  no  protection
         claim.

     41. Dealing with the grounds as drafted,  it  was  submitted  that  the
         judge impermissibly limited his consideration of proportionality is
         that of private life. This was not correct  when  looking  at  [31]
         where the judge considered the compassionate factors including  the
         closeness of the appellant's relationship with her mother and other
         members of the appellant's mother's husband's family in the  United
         Kingdom.

     42. Thus it was submitted that in the absence of any  very  significant
         obstacles, the judge was aware of the closeness to her  mother  but
         it  was  not  disproportionate  for  the  appellant   to   properly
         particularise  her claim and make an application for asylum  should
         she claim that it was not safe for her to return to Pakistan.

     43. Mr Avery, in his oral submissions submitted that the  issue  was  a
         narrow one and concerned the judge's  approach  to  the  claim.  He
         submitted that the judge had  been  a  difficult  position  as  the
         appellant's evidence  was  thin.  There  was  a  reference  in  the
         original application form and in  the  witness  statement  but  the
         factual account did not amount to much by way of a protection claim
         and  that  all  she  had  established  was  she  was  "suffocating"
         alongside her family and was not evidence which was  sufficient  to
         establish a protection claim.

     44. He submitted the risk the appellant from the outset was  slight  in
         terms of the evidence. The appellant had not put in any evidence as
         to her circumstances in Pakistan and the  judge  did  his  best  by
         looking at the CPIN report.

     45. Mr Avery submitted that the factual findings made by the judge  did
         not establish a protection claim or that she was at risk  of  harm.
         He submitted that the judge took into account  that  the  appellant
         had remained in Pakistan after divorce in 2009 - 2012 and that this
         was a factor in the judge's assessment. He  also  stated  that  the
         evidence as to "pressure" was not sufficient to  constitute  proper
         evidence of risk of harm.

     46. He submitted that even if the appellant was in need  of  protection
         the onus was on the appellant to establish that as set out at 2.4.2
         and that "the onus is on the person to demonstrate why  they  would
         be unable  to  access  effective  protection".  This  is  not  been
         established in the  appellant's  case  and  there  was  a  lack  of
         evidence before the judge on the impact of the appellant. There was
         no suggestion that the judge had failed to  take  into  account  or
         properly consider the evidence that was in front of  him  and  that
         the findings made were therefore sound.

     47. Mr O'Ryan by way of reply submitted that the appellant's point made
         that she was feeling pressured but no finding was made as  to  what
         the pressure was or  how  it  manifested  itself.  There  were  not
         adequate reasons to show that it was insufficient to  amount  to  a
         significant obstacle of reintegration.

     48. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I
         now give.


Decision on error of law:

     49. Before considering the grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant,
         it is necessary to consider two preliminary issues.

     50. The first issue relates to the grant  of  permission.  The  grounds
         that were originally drafted  did  not  set  out  or  identify  any
         arguable error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  and  from
         paragraphs [8 -  20]  properly  considered  were  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with the decision of the FtTJ and  as  such  does  not
         constitute an error of law. That was the conclusion reached by  the
         FtTJ who refused permission.

     51. Upon renewal on the same grounds, the Upper Tribunal stated in  its
         decision  when  granting  permission  that  the  grounds  had  been
         considered by giving them their "widest possible  reading"  on  the
         basis that the appellant was  unrepresented.  Thus  permission  was
         granted on the grounds set out in the grant of permission.

     52. The respondent in the written  submissions  dated  19  August  2020
         submitted that permission to appeal had be granted for a reason not
         advanced by the appellant and the grounds nor based on a submission
         advanced before the FtTJ at the substantive hearing.  Reference  is
         made to decisions of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AZ  (error  of  law:
         jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018) UKUT  00245  and    Durueke
         (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach)  [2019]  UKUT  000  197  and  in
         particular paragraph 52 of Durueke that if permission is granted on
         a ground that has not been  raised  by  the  parties,  it  is  good
         practice and a useful aid in the exercise of self-restraint for the
         permission judge to indicate which aspect of the headnote 3" of  AZ
         applies.

     53. Notwithstanding those submissions of the respondent, it seems to me
         that the point made  by  Mr  O'Ryan  is  correct  and  that  whilst
         criticisms have been made by the respondent concerning the grant of
         permission, the position as it stands before me is that a grant  of
         permission has been made and therefore there are no  jurisdictional
         issues which arise that would result in this tribunal  refusing  to
         deal with the case on its merits.

     54. The second issue relates to the admission of evidence that was  not
         before the FtTJ. That evidence comprises of a witness statement  in
         support of the appellant and a  copy  of  the  notes  held  by  the
         respondent relating to her application for entry clearance and as a
         student. They were sent in a letter dated 23 October  2020  stating
         "further to the appellant's previous evidence dated 9 November 2019
         we have obtained a further witness statement from the appellant  to
         clarify the history of her account. The statement has been prepared
         following the disclosure of the appellant's file by the  respondent
         in response to a subject access request. Accordingly,  pursuant  to
         15 (2A) of the Upper Tribunal's  2008,  we  therefore  respectfully
         request permission to rely on the witness statement and extract the
         Home Office file attached herewith."



     55. The admission of the further material is set out under Rule  15(2A)
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as follows:
         Evidence and submissions
         15. ...
         ... (2A) In an asylum case or an immigration case-
         (a) if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that
         was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that party must send or
         deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any other party-
         (i) indicating the nature of the evidence; and
         (ii) explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal; and
         (b) when considering whether to admit evidence that was not before
         the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must have regard to
         whether there has been unreasonable delay in producing that
         evidence.
     56. UT rule 15(2A) imposes important procedural requirements where the
         Upper Tribunal is asked to consider evidence that was not before
         the First-tier Tribunal. UT rule 15(2A) must be complied with in
         every case where permission to appeal is granted and a party wishes
         the Upper Tribunal to consider such evidence. Notice under rule
         15(2A) (a), indicating the nature of the evidence and explaining
         why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal, must be filed
         with the Upper Tribunal and served on the other party within the
         time stated in any specific directions given by the Upper Tribunal;
         or, if no such direction has been given, as soon as practicable
         after permission to appeal has been granted.

     57. The letter enclosing the evidence was not filed  until  23  October
         2020, a significant time after the grant of permission on  10  June
         2020.  No  reference  been  made  to  the  delay  in   making   the
         application. Furthermore, it was wholly  unclear  from  the  letter
         which  accompanied  the  fresh  evidence,  why  a  further  witness
         statement prepared to  clarify  the  history  of  her  account  was
         relevant to the issues that the tribunal had to consider.

     58. I note that in the written submissions provided on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that there was reference to the fresh material under  the
         heading "remaking" and that "such a statement is  relevant  to  the
         remaking of the appeal and/or to demonstrate the materiality of the
         above-mentioned errors".

     59. I sought the assistance of Mr O'Ryan who helpfully indicated to  me
         that the immigration history was not clear as regards  the  refusal
         of entry clearance and the subject access  request  from  the  Home
         Office file  provided  the  answer  to  this.  As  to  the  witness
         statement, he stated that it was not necessary to consider this  to
         establish a material error of law but if it were admitted it  would
         assist with materiality as to  the  wider  issues  of  the  family.
         However he made it plain that it was not necessary to rely on  this
         when establishing an error of law.

     60. Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent submitted that for his part he
         could not see that the fresh evidence  had  any  relevance  to  the
         issue of error of law. He submitted that  the  appellant  had  been
         given an opportunity to provide evidence before the FtTJ and  at  a
         time when she was represented and a bundle  of  evidence  had  been
         provided on her behalf including a witness statement.

     61. Having had the opportunity to hear the submissions of the  parties,
         in my judgement the subject access  request  information  does  not
         change the position before the FtTJ as there was no dispute  as  to
         whether she had been granted entry clearance as a  spouse  or  not.
         The written covering letter made by previous representatives  dealt
         with that issue and it was not relevant to the  judge's  assessment
         of the facts. As to the witness statement, the  appellant  had  the
         opportunity  to  provide  a  full   witness   statement   via   her
         representatives and in fact did do so. That statement was  set  out
         in the bundle at pages 1 - 6 dated 5/11 2019 and signed by her. The
         appellant had the opportunity to provide all evidence  relied  upon
         before the FtTJ and no reasons have  been  given  as  to  why  that
         evidence was not provided. Whilst the written submissions  at  [28]
         state that the appellant has sought to clarify some drafting errors
         in her earlier evidence, the errors have not been identified and in
         reality the statement is simply further details of her claim.  That
         being the case, this was not material that was  placed  before  the
         FtTJ when it could have been set  out  in  her  earlier  statement.
         Therefore I  do  not  take  that  into  account  when  reaching  my
         assessment on whether the decision of the FtTJ involved the  making
         of an error on  a  point  of  law.  However,  I  would  accept  the
         submission that such material, in  the  event  of  an  error  being
         found, may be relevant in any remaking of the appeal.

     62. I now turn to the grounds. Permission was granted on the basis that
         it was arguable that the tribunal had failed to take  all  material
         evidence into account when reaching its conclusions  at  [23]  that
         forced marriage would not constitute a "very  significant  obstacle
         to integration" because the appellant could avail  herself  of  the
         general protection of the Pakistani state and that  the  judge  had
         "failed to consider whether such protection in her  case  would  be
         forthcoming."

     63.  The grant of permission  does  not  make  any  reference  to  what
         material evidence the judge  overlooked  or  failed  to  take  into
         account. However Mr O'Ryan in  his  written  and  oral  submissions
         identifies that material as follows; the contents of the CPIN which
         the judge had not  referred  to  and  thus  was  selective  in  his
         citation of that material and also that the CPIN directed attention
         to the relevant CG  decision  (see  paragraph  24  of  the  written
         submissions and the oral submissions made).

     64. He therefore submits that the judge erred in law by failing to have
         to regard to the paragraphs in the CPIN which he has identified  in
         his submissions which he submits were strong enough to point  to  a
         conclusion opposite to the  one  reached  by  the  judge.  Thus  he
         submits the passages  point  to  a  significant  risk  of  harm  to
         single/divorced women by way of a forced marriage and that there is
         no effective protection for such a risk.

     65. He further submits that the part of the CPIN  that  the  judge  did
         cite at paragraph 3.1.2 was  in  general  terms  are  not  repeated
         elsewhere and thus the FtTJ erred in law by seeking to rely on this
         sole passage in reaching his decision.

     66. I have given careful consideration to  the  written  and  the  oral
         submissions which have been made on behalf of the  appellant.  They
         have been helpfully set out in the written submissions submitted by
         Mr O'Ryan and explained in his oral argument.

     67.  Having  heard  those  submissions   and   having   given   careful
         consideration to them and in the light of the decision of the FtTJ,
         I am satisfied that the decision of  the  FtTJ  was  one  that  was
         reasonably open to him to make on  the  evidence  that  was  placed
         before him and on the  particular  factual  circumstances  of  this
         appellant's case.

     68. I will set out my reasons for reaching this conclusion.

     69. As the  FtTJ  stated  and  Mr  O'Ryan  concedes,  this  was  not  a
         protection claim. The appellant had been informed by the respondent
         that if she sought to claim a risk on return  of  serious  harm  or
         persecution she should make such a claim which  would  then  entail
         her claim being considered within the usual  evidential  safeguards
         and the collation of evidence before reaching a decision. She chose
         not to do so but relied upon a claim made on human  rights  grounds
         under article 8 based on her private and family life.

     70. The FtTJ observed at [21] the confusion and lack of clarity in  the
         nature  of  the  appeal  made  by  the  appellant  and  her   legal
         representatives  noting  that  the  basis  of  the  claim  in   the
         application form was for an extension of stay in the UK outside  of
         the rules because of "compassionate and compelling  circumstances".
         The  covering  letter  also  stated  that  she  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (which included the issue of very
         significant obstacles to integration). The judge however noted that
         the grounds of appeal lodged did make reference  to  the  issue  of
         significant obstacles and therefore in fairness to  the  appellant,
         the judge stated that he would consider that issue as part  of  her
         claim and appeal before the Tribunal.

     71. There is no dispute between the parties as to the relevant law that
         was applicable when considering the  issue  of  whether  there  are
         "very significant obstacles".

     72. In the decision of SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813,  Lord Justice
         Sales in considering a foreign criminal's  "integration"  into  the
         country where he is to be deported, stated at [14]  that  the  idea
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life.

     73. In AS v Secretary of State the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1284
         at paragraphs 58 and 59  where,  giving  the  lead  judgment,  Lord
         Justice Moylan held:

         58. I do not  consider  that  Mr  Buley's  categorisation  of  some
         factors as "generic" is helpful. Consideration  of  the  issues  of
         obstacles to integration requires  consideration  of  all  relevant
         factors some of which might be described as generic. What Mr  Buley
         identified as "generic" factors, as referred to above, can  clearly
         be relevant to the issue of  whether  there  are  very  significant
         obstacles  to  integration.  They  can  form  part  of  the  "broad
         evaluative  judgment"  as  is  specifically  demonstrated  by   the
         reference in Kamara to "good health" and "capable of working".

         59. I also reject Mr Buley's  submission  that,  following  Kamara,
         whether someone is "enough of an insider" is to  be  determined  by
         reference to their ties or links to the country. This  is  to  turn
         what Sales LJ said in Kamara into just the sort of gloss  which  he
         expressly warned against. It is  clear,  to  repeat,  that  generic
         factors  can  be  of  significance  and  can  clearly  support  the
         conclusion that the person  will  not  encounter  very  significant
         obstacles to integration.


     74. In Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) the Tribunal found that mere
         hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval, and mere
         inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the
         test of very significant obstacles.

     75. That decision was the subject of further discussion in the decision
         of Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ as follows:

         "Since the grant of permission this Court has had occasion to
         consider the meaning of the phrase "very significant obstacles to
         integration", not in fact in paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) but as it
         appears in paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules and in section
         117C (4) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which
         relate to the deportation of foreign criminals. In Kamara v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813,
         [2016] 4 WLR 152, Sales LJ said, at para. 14 of his judgment:
           "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's 'integration'
           into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported ...
           is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a
           job or to sustain life while living in the other country. It is
           not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject to
           some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
           tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament
           has chosen to use. The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad
           evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will
           be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in
           the society in that other country is carried on and a capacity
           to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to
           be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis
           in that society and to build up within a reasonable time a
           variety of human relationships to give substance to the
           individual's private or family life."
           9. That passage focuses more on the concept of integration than
           on what is meant by "very significant obstacles". The latter
           point was recently addressed by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J
           and UTJ Francis) in Treebhawon v Secretary of State for the Home
           Department [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC). At para. 37 of its judgment the
           UT said:
           "The other limb of the test, 'very significant obstacles',
           erects a self-evidently elevated threshold, such that mere
           hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval or
           inconvenience, even where multiplied, will generally be
           insufficient in this context."
         I have to say that I do not find that a very useful gloss on the
         words of the rule. It is fair enough to observe that the words
         "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold, and I have no
         difficulty with the observation that the test will not be met by
         "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I am not sure that saying
         that "mere" hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even if multiplied,
         will not "generally" suffice adds anything of substance. The task
         of the Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any given case is
         simply to assess the obstacles to integration relied on, whether
         characterised as hardship or difficulty or anything else, and to
         decide whether they regard them as "very significant".

     76. What is in issue is whether the FtTJ in his assessment  of  whether
         there  were  "very  significant   obstacles   to   the   appellants
         integration" to Pakistan took into account all relevant material.

     77. As set  out  above  the  submissions  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant assert that the judge erred in law by being selective  in
         the consideration of evidence contained in the CPIN and  identified
         that by referring to the only passage cited at 3.1.2 and thus erred
         in law by failing to have regard to other passages which pointed to
         a significant risk of harm to single/divorced women  subject  to  a
         forced marriage and finding there was effective protection.  It  is
         further submitted that this was a "sweeping generalisation".

     78. When considering the submissions, it is important in  my  judgement
         to  consider  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtTJ  and  the
         assessment of that evidence. As Mr Avery  submitted,  the  material
         was placed before the judge was sparse in its contents;  there  was
         no reference to any country material and in the  witness  statement
         concerning factual circumstances there was little reference to risk
         beyond generalised statements.

     79. The CPIN that the FtTJ made reference to sets out the  position  of
         women in Pakistan as follows.



         2.3.1 Pakistan is ranked as the third most dangerous place in the
         world for women, and one of the most unequal. Violence against
         women is widespread, be it domestic violence, sexual abuse and
         harassment, acid attacks, forced marriages, forced conversion and
         honour killings.
     80. Treatment by the state
         2.3.2 The law in Pakistan prohibits discrimination on the basis of
         sex but in practice the authorities did not enforce it: women face
         legal and economic discrimination. Women faced discrimination in
         family law, property law, and the judicial system. Discriminatory
         provisions against women also exist in a number of laws, such as
         the Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order 1984 (Law of Evidence), the Hudood
         Ordinances (1979) and the Citizenship Act (1951).
         2.3.3 There have been a number of legislative measures undertaken
         to improve the situation of women in Pakistan in recent years.
         However, the Prevention of Anti-Women Practices [Criminal Law
         Amendment] Act, 2011 is considered to be too ambiguous and police
         cannot arrest for the offence without a warrant or court order.
         Additionally, a study found that there was a lack of awareness and
         clarity about its application amongst police officers and public
         prosecutors. The police are sometimes complicit in violence against
         women. (See Legal context and Police attitudes and responses to
         violence against women).
         2.3.4 In the country guidance case SM (lone women - ostracism) (CG)
         [2016] UKUT 67 (IAC), 2 February 2016, the Upper Tribunal held
         that: Women in Pakistan are legally permitted to divorce their
         husbands and may institute divorce proceedings from the country of
         refuge, via a third party and with the help of lawyers in Pakistan,
         reducing the risk of family reprisals. A woman who does so and
         returns with a new partner or husband will have access to male
         protection and is unlikely, outside her home area, to be at risk of
         ostracism, still less of persecution or serious harm (paragraph 73
         viii).
         2.3.5 Pakistan remains a heavily patriarchal society and
         discrimination against women persists. Levels of violence against
         women (VAW) continue to be high; over 10,000 cases were reported in
         2014. Statistics varied on the number of cases of VAW - under-
         reporting was cited as one reason and those who did file reports
         were often disbelieved or reprimanded for being part, if not
         entirely responsible. An average of 4 women were raped each day in
         2014; 1,000 "honour" killings were said to be committed each year;
         up to 232 incidents of acid throwing occurred in 2014; 9 out of 10
         women experience domestic violence. Other forms of VAW include
         dowry disputes, kidnappings, child marriage, acid and burn attacks,
         and forced marriages.
         2.3.6 Being female does not on its own establish a need for
         international protection. The level of discrimination against women
         in Pakistan does not, in general, amount to persecution. The onus
         is on the person to demonstrate that she would be personally at
         risk of gender-based violence and that she would be unable to
         access effective state protection.
         Forced marriages.
         7.3.1 According to Dr Shakira Hussein, a fellow at the Australian
         National University, arranged marriages with a partner from their
         own ethnic community was the traditional norm across Pakistan,
         regardless of social standing. Dr Hussein noted that 'love
         marriages which transgress family expectations can result in
         considerable family pressure being brought to bear. Again, violence
         could be a part of such pressure.' [26] Some families were
         reportedly moved to use violence in opposing love marriages,
         including kidnapping their daughters, attacking the relatives of
         the males in a relationship, and obtaining help from the police to
         track down partners who married without family approval. [27] Women
         were legally free to marry without family consent, but those who
         did so were often ostracised or faced becoming the victims of
         "honour" crimes. [28]



     81. Paragraph 2.3.6 of the CPIN cited above makes  it  plain  that  the
         onus is on the person to demonstrate that she would  personally  be
         at risk of gender-based violence and that she would  be  unable  to
         access state protection."

     82. As regards the issue of protection the CPIN cites the  decision  of
         SM.

     83. The headnote in SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 67
         (IAC) reads as follows:

         (1)Save as herein set out, the existing country guidance in SN  and
         HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283
         and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return)  Pakistan
         CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

         (2)    Where a risk of persecution or serious  harm  exists  in her
         home area for a single woman or a female head of  household,  there
         may be an internal relocation option to one  of  Pakistan's  larger
         cities, depending on the family, social and  educational  situation
         of the woman in question.

         (3)    It will not be normally be unduly harsh to  expect  a single
         woman or female head of household  to  relocate  internally  within
         Pakistan if she can access support from family members  or  a  male
         guardian in the place of relocation.

         (4)    It will not normally be unduly  harsh  for  educated, better
         off, or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps
         if a  woman  has  qualifications  enabling  her  to  get  well-paid
         employment and pay for accommodation and childcare if required.

         (5)      Where  a  single  woman,  with  or  without   children, is
         ostracised by family members and other sources of  possible  social
         support  because  she  is  in  an  irregular  situation,   internal
         relocation will be more difficult and whether it  is  unduly  harsh
         will be a question of fact in each case.

         (6)    A single woman or female head of household who  has  no male
         protector or social network may be able to use the  state  domestic
         violence shelters for a short time, but the focus of such  shelters
         is on reconciling people with their family networks, and places are
         in short supply and time limited. Privately  run  shelters  may  be
         more flexible,  providing  longer  term  support  while  the  woman
         regularises her social situation, but again, places are limited.

         (7)    Domestic violence shelters are available for  women  at risk
         but where they are used by women with children,  such  shelters  do
         not always allow older  children  to  enter  and  stay  with  their
         mothers. The risk of temporary separation, and the  proportionality
         of such separation, is likely to differ depending on  the  age  and
         sex of a woman's children: male children may be removed from  their
         mothers at the age of 5 and placed in an  orphanage  or  a  madrasa
         until the family situation has been regularised (see KA and  Others
         (domestic violence risk on return)  Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216
         (IAC)).   Such   temporary   separation   will   not   always    be
         disproportionate or unduly harsh: that is a  question  of  fact  in
         each case.

         (8)    Women in Pakistan are  legally  permitted  to  divorce their
         husbands and may institute divorce proceedings from the country  of
         refuge, via a third party and with the help of lawyers in Pakistan,
         reducing the risk of family reprisals. A  woman  who  does  so  and
         returns with a new partner or husband  will  have  access  to  male
         protection and is unlikely, outside her home area, to be at risk of
         ostracism, still less of persecution or serious harm.

     84. Again, reference is made in that decision to the onus being on  the
         person to demonstrate why  they  would  not  be  unable  to  access
         effective protection.

     85. Whilst Mr O'Ryan submits that the judge erred in  failing  to  have
         regard to the relevant considerations as to the assessment of  risk
         on return as set  out  in  SM  (as  cited)  in  my  judgement  that
         submission fails to take account of the factual assessment made  by
         the FtTJ on the evidence that was before him which was relevant  to
         any assessment in SM.

     86. The decision makes it plain under headnote (2)  that  the  guidance
         applies where "a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in  the
         applicant's home area" and therefore a risk of serious harm in  the
         appellant's home area is a necessary factual prerequisite.

     87. The FtTJ addressed this issue in his assessment  of  whether  there
         were very significant obstacles to integration  at  paragraph  [23]
         where he stated as follows:

         " the appellant would be returning to Pakistan as a single divorced
         woman. The appellant has suggested that her life would be  at  risk
         in the event of return to Pakistan although she has  not  made  any
         protection or asylum claim in that respect nor did she do  so  when
         she first entered the United Kingdom in 2012. In  considering  this
         aspect, I note that the appellant stated that  her  problems  began
         following her divorce in 2009 but that she had continued to  reside
         in Pakistan until entering the United Kingdom on a student Visa  in
         2012. Although the appellant  states  that  she  was  pressured  by
         members of her family to marry other people, I do not consider that
         the appellant's concerns in this respect  would  be  sufficient  to
         amount to significant obstacles to integration to Pakistan  in  the
         event of return".

     88. In assessing the risk of serious harm and the claim made  that  her
         life would be at risk, the judge was entitled to take into  account
         that she had made no protection or asylum claim. If  such  a  claim
         had been  made  it  would  have  been  subject  to  the  evidential
         requirements such as an interview and collation of  evidence  which
         would have been properly considered by the respondent.  Furthermore
         and of more relevance in my judgement, the judge  was  entitled  to
         place weight on a failure to make a claim of being at risk of  harm
         when she entered the United Kingdom in 2012,  having  first  stated
         that she was at risk of a forced marriage since 2009.

     89. A further point made by the judge in his analysis of risk  is  that
         the appellant stated that her problems began following the  divorce
         in 2009 but notwithstanding that claim  she  remained  in  Pakistan
         living alongside and with her family relatives  until  she  entered
         the UK on a student visa in 2012. The inference from  that  factual
         finding is that despite a claim to be at risk of a forced  marriage
         from  family  members  she  remained  living  in  Pakistan  for   a
         significant period of time between 2009 - 2012 without risk of harm
         being demonstrated. There was no evidence before the judge that she
         had been forced into marriage during that period claimed and in  my
         judgement those were all findings that were relevant to the risk of
         harm which is an essential prerequisite before  considering  issues
         of protection and relocation.

     90. Contrary to the grounds, the judge did make a finding on the  issue
         of risk based on the appellant's own evidence. The judge stated  at
         paragraph [23]"although the appellant states that she was pressured
         by members of her family to marry other people, I do  not  consider
         that the appellant's concerns in this respect will be sufficient to
         amount to significant obstacles to her integration to  Pakistan  in
         the event of return."

     91. There are two points to rise from that analysis. Firstly, the judge
         identified that the tenor of the appellant's evidence was that  she
         claimed to have been pressurised by members of the family to marry.
         Secondly, the judge did not consider that the claimed  pressure  as
         she described it evidentially was a  significant  obstacle  to  her
         integration. A proper reading  of  the  decision  demonstrates  the
         judge was not stating that forced marriage itself could  not  be  a
         "significant obstacle to integration" or could  not  give  rise  to
         risk on return but that in the circumstances of the  appellant  and
         on the facts as he had found them, the appellant's evidence in  her
         witness statement had been insufficient to demonstrate such a  risk
         or in the terms of the  judge  was  deciding  "a  very  significant
         obstacle to integration".

     92. As the FtTJ had earlier found, despite the claim made that she  was
         at risk in 2009 when the divorce occurred, she remained in Pakistan
         for a significant period of time from 2009  -  2012  and  this  was
         contrary to her evidence that she had been  forced  time  and  time
         again into a second marriage. As recorded in the submission made on
         behalf of the respondent at [18] at no time had she even  named  or
         identified any individuals she was or would be forced to marry.

     93. I accept the submission made by Mr Avery that the evidence advanced
         by the appellant was sparse in its contents and gave little  detail
         of having suffered or being at risk of harm  by  way  of  a  forced
         marriage. The evidence in the  appellant's  witness  statement  and
         that of the mother did not  provide  cogent  evidence  which  would
         demonstrate that those findings or points identified by  the  judge
         were wrong in the light of the evidence and thus they were findings
         in my judgement which undermined the appellant's claim that she had
         demonstrated a risk of forced marriage.

     94. Whilst the judge did  not  say  so,  the  factual  account  of  the
         appellant's mother leaving her daughter in 2009 to enter the United
         Kingdom and to remain there in the knowledge of  the  circumstances
         of the appellant undermined the appellant's own claim that she  was
         at risk.

     95. In my judgement the factual findings were sufficient to  constitute
         a fact specific assessment about the nature and scope  of  risk  as
         set out in the headnote of SM (as cited).

     96. Whilst the  judge  did  consider  the  issue  of  state  protection
         thereafter citing  3.1.2  and  that  there  was  general  effective
         protection,  the headnote in SM also states, "the onus  is  on  the
         person to demonstrate why they would be unable to access  effective
         protection." No such evidence was provided in the evidence advanced
         before the judge for her appeal and there was no evidence as to the
         impact on the appellant. In this respect I  accept  the  submission
         made by Mr Avery. The FtTJ had taken into account the claim  to  be
         at risk but have found that on the evidence that she  had  advanced
         it did not demonstrate such a risk and that  there  was  a  general
         sufficiency of protection which the appellant had not  demonstrated
         that she was unable to access.

     97. This was not a protection claim  and  the  judge  was  required  to
         consider  the  establishment  of  the  facts  on  the  balance   of
         probabilities and not the lower standard applicable to a protection
         claim. There is no suggestion the judge failed to take  account  of
         evidence that  the  appellant  had  provided  and  on  the  limited
         evidence that the judge had before him, I  am  satisfied  that  the
         assessment of whether there were very significant  obstacles  which
         included a risk on return to Pakistan were properly  considered  by
         him in his decision. The FtTJ considered that the appellant  was  a
         single divorced woman but that does not equate to a single woman at
         risk of a forced marriage without more.

     98. Even if it could be said the appellant would be ostracised, on  the
         factual findings made by the judge, the  appellant would  not  fall
         into a category of being a poorly  educated  rural  woman  but  was
         someone who had education  in  Pakistan  and  also  in  the  United
         Kingdom and would have the assistance from her  family  members  in
         the UK.

     99. For all of these reasons I consider that the grounds of  appeal  do
         not disclose any errors of law requiring the judge's decision to be
         set aside. The judge clearly had regard to all the evidence and was
         entitled to make the adverse findings that  he  did.  Consequently,
         the FtTJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant had failed  to
         show  that  there  were  "  very  significant  obstacles   to   her
         integration" and that that  her  removal  to  Pakistan   would  not
         breach her human rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  The  FtTJ
         carried out a full assessment both under the immigration rules  and
         outside the rules,  identifying and applying  the  relevant  public
         interest  considerations  and  reaching   a   conclusion   on   the
         proportionality of the decision having weighed in the  balance  the
         family life established in the UK. That was a conclusion  that  was
         reasonably open to him to make.

    100. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it  has   been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did not  involve  the  making  of  an
         error on a point of law and that the decision should stand.



Notice of Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated  19 April 2021
