
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14176/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 January 2019                      |On 14th May 2019                   |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     Y S
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues.  We  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:            Mr P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:           Mr L. Garrett, instructed by Templeton Legal
Services

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, we will refer to the parties as they  were
      before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the  Secretary  of
      State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant entered the UK  on  08  September  2001  using  a  false
      passport and claimed asylum. The protection claim was  refused  on  01
      November 2001. An appeal was dismissed on 16 May 2002  and  permission
      to appeal was refused. His appeal rights became exhausted on  18  June
      2002.  The appellant remained in the UK in the knowledge that  he  had
      no leave to remain. On 13 April 2007 he made  further  submissions  to
      the Secretary of State on the basis that he was in a relationship  and
      had two children. The appellant was  listed  as  an  absconder  on  14
      December 2007 after failing to report.

3.    The Secretary of State made a deportation order under section 5(1)  of
      the Immigration Act 1971 on 09 July  2009  following  the  appellant's
      conviction for possession of class C drugs, for which  he  received  a
      sentence of  12  months'  imprisonment.  The  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  24
      September  2009.  Permission  for  reconsideration  was   subsequently
      refused. His appeal rights became exhausted on 27 October 2009.

4.    It is unclear whether the appellant was reporting in the period  after
      the deportation  appeal  or  whether  any  steps  were  taken  by  the
      Secretary of State to enforce the deportation order. None are recorded
      in the immigration history provided by the respondent. On  13  January
      2012 the appellant was convicted for failing to provide a specimen. He
      was fined and disqualified from driving for two years. The  respondent
      wrote to the appellant on 25 September 2012 to ask for  an  update  on
      his family life in the UK. The appellant  responded  on  17  September
      2012. On 12 April 2013 the appellant made an application to revoke the
      deportation order,  which  was  refused  on  09  September  2013.  The
      appellant did not lodge an appeal. Further submissions  were  made  in
      2013, 2014 and 2016, but the respondent refused to  treat  them  as  a
      fresh human rights claim in a decision dated 24 June  2016.  Following
      judicial review proceedings, the respondent made a fresh decision.

5.    The appellant ("YS") appealed the respondent's decision dated 28  June
      2018 to refuse a human rights claim  in  the  context  of  deportation
      proceedings.

6.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-Beal  ("the  judge")  allowed  the
      appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  19  October  2018.  The  judge
      accepted  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with his  three  children  (at  least  two  of  whom  are
      British). At the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing the  children
      were 13 years old (twins) and 11 years old. They attended the  hearing
      and wanted to give evidence although they did not  do  so.  The  judge
      considered the letters they wrote in support of the appeal, which  she
      found to be "compelling reading". The children's mother gave evidence.
      Although the appellant is no  longer  in  a  relationship  with  their
      mother the judge accepted that they parent the children together.  The
      appellant is recorded  as  having  two  other  children  by  different
      mothers. It appears that he did not rely on a relationship with  those
      children for the purpose of these proceedings.

7.    The judge referred to  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  immigration
      rules and emphasised that the public interest required the appellant's
      deportation because of his convictions. She considered whether it  was
      'unduly harsh' for the children to be separated from their father. She
      made clear that the children's interests were a primary  consideration
      although not the only consideration. She weighed their rights  against
      the fact that the appellant had never had leave to remain  in  the  UK
      and had broken the law [38]. The judge took into account the fact that
      the children's mother also suffered from ill health and relied on  the
      appellant to support her in raising the children  [39].  She  reminded
      herself of the stringent nature of the test [40]. The judge then  went
      on to consider the nature of the appellant's criminal  offending.  She
      noted that he had not reoffended in relation to drugs for 10 years and
      that  the  risk  of  reoffending  was  low.  Although  she  noted  the
      conviction in 2012, she observed that he was  given  the  lowest  fine
      possible [41]. The judge observed that the deportation order was  made
      in 2009, but the respondent had taken no steps to remove the appellant
      since then. She noted that the respondent did not appear to be "imbued
      with a sense of urgency" to deport him [42].  The  delay  in  decision
      making, and the lack of action to remove the appellant indicated  that
      there was "not a pressing public interest in his removal". During  the
      period of delay the appellant and his children had strengthened  their
      family life together such that it was unduly harsh  to  separate  them
      from their father [43].

8.    The judge was "very conscious of the lack of  status  of  the  mother"
      and agreed that a Zambrano issue might arise. It could not be  assumed
      that the mother would be allowed to stay in the UK  if  the  appellant
      was removed. In such circumstances British children might be forced to
      leave the area of the European Union [44]. She directed herself to the
      decision in MM v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, AJ v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      1012 and CT v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 488 and reminded herself that there
      must  be  something  more  than  the  usual   separation   caused   by
      deportation. She was satisfied that the  uncertainty  surrounding  the
      mother's status ... is the 'something more'."  At  least  one  of  the
      parents needed to have status in the UK to  safeguard  the  children's
      welfare [45]. She concluded:

           "49.  In the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  above
                 factors   are   sufficiently   compelling   and   therefore
                 exceptional so as  to  make  the  decision  to  deport  him
                 disproportionate and thus outweigh the public  interest  in
                 his deportation."

9.    The Secretary of State appeals the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
      the ground that the judge's finding that it would be 'unduly harsh' on
      the children was perverse given the stringent nature of the test.  The
      judge relied on the mother's lack of status as a determinative  factor
      in concluding that the stringent  threshold  was  met  in  this  case.
      However, it was unlikely that she was at risk of  removal  because  it
      would be open to her to apply  for  a  derivative  residence  card  on
      Zambrano grounds if the appellant is deported.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

10.   The judge directed herself  to  the  relevant  legal  framework  in  a
    careful and well-reasoned decision [27-32]. The appellant was sentenced
    to 12 months' imprisonment so it was open to him to argue that he  came
    within one of the exceptions to deportation outlined in  the  statutory
    scheme contained in section 117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002") and the respondent's policy  set  out
    in paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules.

11.         There is no challenge to the judge's finding that the  appellant
    has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  three
    children [35]. Although the  respondent's  grounds  asserted  that  the
    judge failed to consider whether the children could relocate to  Sierra
    Leone with their mother (who is a Jamaican citizen and no longer  in  a
    relationship with the appellant) Mr Duffy did not argue this ground  at
    the hearing and confined his submissions  to  the  assertion  that  the
    judge's overall conclusion was perverse. He  was  quite  right  not  to
    pursue the argument because it is clear from the decision  letter  that
    the Secretary of State already accepted that it would be  unduly  harsh
    to expect the children to live in the country  to  which  their  father
    would be deported. It is also clear that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer reaffirmed the concession at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    [17]. The only issue before the judge was whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to  be  separated  from  their  father  if  they
    remained in the UK.

12.   The judge considered  the  correct  test  of  whether  the  effect  of
    deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on the appellant's three  children.
    She made clear that she was aware of the stringent nature of  the  test
    [40]. At the date of the hearing she considered relevant case law  from
    the Court of Appeal in MM v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450,  which  suggested
    that  the  assessment  of  the  'unduly  harsh'  test  should   include
    consideration of "the  deportee's  criminal  and  immigration  history"
    [45]. The judge referred to what was said by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    SSHD v CT (Vietnam)[2016] EWCA  Civ  488  and  came  to  the  following
    conclusion at [45]:

             "...'Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the   Respondent's
           children nor their likely separation from  their  father  for  a
           long time is exceptional circumstances which outweigh the public
           interest in his  deportation.  Something  more  is  required  to
           weight in the balance....' and in this case, I am satisfied that
           it is the uncertainty surrounding the mother's status  which  is
           the 'something more'. At least one of the  parents  have  to  be
           given  status  here  in  the  UK,  in  order  to  safeguard  the
           children's welfare and their future and I am satisfied that  the
           exception in paragraph 399(a) applies."

13.   Although the judge was entitled to consider many of the  factors  that
    she did in assessing whether it would be unduly harsh to  separate  the
    children from their father, it seems clear from  this  section  of  the
    decision that the uncertain immigration status of the children's mother
    was the key element that the judge found tipped the case into the realm
    of unusual and compelling circumstances over and above the usual  harsh
    effects of deportation on children.

14.   We conclude that there is some difficulty with  this  finding.  Having
    accepted that it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  children  to
    relocate to Sierra Leone, the only question was  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to be separated from  their  father.  The
    exact wording of paragraph 399(a) is whether it would be  unduly  harsh
    for the children to "remain in the UK" without the person who is to  be
    deported. The theoretical question contained in the rules assumes  that
    the children would remain in the UK.

15.   In the theoretical situation that the judge was asked to consider,  it
    was reasonable to infer  that,  in  the  absence  of  the  father,  the
    Jamaican mother's claim to residence rights as the  primary  carer  (as
    she would become) of two British children is likely to  be  strong.  On
    behalf of the respondent, Mr Duffy accepted that if the  appellant  was
    removed there "didn't seem to be much uncertainty about the position of
    the mother with reference to derivative rights of  residence".  If  the
    mother became the primary carer in the appellant's  absence,  then  the
    effect of her removal to her country of nationality would be to require
    European Union citizen children to leave the area of the EU  with  her.
    In these circumstances it is difficult to see how the lack  of  current
    status of the mother at the date of the hearing was likely to impact on
    the issue that needed to be determined, which was whether it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without their father.



16.   We note that the judge  considered  a  number  of  factors  that  were
    relevant to the balancing exercise under Article 8, and  quite  clearly
    found that the combination of factors was "sufficiently compelling  and
    therefore exceptional  so  as  to  make  the  decision  to  deport  him
    disproportionate" [49]. In  light  of  these  wider  findings  we  have
    considered whether the judge's conclusion nevertheless is  sustainable.
    However, we conclude that the decision must be set  aside  because  (i)
    the key point upon which she  concluded  that  the  circumstances  were
    sufficiently compelling amounted to an error of law  that  appeared  to
    make a difference to the  outcome  of  the  decision;  and  (ii)  given
    changes in the law following the Supreme Court decision in KO (Nigeria)
    v SSHD [2018] WLR 5273 it is desirable to remake the  decision  on  the
    basis of the current law.

Remaking

17.   We have decided that it is possible to remake the decision  without  a
    further hearing. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Duffy  was
    content for the Tribunal to  go  on  to  remake  the  decision  without
    another hearing. Although Mr Garrett suggested that a  further  hearing
    would be necessary,  we  do  not  consider  that  it  is.  The  factual
    circumstances are not in dispute. The appellant is not prejudiced given
    the outcome of our decision.

Best interests of the children

18.   It is not possible to assess the exceptions to  deportation  contained
    in section 117C(5)  and  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  immigration  rules
    without an evaluation  of  the  best  interests  of  the  children.  An
    assessment must  be  conducted  in  every  case  where  an  immigration
    decision is likely to impact on the welfare of a child.

19.   In assessing the best interests of the children in this case, we  have
    considered the principles outlined  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of children are a  primary
    consideration although they may be outweighed by the cumulative  effect
    of other considerations.

20.   The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are "in the United Kingdom". We take into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55. In the guidance, the respondent acknowledges
    the importance of international human rights instruments including  the
    UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on
    to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." The UNCRC sets  out
    rights including a child's right to survival and development, the right
    to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

21.   Three children are affected by the decision to deport  the  appellant.
    His eldest children, A and B, are 13-year-old  twins  who  are  British
    citizens. His youngest daughter, C, was born in the UK and is 11  years
    old. Although she is eligible to register as a British  citizen  it  is
    unclear whether she now has British citizenship. Nevertheless, she  has
    been continuously resident in the UK for a period of  more  than  seven
    years.

22.   The First-tier Tribunal judge was satisfied that the appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  all  three  children
    since birth. In his statement, the appellant said [4]:

            "I have a strong bond and connection with  my  children.  I  was
           present from birth and have been in their lives ever since. They
           are a part of me and I am a part of them."

23.   The  evidence  of  the  children's  mother  also  confirmed  that  the
    appellant had been fully involved in their upbringing albeit  they  are
    no longer in a relationship. She said  that  his  separation  from  the
    family following his conviction was difficult for all of them. She  was
    a single mother without status in the UK struggling to care  for  three
    children.  She said that she was resentful of the difficulties that the
    appellant caused the family as a result of his actions and that it took
    time to build trust between them after he  was  released  from  prison.
    However, in  her  view  the  appellant  had  proven  himself  to  be  a
    "wonderful and caring father and a reformed individual". The children's
    mother said that she had been battling with depression for a number  of
    years and that his assistance with childcare had been very helpful. She
    was unable to afford to apply for an extension of her leave  to  remain
    in 2017. As a result, she lost her job. She and the  children  faced  a
    difficult period of homelessness. Social services refused to help them.
    They had been reliant on a friend to support and accommodate them.  She
    found  their  circumstances  very  stressful,  which  exacerbated   her
    depressive episodes. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  acknowledged  that
    there was evidence to show that the children's mother had been  treated
    for anxiety and depression, was being treated for high  blood  pressure
    and investigated for possible angina.

24.   The First-tier Tribunal judge also described  the  evidence  from  the
    children as "compelling reading". The children  are  of  an  age  where
    their voices should be considered. It is  worth  setting  out  some  of
    their evidence as part  of  this  assessment.  In  B's  letter  to  the
    Tribunal she emphasised that she had a right to a relationship with her
    father. She described the relationship with her father  and  urged  the
    authorities not to separate them. She said:

            "Every night before we go to bed my dad would kiss us  and  make
           sure we would have a goodnight sleep. Without him I can't  sleep
           and my mind would be on him 24 hours a day for 365 days a  year.
           How would you feel if someone was  forcing  you  to  leave  your
           father that you love very much? I know  it  wouldn't  feel  that
           nice. So why do it to us children. If you do, me and my siblings
           would be heartbroken and would never forget the day you did.


            If you do, we would have to grow up without a father  figure  in
           our life. As for us would be hard because we have had one in our
           life since we were born. He was the first one to hold me when  I
           was born, also my first words were 'daddy'. He has  been  in  my
           life from the second I was born and he has never  left  my  side
           since, through thick and thin. He had  promised  us  'no  matter
           what, he would never leave us' and you are trying to  force  him
           to break it and leave us."

25.   In another letter to the Tribunal B said:

            "Without my father a part of me will be lost and I just wouldn't
           feel like myself no more.  Finally,  if  our  mom  is  gone  out
           because she is busy we will need someone to feed us, love us, to
           entertain us, have their up  and  down  day  with  us  and  most
           importantly educate us when we are not at school, and  that's  a
           job done magnificently by my father. He has been with  us  since
           day 1 and never left us. So PLEASE let my dad stay."

26.   In one of A's letters to the Tribunal he said:

            "I am writing to you to try and convince you not  to  deport  my
           dad. In this letter you will find reasons for  not  sending  him
           back and my distinct feelings on this whole situation.


            You should not deport my dad because he plays a huge part in our
           life for example he brings myself and my sisters to school every
           morning. Also my dad has enrolled us in a local mosque to expand
           our knowledge by learning Arabic.
            ....
           Article 9 UNICEF rights of  the  child:  children  must  not  be
           separated  from  their  parents  unless  it  is  in  their  best
           interests."

27.   In another letter he said:

            "My dad always goes the extra mile for us. For  example  at  the
           end of year performance he told he that he would not make it but
           he still came. My  dad  always  comes  through  for  me  and  my
           sisters. Like when we have football matches and he tells  us  we
           can't go. But the last minute he always says that we can go.  So
           those are a few reasons why I like my dad and I would  not  give
           him up for anything in the world."

28.   The youngest child, C, also wrote several letters to the Tribunal.  In
    one, she said:

            "I'm writing to express myself and my feelings about my dad. I'm
           writing to you to say that I need a dad in my life. What if your
           dad was sent away? How would you like it without a  dad  in  the
           same country for life? Firstly, I have a right to see my dad and
           if you send him back [you  will  take]  my  rights  away.  Also,
           whoever sends him back would also be taking all of our rights  I
           would also be feeling unhappy without  a  dad  because  he  does
           everything for me. The main reason and things he does for me  is
           that he makes sure I'm safe and hes always at the school gate on
           time. When I come outside hes always  there  showing  me  a  big
           smile that I could never forget and the  smile  makes  my  heart
           melt. My dad is appart of me hes my life, my blood, my heart and
           hes up there in my mind and he would never be forgotten." (sic)

29.   In another letter she said:

           "I want my dad to stay please don't take my dad away from  me  I
           am so stress without my dad I keep crying for my dad he is apart
           of my life. I can't live without him he apart of  me  he  looked
           after me so please let my dad stay. He is a  good  dad  he  does
           every thing for us. He looks after us. He promises us things and
           he does not break. He takes us places he cares for us he  loves.
           He does all the things we want to do. (sic)"

30.   A letter from the assistant head teacher of C's school dated  12  July
    2018 said the following:

            "I am writing this letter to confirm that Mr  [YS]  has  a  very
           active and crucial role in the care and upbringing of this three
           children...

            I have worked at [the school] since 2014 and  in  that  time  Mr
           [YS] has supported his children  by  taking  them  to  and  from
           school, ensuring that they are well presented, providing  packed
           lunch and being available to  collect  them  from  after  school
           clubs. He has also supported [C] with  her  involvement  with  a
           local football team and has ensured that she has made  excellent
           progress in  developing  her  athletic  and  social  skills.  He
           attends parent's evenings, workshops and special  school  events
           and is always willing to attend specific meetings to discuss and
           formulate plans to support her learning.


            [C] sometimes displays challenging behaviour in  school  and  Mr
           [YS] has gone over and beyond in his support for us in our  work
           with his daughter. In the past I have rung home  to  ask  for  a
           parent to come in to school and Mr [YS] has come right  away  to
           help  us  support  his  daughter's  behavior  (sic).  Mr  [YS]'s
           behavior (sic) management with his daughter is effective; he  is
           calm but firm and always follows through consequences which help
           us immeasurably in  our  behavior  management  in  school.  This
           support  has  been  vital  in  helping  [C]  to  overcome   many
           challenges with  her  behaviour  and  learning  which  has  been
           pivotal to her continuing her education at this school.  Without
           his constant influence and support I fear this progress will not
           continue and  this  positive  change  and  development  will  be
           compromised, affecting [C]'s future.


            Mr [YS] is a very dedicated and  loving  father  who  takes  his
           responsibility for his three children very seriously which is to
           be applauded as he provides them with the support  and  guidance
           which is vital in ensuring their development into  well  rounded
           members of our society."

31.   Having reviewed the evidence we have no hesitation in finding that  it
    is in the children's best interests to be brought up by  both  parents.
    The evidence shows that the appellant is a positive influence in  their
    life and takes an active role in their upbringing. The  evidence  shows
    that, aside from a short period in prison, the appellant  has  been  an
    involved and supportive  father  to  his  children.  The  family  bonds
    between  the  appellant  and  his  children  clearly  are  strong.  The
    separation of the appellant from his children for  a  prolonged  period
    would have a detrimental impact upon  them.  As  British  citizens,  at
    least two (possibly now all) of the children have a right to remain  in
    the UK and to all the benefits and advantages that this status  brings.
    We conclude that the best interests  of  the  children  point  strongly
    towards the status quo i.e. being brought up by both parents in the UK.



Findings in the context of the legal framework

32.   Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes it unlawful for a  public
    authority to act in a way that it incompatible with a Convention right.
    This duty is placed on the Secretary of State as  well  as  courts  and
    tribunals. The requirements of the immigration rules and the  statutory
    provisions are said to reflect the respondent's position on  Article  8
    of the European Convention.  The  complicated  provisions  relating  to
    private and  family  life  and  the  separate  provisions  relating  to
    deportation bear little  resemblance  to  the  approach  taken  by  the
    European Court of Human Rights when  conducting  a  balancing  exercise
    under Article 8. The Strasbourg court conducts a holistic assessment of
    all the relevant circumstances of  a  case  weighing  the  individual's
    circumstances  against  the  public  interest  considerations   without
    separating different aspects of a claim. We are  bound  to  assess  the
    appeal with reference to the immigration rules and  relevant  statutory
    provisions, but it must always be remembered that those provisions  are
    intended to give effect to, and are said to  be  compatible  with,  the
    underlying  principles  enshrined  in  Article  8   of   the   European
    Convention: see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] WLR(D) 662 [38-39].

33.   Part 5A of the  NIAA  2002  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches a person's right to private  or  family  life  and  as  a
    result is unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998. In considering  the
    'public interest question' a court or tribunal must also have regard to
    the issues outlined in section 117C in cases concerning the deportation
    of foreign criminals. The 'public interest question' means the question
    of whether interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  their
    private or family life is justified under Article 8(2) of the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

34.   The statute makes clear that deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in
    the public interest and that the more serious the offence committed the
    greater is the public interest in deportation. However,  the  statutory
    scheme also sets out circumstances in  which  the  public  interest  in
    deportation is outweighed because a person  meets  one  of  the  stated
    exceptions.

35.   The appellant was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  12  months
    and is eligible to argue that he comes within one of the exceptions  to
    deportation outlined in section 117C(5) of the NIAA  2002.  It  is  not
    disputed that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with  qualifying  children.  The  public  interest  in  deportation  is
    outweighed if the effect of deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on  the
    appellant's children. In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2018]  1  WLR  5273  the
    Supreme Court confirmed that the assessment must  be  focussed  on  the
    position of the children but emphasised the elevated threshold in cases
    involving the deportation of foreign criminals.

          "23.   On the other  hand  the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
                 clearly intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that  of
                 "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking  account  of
                 the  public  interest  in  the   deportation   of   foreign
                 criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element  of
                 comparison. It assumes that  there  is  a  "due"  level  of
                 "harshness", that is a level which  may  be  acceptable  or
                 justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.  "Unduly"  implies
                 something going beyond that level. The relevant context  is
                 that set by section 117C(1), that is the public interest in
                 the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking for  a
                 degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily  be
                 involved for any child faced  with  the  deportation  of  a
                 parent. What it does not require in my view (and subject to
                 the discussion of the cases  in  the  next  section)  is  a
                 balancing of relative levels of severity  of  the  parent's
                 offence, other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by
                 the section itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor
                 (contrary to  the  view  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in IT
                 (Jamaica)   v   Secretary   of   State   for    the    Home
                 Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55,
                 64) can it be equated with  a  requirement  to  show  "very
                 compelling reasons". That would be in effect  to  replicate
                 the additional test applied by section 117C(6) with respect
                 to sentences of four years or more."

36.   The starting point for this assessment is our finding  that  it  would
    be contrary to the best interests of the children to be separated  from
    their father. However, the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) noted  that
    the inevitable  consequence  of  deportation  is  for  children  to  be
    separated from a parent even  though  it  is  contrary  to  their  best
    interests. The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) made clear that  something
    more than the usual harsh effect of deportation on a child is needed to
    reach the elevated threshold of 'unduly harsh' to meet the  requirement
    of section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002.

37.   Focussing solely on the evidence relating to these  children,  we  can
    see that they have a close and loving relationship with  their  father.
    The relationship is long standing since birth. They have benefited from
    their father's presence in their lives for a sufficiently  long  period
    of time to show that the love and  support  he  provides  is  real  and
    enduring. It seems clear from the evidence given by the  children  that
    they would be devastated if they were no longer  to  receive  the  same
    level of care and support provided by their father. Although  they  are
    now of secondary  school  age,  they  are  no  so  old  that  they  are
    imminently approaching adulthood. To continue their  relationship  with
    their  father  at  a  distance  solely  by  way  of  modern  means   of
    communication would be wholly inadequate given  the  current  level  of
    support that he provides.

38.   There is no evidence to show that any  of  the  children  suffer  from
    serious health or developmental problems. Although the school mentioned
    that C has had some behavioural problems, there is little detail as  to
    the cause or extent of those problems. However, the evidence does  show
    that her father plays a key part in  managing  the  emotional  problems
    that she is experiencing.

39.   The evidence shows  that  the  children's  mother  has  a  history  of
    anxiety and depression. Although the medical evidence does  not  go  so
    far as to assess the likely impact of the appellant's  removal  on  her
    ability to care for the children, it is reasonable to  infer  that  the
    additional strains of caring for three children alone are likely to  at
    least maintain or possibly exacerbate the difficulties that  she  faces
    with her mental health. In turn,  this  is  likely  to  impact  on  the
    children in a negative way.

40.   It is clear  that  the  appellant  plays  an  important  part  in  the
    children's lives. He has  been  a  stabilising  factor  at  a  time  of
    instability when their mother has faced problems with  her  immigration
    status and  housing.  The  children  have  faced  a  recent  period  of
    homelessness with their mother. It is in their  interests  to  maintain
    what stability they currently have. We  conclude  that  the  cumulative
    effect of the entrenched relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
    children, the mental health issues faced by the children's mother,  C's
    existing emotional difficulties  and  the  recent  instability  in  the
    children's lives all indicate  that  further  upheaval  would  have  an
    unduly harsh effect on the children. Whilst none of these factors would
    be sufficient, taken alone, we conclude that  the  combined  effect  of
    these circumstances is such that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
    children to be separated from their father over  and  above  the  usual
    negative effects of deportation. For these reasons we conclude that the
    appellant meets the requirements of section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002 or
    399(a) of the immigration rules.

41.   In the alternative, we  turn  to  consider  whether  there  are  'very
    compelling  circumstances'  to  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation. Although the precise wording of  section  117C(6)  of  the
    NIAA 2002 only purports to apply this test  to  foreign  criminals  who
    have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or  more,
    the same provision in the immigration  rules  clearly  shows  that  the
    'very compelling circumstances' test is an alternative consideration if
    a person  fails  to  show  that  they  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    exceptions. The combined effect of the decisions in NA  (Pakistan),  KO
    (Nigeria) and the most recent decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RA
    (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT  00123
    is that section 117C(6) must be read to apply to  all  cases  involving
    deportation.

42.   The rules and statutory framework must be read to  be  compliant  with
    Article 8 of the European Convention. Significant weight must be  given
    to the public interest in  deportation  but  whether  there  are  'very
    compelling circumstances' that outweigh the public interest will depend
    on the individual circumstances of each case.

43.   The courts have repeatedly emphasised that significant  weight  should
    be given to the public interest in deportation. However, that is not to
    say that the weight to be given to the public interest  in  deportation
    is uniform or monolithic. The more serious the offending behaviour; the
    greater the weight is placed on the public interest in deportation. The
    less serious the offending behaviour; the more readily an  individual's
    compassionate or compelling circumstances  might  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation. In other words, the assessment  under  section
    117C(6) of the NIAA 2002 and paragraph 398  of  the  immigration  rules
    more closely resembles the overall balancing exercise undertaken by the
    Strasbourg  court  when  assessing  whether  the  interference  with  a
    person's private or family life is justified  and  proportionate  under
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention. After all, that is the  stated
    intention of the statutory scheme.

44.   The appellant  entered  the  UK  illegally  on  a  false  passport  in
    September 2001 and claimed asylum on  arrival.  His  asylum  claim  was
    refused and a subsequent appeal was dismissed.  All  rights  of  appeal
    became exhausted by June 2002. The appellant remained  in  the  UK  and
    started a family in the full knowledge that his immigration status  was
    precarious and that he had no expectation that he would remain  in  the
    UK.  A and B were born in 2005 and C was born in 2007. In the meantime,
    the appellant was listed as an absconder by  the  immigration  service.
    The appellant only came to the attention of  the  authorities  in  July
    2008 when he was arrested by police  and  charged  with  possession  of
    Class C drugs with  intent  to  supply.  On  22  October  2008  he  was
    sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. The appellant received a  further
    conviction for failing to provide a specimen  (being  in  charge  of  a
    motor vehicle) on 13 January 2012, but as the First-tier Tribunal judge
    noted, the fine of �115 was minimal although he was banned from driving
    for two years. A second conviction is  a  matter  that  must  be  given
    weight, but in the scheme of criminal offending, it was fairly minor.

45.   The combined effect of the appellant's  immigration  history  and  his
    convictions is such that significant  weight  must  be  placed  on  the
    public interest in deportation. In assessing what weight must be  given
    to the public interest considerations we take  into  account  the  fact
    that the appellant has never had leave to remain and would be liable to
    removal in any event. The fact that he  was  convicted  of  a  criminal
    offence relating to drugs is  a  serious  matter  that  must  be  given
    weight, but the sentence of 12 months' imprisonment is at the lower end
    of the sentencing scale. The overall picture shows an isolated  offence
    that was serious enough to justify a period of imprisonment.  There  is
    no  pattern  of  persistent  or  serious  offending  and   no   further
    convictions since 2012.

46.   Unlike the other exceptions to deportation, whether  there  are  'very
    compelling circumstances' that might outweigh the  public  interest  in
    deportation involves a holistic assessment of all the circumstances  of
    the case. In assessing the  appellant's  individual  circumstances,  we
    taken into account the fact that he has lived in the UK for a period of
    18 years. Over this time it is likely that he has established  ties  to
    the UK. However, we give little weight to any  private  life  that  the
    appellant might have established during a period when  his  immigration
    status was precarious.

47.    In  assessing  the  weight  to  be  placed  on  the  public  interest
    considerations we also take  into  account  the  course  of  subsequent
    events. The respondent began deportation proceedings  as  long  ago  as
    December 2008. The appellant went through a process  of  appeal,  which
    was dismissed and by October 2009 his  appeal  rights  were  exhausted.
    However, since then the history indicates that the respondent  did  not
    appear to consider that there was a pressing social need to enforce the
    deportation order. No action was taken to  remove  him.  The  appellant
    made further representations to the respondent  in  2011,  which  after
    some correspondence between the  parties,  resulted  in  a  refusal  to
    revoke the deportation order in September 2013.  The appellant did  not
    appeal the decision but it seems that still  no  action  was  taken  to
    remove him. Further representations were made in late 2013, 2014 and in
    2016. The respondent did not make a decision to  refuse  to  treat  the
    further submissions as a fresh human rights claim until June 2016. This
    was challenged and eventually resulted in  the  decision  that  is  the
    subject of this appeal, which is dated 28 June 2018.

48.   Some of the delay might be attributed  to  the  appellant  failing  to
    pursue  avenues  of  appeal  or  in  pursuing  legitimate  avenues   of
    challenge. However, the history set  out  above  paints  a  picture  of
    general inaction by the respondent that is not  commensurate  with  the
    weight that is said to be placed on the public interest in deportation.
    During the period of delay in further decision-making  the  appellant's
    continuing relationship  with  his  children  became  more  entrenched.
    Though  cases  involving   very   young   children   have   their   own
    considerations, the age of the appellant's children is such  that  they
    have now benefited from a particularly long-standing relationship  with
    their father. The family ties between  father  and  children  are  more
    entrenched and enduring that they would have been if action  to  remove
    the  appellant  pursuant  to  the  deportation  order  had  been  taken
    promptly.

49.   We have already found that the best interests of  the  children  point
    strongly in favour of them remaining in the UK with  both  parents.  We
    have also found that the effect of separation from their  father  would
    be unduly harsh given the  long-standing  and  entrenched  relationship
    that they  have  developed  since  birth.  We  have  also  noted  other
    compassionate  circumstances  affecting  the  children  such  as  their
    mother's mental and physical health problems and the  instability  that
    they have suffered as a result of their parents' precarious immigration
    status. Further disruption in the form  of  prolonged  separation  from
    their father is likely to have a significant and  long-term  impact  on
    the welfare of the children.

50.   We bear in mind that  the  test  of  'very  compelling  circumstances'
    reflects the strong case that is needed  to  outweigh  the  significant
    weight that must be placed on the public interest in  deportation.  The
    assessment under section 117C(6) of the NIAA 2002 and paragraph 398  of
    the immigration rules is  more  akin  to  a  balancing  exercise  where
    appropriate weight can be given to the public interest depending on the
    individual circumstances of a case.

51.   In this case we have found that the appellant's  offence  was  at  the
    lower end of the scale and that it did not form a pattern of  offending
    behaviour.  We  weigh  against  that  the  cumulative  effect  of   the
    appellant's length of residence (albeit little weight is placed  on  it
    with reference to his private life), the length and depth of his family
    life during the long period in which deportation proceedings have  been
    pending, the fact that it would have an unduly harsh effect on not just
    one, but three children, who need continuity in their lives following a
    recent period of instability. We remind ourselves that  the  provisions
    contained in the statutory scheme are intended to be compliant  with  a
    proper  application  of  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention.  In
    assessing whether a fair balance has been struck between the  undoubted
    weight that must be placed on the public interest  in  deportation  and
    the individual circumstances of this case, we conclude, like the First-
    tier Tribunal judge before  us,  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
    appellant's circumstances is sufficiently compelling, to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation on the facts of this particular case.

52.   For the reasons given above we conclude that removal of the  appellant
    would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]                           Date   09 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




