
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14644/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 3 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                             JUNIOR CHIKURUKUTA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe born in 1971, appeals against  the
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hembrough  who,  following  a
    hearing at Harmondsworth on 17 October 2017, dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  her  human
    rights claim.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted
    by its Vice President in November 2018, consequent upon the quashing by
    the High Court of an earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal  to  refuse
    permission to appeal.

 2. At the hearing before us, Mr Wilding conceded the appeal.  He  accepted
    that Judge Hembrough's decision should be set aside for  error  of  law
    and the decision re-made, allowing the appeal on human rights  grounds.
    In the light of all the evidence, it was more likely than not that  the
    appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  6   March   1999.
    Accordingly, she satisfied the provisions of paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and it would be a disproportionate interference  with
    her accepted Article 8 rights to remove her, given that  she  satisfied
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Upper Tribunal accepts that concession.   The  essential  error  in
    Judge Hembrough's decision was that he regarded himself as bound by  an
    earlier appeal decision of Judge Kaler, in  so  far  as  that  decision
    appeared to make findings of fact regarding the appellant's presence in
    the United Kingdom.  Whilst it is entirely appropriate to  have  regard
    to findings made by a judge whose decision has  subsequently  been  set
    aside (as Judge Kaler's was by the Upper  Tribunal  in  2016),  in  the
    present case the findings of fact of Judge Kaler were infected by legal
    error and so should not have been relied upon.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  We set aside that decision and re-make the decision in  the
appeal by allowing it on human rights grounds.


                           Signed   Dated:  1 April 2019


                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber


