
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14050/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 11 March 2021                              |On : 23 March 2021            |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                              RITA KUMARI LIMBU

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 17  September  1993.  She
      applied for entry clearance on 3 April 2019, at the age of  25  years,
      to settle in the UK as the adult dependant child of  her  mother,  the
      widow of an ex-Gurkha soldier who passed away on  9  April  1988.  Her
      mother came to the UK on 8 March 2018.

   3. The respondent refused the appellant's application for entry clearance
      on 9 July 2019 on the basis that she did not meet the requirements  of
      the immigration rules, that the Home Office policy  in  Annex  K,  IDI
      Chapter 15, section 2A  13.2  did  not  include  provision  for  adult
      children of ex-Gurkha widows and that Article 8  was  not  engaged  on
      family or private life grounds. The respondent considered  that  there
      were no compassionate factors in  the  appellant's  case  which  would
      warrant a grant of entry clearance outside the immigration rules.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Buttar on 9 October 2020 and dismissed in
      a decision promulgated on 20 October 2020. The judge  heard  from  the
      appellant's mother, the sponsor, who  stated  that  her  daughter  had
      studied in Nepal until the age of 18 and had been unable to find  work
      after then. The sponsor said that she had not  had  enough  money  for
      both herself and her daughter to come to the UK and so  she  had  only
      applied for herself. She confirmed that the appellant was living  with
      her (the appellant's) sister Radhika. The appellant had other siblings
      in Nepal but only had a good relationship with Radhika. They lived  in
      the family home which was very small and damaged and  they  could  not
      afford to do any repair  work.  The  sponsor  said  that  she  started
      sending  money  to  the  appellant  once  she  began  receiving  money
      including pension credit  and  housing  benefit,  eight  months  after
      arriving here in March 2018. The money she sent was shared between the
      appellant and Radhika. Her  other  children  in  Nepal  did  not  have
      regular employment but worked in farmlands as casual labourers.  Prior
      to coming to the UK, she and the appellant had always  lived  together
      and she supported her financially and emotionally.

   5. The judge noted the evidence that the appellant was the youngest child
      of the sponsor and had six other married siblings, five of  whom  were
      in Nepal. She  noted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
      sponsor's claims about the siblings and she considered  the  sponsor's
      evidence of the appellant's siblings to  be  inconsistent.  The  judge
      considered that  there  was  nothing  preventing  the  appellant  from
      working in Nepal  and  she  considered  there  to  be  no  independent
      evidence to show that she was not  working.  She  noted  the  lack  of
      regular payslips documenting financial support from the sponsor to the
      appellant. The judge found that the sponsor did not  provide  real  or
      effective or committed financial support to the appellant and that the
      appellant  was  not  financially  dependent  upon  the  sponsor.   She
      considered that the appellant was able to support herself  by  working
      in Nepal or with the support of her siblings. The judge did not accept
      that there was reliable  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  and
      sponsor lived together before the sponsor left Nepal in 2018 and found
      in any event that any ties between them before the sponsor left  Nepal
      did not go beyond the emotional or financial ties existing  between  a
      mother and unemployed daughter living in the same household. The judge
      found that since the sponsor left Nepal the level of contact  did  not
      demonstrate family life beyond the normal ties of love  and  affection
      between an adult child and their parents. She  concluded  that  family
      life did not currently exist between the appellant and the sponsor and
      found that Article 8(1) was not engaged. She accordingly dismissed the
      appeal without the need  to  consider  proportionality  under  Article
      8(2).

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
      basis that the judge  had  misdirected  herself  in  law  and  reached
      contradictory conclusions, applying the wrong  test  for  establishing
      whether family life existed and whether  Article  8(1)  was  therefore
      engaged.

   7. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 11 December  2020
      and the matter then came before me.

Hearing and submissions

   8. Both parties made submissions before us.

   9. Ms Jaja submitted that the judge had misdirected herself  on  the  law
      and made contradictory findings. Ground 1 was that, whilst  the  judge
      referred at [18] to the test for family life as set out in Rai v Entry
      Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320, as "real,  committed
      or effective support", she applied the wrong test at [40] by requiring
      the appellant to show that she was "wholly  reliant  on  her  mother".
      Ground 2 was that the judge elevated the test  at  [41]  by  requiring
      "real, effective and committed support".  Ground  3  was  the  judge's
      contradictory findings at [43] and [44], where she set  out  the  five
      stages in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27,  found  that  the  second  step  of
      interference with family life was met, but then found that family life
      was not engaged. Ground 4 was that the judge's finding at  [20],  that
      there must  be  a  dependency  between  the  sponsor  and  child,  was
      inconsistent with the extract from Rai at [18] where it was said  that
      an extant family life fell well short of what constituted  dependency.
      Ground 5 was that the judge's finding at [17], that it would  only  be
      in rare cases that family life between  a  parent  and  child  engaged
      Article 8 when they were in different countries, was contrary  to  the
      guidance in Rai. Ground 6 was that the judge had made  a  misdirection
      on the facts by considering that the appellant  was  living  with  her
      sister, whereas that was only a temporary address pending her move  to
      the UK and that her permanent address was where she had lived all  her
      life with her mother. Ms Jaja submitted that when these  matters  were
      all  taken  together  cumulatively,  the  judge's  decision  was   not
      sustainable and the case needed to be re-heard.

  10. Mr Kandola submitted that the judge's decision  was  sustainable.  The
      judge had properly directed herself on the law, she had  set  out  her
      analysis of the evidence from [30] and had  made  adverse  credibility
      findings against the sponsor at [32]. Contrary to the submissions  for
      the appellant, the judge had not misdirected herself on the facts, but
      had found inconsistencies in the evidence of where the  appellant  was
      living before the sponsor left Nepal and had  found  there  to  be  no
      family life at that time.  The  judge  found  that  there  was  little
      evidence of family life since the  sponsor  had  left  Nepal  and  had
      properly entered into a fact  sensitive  analysis  in  line  with  the
      guidance in Rai. The judge had applied the right  test.  Whilst  there
      was a contradiction at [44] it could not be said that that  undermined
      the preceding properly reasoned paragraphs and it was clear  that  the
      judge found that family life had not been established for the purposes
      of Article 8(1).

  11. In  response,  Ms  Jaja  submitted  that,  contrary  to  Mr  Kandola's
      submission, the judge clearly found, at the end of [36],  that  family
      life did exist before the sponsor left Nepal. The  judge  had  applied
      the wrong test and her decision was riddled with  inconsistencies  and
      misdirections.

Consideration and findings

  12. I have to agree with Ms Jaja that the judge's findings and conclusions
      are unclear and confusing and appear to be contradictory. Having  read
      the decision several times, it is not at all  clear  to  me  what  the
      judge's conclusion was in regard to the existence of family life prior
      to the sponsor leaving Nepal. At [35] the judge found that  there  was
      an absence of reliable evidence of the appellant  and  sponsor  having
      lived in the same house prior to the sponsor's departure and  went  on
      to find that even if they did live in the same house, the ties between
      them did not go beyond the usual ties existing between a mother and an
      unemployed daughter living in the same house. The sole basis  for  the
      latter finding appears to be  that  the  judge  did  not  believe  the
      sponsor's evidence that the appellant could  not  find  employment  in
      Nepal, which seems to be a rather  unsafe  basis  for  making  such  a
      finding. That is particularly so when she went on to make a finding at
      [36] that the family situation was that "the  mother  potentially  may
      have financially supported an unemployed adult daughter living in  the
      family home".  The judge's final sentence in [36], that "that  is  the
      basis upon which I find that family life existed between the appellant
      and sponsor before the sponsor left Nepal" was relied upon by Ms  Jaja
      as a finding by the judge  that  family  life  existed  prior  to  the
      sponsor's departure, but it seems to  me  that  that  sentence  is  as
      ambiguous and unclear as her preceding findings.

  13. The ambiguity in the judge's findings on the existence of family  life
      between the appellant and the sponsor prior  to  the  sponsor  leaving
      Nepal is clearly a material consideration  in  the  challenge  to  her
      decision on family life existing subsequent to the sponsor  coming  to
      the UK and thereafter. Further, there is merit in Ms Jaja's  challenge
      to the judge's application of the relevant test in  assessing  whether
      Article 8(1) was engaged, which again appears to have been  predicated
      on the rejection of the sponsor's account of her daughter being unable
      to find employment and  an  absence  of  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant was "wholly reliant on her mother"  (at  [40]),  neither  of
      which involve the correct application of the test in Rai.

  14. Whilst I do not consider the  evident  contradiction  in  the  judge's
      findings at [43] to [44] to be particularly material, if taken  alone,
      I do find that it is just a further example of unclear  and  ambiguous
      findings when considering the decision as a whole.  I  agree  with  Ms
      Jaja that, when all of these  concerns  are  taken  cumulatively,  the
      judge's findings and conclusions are simply not  sustainable  and  the
      decision cannot stand.

  15. Accordingly, I set aside the judge's decision. It seems to me that the
      appropriate course is for the case to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be heard de novo, with no findings preserved.

  16. The appellant is advised to take this further  opportunity  to  obtain
      and produce the evidence which was lacking before Judge  Buttar,  both
      in regard to her living circumstances prior to the sponsor's departure
      from the UK and to the nature and extent of the  support  provided  by
      the sponsor since she came to the UK.

DECISION

  17. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with afresh,
      pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Buttar.






Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 March 2021
