
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/14374/2018
                                                               HU/14381/2018
                                                               HU/14389/2018
                                                               HU/14394/2018
                                                               HU/14396/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 21 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                  AVTAR [S]
                                 RAJDEEP [K]
                                    [GSU]
                                    [PKU]
                                    [JS]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on  8  March  2019  dismissing  their  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 20 June 2018 refusing  them  leave
    to remain on human rights grounds.


Background.

 2.   The appellants are all citizens of India.  The first  appellant,  born
    on 25 April 1975, is married to the second appellant, born on 12  April
    1987.  They have three children, the third appellant, born on 27 August
    2010, the fourth appellant, on 22 January 2013 and the fifth appellant,
    on 10 March 2014.

3.    Their immigration history can briefly be summarised as  follows.   The
    first appellant claims that he entered the  UK  illegally  in  December
    2000.  The second appellant entered on 17 May 2005 with  a  visit  visa
    valid until November 2005 and, thereafter, she  became  an  overstayer.
    Their three children have all been born in the UK.  On 22 December 2017
    the appellants applied for leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds
    based on their family life.  Their applications were  refused  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision letter of 20 June 2018.  The respondent
    was not satisfied that the appellants could meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules or that there were exceptional circumstances which would lead
    to a refusal of leave being in breach of  article  8.   The  appellants
    could return to India as a family unit  and  continue  to  enjoy  their
    family life together.  Any disruption to their private  life  would  be
    proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim   of   maintaining   effective
    immigration control.


The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


4.    At the hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal, the judge  recorded  at
    [6] that the appellants' representative confirmed that it was  accepted
    that they could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  and  that  the
    appeal was based on article 8 grounds only.  It was submitted that  the
    appeal should be decided on the basis that the eldest child, the  third
    appellant, had been in the UK for over seven years, that he  should  be
    granted leave and the other members of the  family  should  be  granted
    similar status.


5.    The first appellant claimed in his evidence  that  he  was  afraid  of
    returning to India, but the judge did  not  find  his  evidence  to  be
    credible in that respect.  She set out her reasons for her findings  on
    this issue in [11]-[14].


6.    The judge accepted that all three of the children  had  been  born  in
    the UK and that there was no dispute that the eldest child had been  in
    the United Kingdom for nearly 9 years by the date of  the  hearing  and
    was therefore a qualifying child but it was the respondent's case  that
    it would be reasonable for him to return to India with the rest of  his
    family [16].

7.    She commented  that  it  was  apparent  from  the  evidence  that  the
    appellants had all benefited from the use of the NHS, the three younger
    appellants had been schooled at the expense of the UK and that  neither
    parent had made any contribution to the economy of the UK [17].


8.    She went on  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the  children  in
    accordance with s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009.  She was satisfied that it was in the best interests of all three
    to be brought up in a family unit with their parents [18] but she  also
    had to address whether the best interests of the third  appellant  were
    served by his remaining in the UK.  She accepted that  going  to  India
    would be disruptive for him.  He did not  know  the  country,  but  the
    first appellant had acknowledged  that  he  spoke  the  language.   His
    education would be disrupted but there was nothing before the judge  to
    show that he was at a critical stage in his education.  She referred to
    the decision in  Azimi-Moayed  (Decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals: Iran) [2013] UKUT 197 that length of residence could  lead  to
    the development of social, cultural and education ties that it would be
    inappropriate to disrupt without  compelling  reasons  and  that  seven
    years was considered a relevant period in cases of  children  for  such
    ties to be developed and emotionally it  would  be  undoubtedly  highly
    stressful.


9.    The judge noted at [21] that she had no evidence  before  her  of  any
    friendships the third appellant had made or  his  wishes  and  feelings
    about being returned to India.  There was no independent evidence  from
    a social worker to inform her of the effect that removal would have and
    there was nothing to show that any of the children were in poor  health
    or that healthcare would not be available to them on return  to  India.
    She was satisfied that  there  were  educational  facilities  for  them
    there.


10.   The judge saw no reason why the third appellant could not establish  a
    connection with his country of nationality.  He and his family attended
    services at their Gurdwara and took part  in  other  activities  there.
    They had relatives in India as well as in in the UK [23].


11.   She considered the position of the third appellant in the light of  EB
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and MT and ET (Child's best interests
    - ex tempore project) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88.  She found that the  best
    interests of third appellant would lie in his remaining in  the  United
    Kingdom because it would mean that his ties  formed  here  since  birth
    would  not  be  disrupted  and  he  would  be  likely  to  have  better
    opportunities both educationally and economically by remaining  in  the
    UK [25].  She commented, however, that she did not find this  to  be  a
    case where the third appellant's best interests pointed  overwhelmingly
    in favour of remaining  in  the  UK  because  of  the  factors  already
    mentioned [26].


12.   The judge took into account the judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and in particular the  guidance  that  it  was
    inevitably relevant to consider where the parents were expected  to  be
    as it would normally be reasonable for the child to be with  them.   To
    this extent, the record of the parents may become  indirectly  material
    if it led to them having to leave the UK and it would only be if it was
    not reasonable for the child to leave with them, that the provisions of
    the Rules may give to parents the right to remain [27].


13.   The judge said that, although she considered that it was in the  third
    appellant's best interests to remain  in  the  UK,  it  was  reasonable
    bearing in mind the public interest in the maintenance  of  immigration
    control for him to return to India with his parents and siblings all of
    whom had no right to remain in the UK [28].  The  third  appellant  had
    not reached a critical stage in his education and he would be  able  to
    adapt to life in India with the support  of  his  parents.  There  were
    relatives in India and the third appellant was not  totally  unfamiliar
    with the culture and  traditions  there.  She  took  into  account  the
    significant period of time the first and second appellants had spent in
    the UK, saying this could not be overlooked.  She made  it  clear  that
    she was not relying on their misconduct as part of her consideration of
    reasonableness, which KO (Nigeria) had confirmed  to  be  an  incorrect
    approach.  In considering where the parents were  expected  to  be,  in
    India, she was satisfied that it was reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant and his younger siblings to return to India with  them  [33].
    For these reasons, the appeal was dismissed.


The Grounds and Submissions.

 14.  In the grounds, it is argued that the judge failed  to  recognise  the
    decision of TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ  1109  which  confirmed  that
    meeting the Rules was determinative of a human rights appeal; the third
    appellant was a qualifying child both in terms of para  276ADE  and  s.
    117B(6);  the judge had recorded a concession that the Rules could  not
    be met but this concession was made in respect of the  adult's  ability
    to  meet  para  276ADE  not  the  third  appellant's  ability  to  meet
    276ADE(1)(iv), which if successful would qualify the  adult  appellants
    under para EX.1.;  the judge erred in her assessment of  reasonableness
    and in her interpretation of KO (Nigeria), which  did  not  affect  the
    application of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [49] that the  fact
    that a child had been in the UK for seven years would need to be  given
    significant weight in the proportionality exercise; the judge failed to
    identify strong  and  powerful  reasons  in  the  light  of  the  third
    appellant's residence exceeding seven years to justify a  finding  that
    it was reasonable for him to return to India  with  his  family  or  to
    treat that length of residence as the starting  point  of  leave  being
    granted and the judge had failed to give adequate consideration to  the
    best interests of the third appellant.


15.   Mr Chohan adopted these grounds.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to give any or any proper weight to the fact that the  appellant
    would be moving to a new country with a  different  educational  system
    and be living in a different culture.  He would have to move to  a  new
    school.  In substance, the third appellant was  being  blamed  for  the
    failure of his parents to comply with the Rules.   The  length  of  his
    residence in the UK  meant  that  that  should  have  been  the  proper
    starting point and the judge should have considered whether there  were
    strong and powerful reasons rebutting the presumption  of  leave  being
    granted.  Even looking at the matter in the context of  the  real-world
    situation, she had failed to give proper weight to the  best  interests
    of the third appellant.


16.   Mr Bramble submitted that the judge had reached  a  decision  properly
    open to her on the evidence.  She  had  properly  directed  herself  in
    accordance with KO (Nigeria).  She was clearly aware that  the  central
    core of the appeal was the fact that the oldest child had been resident
    in the UK for over seven years.  She had considered  all  the  relevant
    evidence and had explained her finding that it would be reasonable  for
    the third appellant to leave with the other members of his family.  The
    fact that another judge might have reached a different decision did not
    mean that this judge had erred in law. Her decision was  properly  open
    to her for the reasons she gave.  In the grant of permission there  was
    reference to JG (s.117B(6): "reasonable to  leave"  UK)  Turkey  [2019]
    UKUT 72, also referred to in the grounds, but that case  was  based  on
    very different facts and could properly be distinguished.


Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.


17.   I accept that the judge may have misunderstood the concession made  at
    the beginning of the hearing that the appeal was proceeding  solely  on
    article 8 grounds.  In the light of the length of the third appellant's
    residence in the UK, the provisions of para 276ADE(1)(iv) were  met  in
    respect of  length  of  residence  but  this  rule  also  contains  the
    requirement set out in s. 117B(6) of needing to show that it would  not
    be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.

18.   In KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court made it clear that,  when  assessing
    reasonableness, the proper context was the real-world position in which
    the children found themselves.  Lord Carnwath said at [18]:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
          To that extent the record of the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here and having to leave.  It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not be reasonable for the child to leave the provision may
         give the parents a right to remain".

19.   In the present case none of the appellants have the  right  to  remain
    in the UK and, accordingly, normally it would  be  reasonable  for  the
    children to return with their parents.

20.   The Supreme Court set out this approach  in  the  context  of  finding
    that the provisions of section 117B(6) were focussed on the position of
    the child and that the best interests of a child included the principle
    that a child should not be blamed for matters for which they  were  not
    responsible including the conduct of their parents.

21.   I am satisfied that the judge followed the  approach  set  out  in  KO
    (Nigeria).  In her assessment of what  was  reasonable  she  took  into
    account the length of the third appellant's residence which by the date
    of the hearing was over nine years, the whole of the third  appellant's
    life.  She was clearly aware that the length of  his  residence  was  a
    relevant consideration, citing, as she did, the  Tribunal  decision  in
    Azimi-Moayed, which considered the importance of length of residence at
    [13].

22.   The  judge  took  into  account  and  carefully  considered  the  best
    interests of the third appellant.  She found that  they  would  lie  in
    remaining in the UK because it would mean that the  ties  formed  since
    birth would  not  be  disrupted  and  he  was  likely  to  have  better
    opportunities both educationally and economically by remaining  in  the
    UK.  When considering the third appellant's best interests,  the  judge
    specifically considered the potential disruption to him from having  to
    move both school and  country.   However,  she  noted  that  there  was
    nothing before her to show that he was  at  a  critical  stage  in  his
    education or that he would not receive a suitable  education  in  India
    where both his parents been educated to GCSE level.

23.   She had no evidence of any friendships  the  third  appellant  had  or
    about his wishes.  There was  nothing  to  indicate  that  any  of  the
    appellants were  in  poor  health  or  that  healthcare  would  not  be
    available.  She considered whether the third  appellant  in  particular
    could establish a connection with his  country  of  nationality  noting
    that he and family members attended services at the Gurdwara  and  took
    part in activities there. They had relatives both in India and  in  the
    UK. She also had to factor into her assessment  of  reasonableness  her
    finding that it was in the best interests of all three children  to  be
    brought up in a family unit with their parents.

24.   Having considered these factors, she then considered the  judgment  in
    KO Nigeria reminding herself that where, as here, the third appellant's
    parents had no right to be  in  the  UK,  as  neither  did  he  or  his
    siblings, it would normally be reasonable for the children to  be  with
    them.  She found that the third appellant would be  able  to  adapt  to
    life in India.  She did not accept that the family would  have  nowhere
    to go and was satisfied  that  the  first  appellant's  brother  farmed
    family land.  She also noted the  evidence  that  the  appellants  were
    being supporting the UK by siblings here and she was entitled  to  find
    that there was no reason to show that this support would  not  continue
    if the family were removed to India [30] and that there was  no  reason
    why the first appellant could not obtain work there [31].


25.    She took into account the significant period of time  the  first  and
    second appellants had been in the UK commenting that the fact  that  it
    had been spent here illegally could not be  overlooked.   However,  she
    explained that she was not relying on misconduct on their part as  part
    of the consideration of reasonableness but simply giving effect to  the
    guidance that where parents have  no  entitlement  to  be  in  the  UK,
    normally their children should return with them.

26.   In summary, the grounds do not satisfy me  that  the  judge  erred  in
    law.  The reference to TZ (Pakistan)  in  the  grounds  is  beside  the
    point.  The third appellant had to show that he could not reasonably be
    expected to leave the UK if he was to succeed under para  276ADE(1)(iv)
    and the judge reached a finding on reasonableness  which  was  properly
    open to her.  It was for her to assess in the light of the evidence  as
    a whole whether it would be reasonable for the third  appellant  to  be
    expected to leave the UK. Therefore, if the judge did misunderstand the
    concession made at the beginning of the hearing,  it  had  no  material
    bearing on the outcome of the appeal.

27.   She took into account the length of the  third  appellant's  residence
    and explained why it did not make it  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    leave the UK in the light of the  other  factors  she  identified.  The
    grounds refer to and rely on MA (Pakistan) and the  significant  weight
    to be given to residence of more than  seven  years  but  there  is  no
    reason to believe that she did not give proper weight to the length  of
    his  residence.  I  am  also  satisfied  that  the  judge   gave   full
    consideration to the best interests of the children. The grounds  refer
    to JG (Turkey) but there is nothing in that decision  where  the  facts
    differ significantly from this appeal to support an argument  that  the
    judge erred in law.

 28.  I am satisfied that  she  was  entitled  to  find  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the third appellant return to India with his parents and
    siblings none of whom had  the  right  to  remain  in  the  UK,  having
    balanced all the various factors she had identified. She looked at  the
    situation in which the family  found  itself  and  reached  a  decision
    properly open to her.

Decision.


29.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and  it  follows  that  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 14 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
