
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14332/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 15th May 2019  On 26th June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  LUIS [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P V Thoree, Thoree and Co, Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Ecuador. He came to the United Kingdom
       on 21 August 2017 on a six-month visit Visa, valid to 29 May 2018. On
       3 May 2018 he applied for further leave so as to remain here with his
       British wife and child. They had been living with him in Ecuador and
       arrived here around the same time. The couple had been together since
       2008 and married on 21 August 2017.Their daughter [D] was born in
       Ecuador on 15 May 2015.The appellant's parents remain in Ecuador. His
       wife's parents originally lived there and are settled in London in a
       property they share with the appellant and their daughter and
       granddaughter.

    2. His application was refused on 18 June 2018. The relationships were
       accepted as genuine and subsisting. However, he could not meet the
       eligibility requirements of appendix FM because he was here on a
       visit Visa. Furthermore, his wife had provided insufficient evidence
       to confirm her earnings met the financial requirements. He also did
       not have the necessary English test. The respondent took the view
       that he could return to his home country and then reapply.

The First tier Tribunal

    3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro at Hatton
       Cross on 4 February 2019. Mr Thoree appeared for the appellant then
       as he does now. In a decision promulgated on 18 February 2019 the
       appeal was dismissed. Mr Thoree accepted that the appellant did not
       meet the requirements of Appendix FM and was not seeking to rely upon
       paragraph 276 ADE and his private life. By the time of the appeal
       hearing the appellant had obtained confirmation of his English
       ability.

    4. The judge accepted the existence of family life as well as private
       life and progressed in the sequential Razgar approach to the final
       issue, proportionality. The judge also referred to the best interests
       of their child as a primary consideration.

    5. The judge accepted the appellant had a genuine relationship with his
       child and that it was in the best interests of the child to be with
       both parents. The judge accepted the appellant shared responsibility
       with his wife for the upbringing of their child. The judge was
       satisfied that the best interests of their child was to remain in the
       United Kingdom with both parents. The judge indicated that the
       appropriate application should have been made from Ecuador instead of
       the appellant coming on a visit Visa and then applying. However, the
       judge said the child should not be made to suffer as a consequence.

    6. In the appeal the argument centred on the reasonableness of the
       respondent's view that the appellant should return to Ecuador and
       make a proper application. Reference was made to the decision of
       Chickwamba [2008] UKHL 40. The judge referred to the appellant
       circumventing the rules and in effect jumping the queue. The judge
       said that any separation by the appellant returning to his home
       country and applying from there would only be temporary. His in-laws
       would help care for their child. The judge did not accept as true the
       account given of a lack of family support in the United Kingdom.

    7. The judge referred to section 117B and that the maintenance of
       effective immigration control was in the public interest. The judge
       did not find there would be insurmountable obstacles for family life
       continuing outside the United Kingdom, pointing out they had lived as
       a family unit in Ecuador before and they still had family support
       there. The judge noted that the appellant's wife was working and at
       paragraph 19 found they were financially independent.

    8. The judge then turned to section 117B(6) and referred to the
       appellant's child being a qualifying child. A genuine and subsisting
       parental relationship had been accepted. The child, as a British
       national was not required to leave the United Kingdom. She could
       remain here with her mother whilst the appellant made an application
       from Ecuador. Alternatively, the child could return to Ecuador with
       the appellant. The judge concluded it would not be unreasonable to
       expect the child to leave for a temporary period. However, the judge
       took the view that this was hypothetical because the respondent does
       not expect the child to leave.

The Upper Tribunal

    9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable
       the judge did not apply section 117B(6) correctly. Reference was made
       to the decision of JG (section 117B(6) : reasonable to leave) Turkey
       [2019] UKUT 00072. Furthermore, in considering the possibility of the
       child accompanying the appellant to Ecuador it was necessary to also
       consider whether the child would be accompanied by her mother. If her
       mother travelled with her she would be unlikely to be able to keep a
       job in the United Kingdom.

   10. Mr Thoree relied upon the ground and submitted the judge erred in
       concluding it was reasonable to expect the appellant's child to
       leave. He made the point that unlike the appellant in JG who had a
       poor immigration history, the appellant came here legally, the
       application was made whilst he still had leave. There was no
       criminality involved. The financial requirements were met. An English
       test has been taken.

   11. In response, Ms Jones pointed out the family had lived in Ecuador
       before coming here. Furthermore, the appellant and his wife had not
       been truthful in suggesting family members here could not assist. The
       factual situation in Chickwamba was considerably different.

   12. Both representatives were in agreement that if I find a material
       error of law the relevant facts were sufficiently established for me
       to remake the decision.

Consideration

   13. JG (section 117B(6): reasonable to leave) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072
       considered what was said at paragraphs 18 and 19 of the judgement of
       KO (Nigeria) and others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53. Lord Carnwath,
       reflecting on the reasonableness enquiry, said that it was relevant
       to consider where the parents of the child, apart from the relevant
       provision, would be. To this extent the conduct of the parents became
       indirectly relevant if it meant they ceased to have a right to remain
       and had to leave. Based on that hypothesis they may acquire a right
       to remain if it would not be reasonable for the child to leave. At
       paragraph 19 he referred to the reasonableness question being
       considered in the context of the real world in which the children
       find themselves.

   14. In JG Counsel for the Secretary of State argued Lord Carnwath's
       comments supported the argument that the application of section
       117B(6) was dependent upon the Tribunal finding the child would be
       expected to leave if the person concerned were removed. On the facts,
       the Upper Tribunal concluded that if the Turkish mother of the
       British children concerned were removed to Turkey it was very
       unlikely they would follow her. The children would, in the 'real-
       world scenario' most likely remain and continue to live with their
       British father and his parents and continue attending school. The
       appellant's Counsel argued section 117B(6) did not depend on what was
       likely to happen in the real world but required the tribunal to
       hypothesise that the children would leave the United Kingdom and then
       ask whether that would be reasonable.

   15. Focusing upon the expression `to expect' the Upper Tribunal favoured
       the hypothesis interpretation advocated by the appellant's
       representative.

   16. On the facts, the Upper Tribunal found the appellant to be dishonest
       and unscrupulous to a high degree. The Upper Tribunal found there
       were powerful reasons why the appellant should be removed. In the
       circumstance the Upper Tribunal concluded it would be proportionate
       to insist upon the appellant returning to Turkey to make an
       application for entry clearance. Her removal would not have a
       disproportionate effect upon her children or her partner remaining
       behind.

   17. However, even though it was unlikely the children would leave the
       Upper Tribunal went on to consider the situation on the hypothesis
       they would leave. This was based on its construction of section
       117B(6).  It was in this context the reasonableness of expecting them
       to do so had to be considered. The Upper Tribunal went on to say that
       the child's destination and future are to be assumed to be with the
       person being removed. At paragraph 92 the Upper Tribunal said that
       the likely temporary nature of the absence from the United Kingdom
       could make it unreasonable to expect the children to leave and have
       their education disrupted. The conclusion therefore was that based on
       this hypothetical situation it was not reasonable to expect the
       children to leave.

   18. In the present appeal the factual background is somewhat different.
       The child was born on 15 May 2015 and so is only 4 years of age. The
       appellant does not have the poor immigration history of the appellant
       in JG. Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal found that he gave a
       frank account about his intentions when entering on a visit Visa,
       that is, to seek to settle. In the present appeal the child's mother
       is entitled to be here as a British national. Her parents are here.
       Mindful of the child's young age it may well be the case that if the
       appellant were removed the child would remain here with its mother.
       For its mother to leave with the child is unlikely. This would be an
       impediment for the appellant's future entry clearance application. A
       practical consideration is that she is unlikely to be able to keep
       her job open and satisfy the financial requirements.

   19. Section 117B(6) is a free standing provision. Aside from this a fresh
       application may well succeed given the relationship is accepted; the
       sponsor's employment and the appellant's ability in English. If
       section 117B did not assist the appellant the it is still necessary
       to consider the proportionality in the circumstance of the decision
       effectively requiring the appellant to leave and the consequent
       expense and disruption to make an application likely to succeed.

   20. JG requires an assessment of the child's best interests on the
       hypothesis she in fact would go to Uruguay. While she has lived there
       before it was only as a baby. She is now at an age when she can be
       expected to have some awareness of her surroundings. She has been
       attending nursery school and will transit to primary school. The
       hypothetical scenario of travelling to Uruguay to wait on the outcome
       of her father's entry clearance application is not in her best
       interest. A possible separation from her mother is most definitely
       not in her best interests.

   21. Paragraph 20 of the First-tier decision is premised upon the
       possibility of the child remaining in the United Kingdom with her
       mother whilst the appellant seeks entry clearance. The decision was
       promulgated before JG and so the judge did not have the benefit of
       the hypothetical concept. Clearly the comments at paragraph 20 are at
       odds with that. I am required to apply the law as it is currently
       understood.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal judge has accurately set out the factual
       background and specifically considered the best interests of the
       child at paragraph 15 and dealt with section 117B(6) at paragraph 20.
       However, bearing in mind the guidance given in JG the analysis is
       fundamentally flawed. Consequently, I set that decision aside and to
       remake the decision, allowing the appeal. This is based upon the
       application of section 117B(6) as now understood and on the
       hypothesis of the child being in Uruguay. As stated, in that scenario
       the child's interests are not best served by the appellant having to
       leave.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro materially errs in law and
is set aside. I remake the decision allowing the appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Data: 25 June 2019

