
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14113/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On the 29th June 2021                         |On the 5th July 2021           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     RS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Trevelyan, instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction has previously been made by the First-tier
      Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  For the avoidance of any doubt that
      direction continues.  Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs
      otherwise, RS is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.
       This direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to
      comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
      proceedings.


Background


   2. The appellant is a national of India.  He arrived in the UK on 8th
      July 1999 and claimed asylum. That claim was refused by the respondent
      in August 1999 and following an unsuccessful appeal to the First-tier
      Tribunal, the appellant had exhausted his rights of appeal on 22nd
      February 2000. Nevertheless, the appellant remained in the UK, and in
      July 2011, he was granted discretionary leave to remain, initially,
      until 11th July 2014, and later extended until 19th September 2017.
      On 18th September 2017, he applied for indefinite leave to remain, and
      provided further grounds in support of his application in October
      2017.


   3. On 28th May 2005 the appellant was arrested following a domestic
      dispute with his then partner, SK, although no charges followed. On
      7th October 2011, he was convicted at Leicester Magistrates Court of
      "making false relevant record/entry kept for community recording
      equipment Regulations" for which he was fined and ordered to pay
      costs. On 2nd June 2015, he was convicted at Leicester and Rutland
      Magistrates Court of property damage relating to SK's mobile phone for
      which he was fined and ordered to pay costs.  On 18th May 2016, the
      appellant was convicted at Leicester Crown Court of sexual assault on
      SK and received a ten-month sentence of imprisonment.  A number of
      other charges were to 'lie on the file'.  He was also convicted of
      assault by beating, for which he received a sentence of five months
      imprisonment, to run concurrently. The sentencing judge also imposed a
      restraining order on the appellant, and he was automatically placed on
      the Sex Offenders Register for 10 years.


   4. On 17th June 2019 the appellant was served with a Notice of Decision
      to Deport informing him of the respondent's intention to begin
      deportation proceedings under s3(5) Immigration Act 1971.  The
      appellant responded on 24th June 2019 and 12th July 2019 making
      representations, and in particular, claiming that his deportation
      would be in breach of Article 8 ECHR.  The respondent refused the
      appellant's human rights claim for reasons set out in a decision dated
      31st July 2019. Referring to appellant's convictions for sexual
      assault and battery, the respondent concluded that the appellant's
      deportation is conducive to the public good and in the public interest
      because he has been convicted of an offence which has caused serious
      harm.  The respondent also considered the application made by the
      appellant on 18th September 2017 for indefinite leave to remain in the
      UK.  The application was refused under paragraph 322(5) of the
      immigration rules because of his convictions for sexual assault and
      battery.


   5. The appellant's appeal was allowed on human rights grounds by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 30th October 2020. He said:


         "The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds. The exception to
         deportation set out in paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules,
         and the exception set out at section 117C(5), apply to the
         appellant."


   6. The respondent was granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge McClure on 19th February 2020.  The decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Chamberlain was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
      for reasons set out in his decision promulgated on 7th October 2020.
      Upper Tribunal Judge Blum was satisfied that the judge's application
      of the 'unduly harsh' test was legally flawed.  He also found that the
      judge had failed to give adequate reasons for finding the appellant to
      be an honest and credible witness, and for accepting his claim that
      his children had no contact with their mother.


   7. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum directed that given the relatively narrow
      issues in contention, the decision should be remade in the Upper
      Tribunal at a resumed hearing.  The matter was listed for a resumed
      hearing before me on 29th June 2021.





The issues


   8. There are two children of the appellant's relationship with SK. The
      appellant's daughter, who I shall refer to as S, was born on 11th
      March 2007 and is now 14 years old.  His son, who I shall refer to as
      T, was born on 13th February 2008 and is now 13 years old. Both
      children are British citizens. The respondent accepts the appellant
      and a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the children.
      The respondent made that concession "... by only the smallest of
      margins on a limited basis".  The respondent noted the appellant's
      children are in foster care, and the subjects of Care Orders in favour
      of Leicester City Council. The respondent referred to the limited
      contact enjoyed by the appellant but also noted that the appellant
      does care for his children and has made a substantial effort to
      continue his limited access to them. She noted the appellant has never
      missed a visitation event and the social worker commented that both
      children seem to enjoy their time with the appellant. The respondent
      also noted the appellant successfully appealed a decision to place the
      children into adoptive care and the appellant had taken the necessary
      steps to complete courses such as the 'Understanding your child's
      behaviour' course.


   9. The respondent also accepted it would be unduly harsh for the children
      to live in India primarily because the appellant is not their primary
      carer, but also because they have never previously lived in India. The
      respondent noted the children are at very sensitive ages and at the
      formative years of their secondary education.  However, the respondent
      did not accept that it will be unduly harsh for the children to remain
      in the UK without the appellant.  The respondent referred to the Care
      Orders made by the Family Court and the limited contact the appellant
      has with the children.


  10. Mr Trevelyan accepts that the sole issue to be determined in the
      appeal before me is whether deportation of the appellant would be in
      breach of Article 8.  The applicant claims that he meets the
      requirements for the exception to deportation set out at paragraph
      399(a) of the Immigration Rules and/or Exception 2 set out at s117C of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In particular, the
      appellant claims it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain
      in the UK without him.


The evidence


  11. At the hearing before me, I heard evidence from the appellant with the
      assistance of a Punjabi interpreter.  Both the appellant and
      interpreter confirmed that they understood each other without any
      difficulty.  I have before me:


           i) The respondent's bundle.


          ii) The appellant's 'supplementary bundle'


         iii) The appellant's 'supplementary bundle 2'


         iv) The appellant's consolidated bundle comprising of 56 pages
             that was filed and served in accordance with directions made
             by me on 25th May 2021.


The appellant's criminal behaviour


  12. The appellant's offending history is uncontroversial.  I have set it
      out in paragraph [3] above.  Mr Trevelyan accepts it is also
      accurately referred to in the respondent's decision of 31st July 2019
      and at paragraph [3] of the 'error of law' decision of Upper Tribunal
      Judge Blum. The respondent has provided a copy of the appellant's PNC
      record dated 14th June 2019 and Mr Bates confirmed that a recent check
      did not reveal any further offending. For present purposes it is
      sufficient to refer to the transcript of the sentencing remarks that
      are to be found in the respondent's bundle, that put in context the
      sentences imposed on 18th May 2016.  The Judge said:


         "This defendant, at trial, has pleaded guilty to count 1 of assault
         and count 3 of sexual assault on his partner and I have got to
         decide what sentence to impose. I should say the remaining counts,
         that is count 1 of rape,... and count 5 of sexual assault are to
         lie on the file on usual terms, and I fully understand the reason
         why the Crown have accepted these pleas....


         [SK], the complainant was in a relationship with the defendant,
         [the appellant] for about 11 years. They were not married but they
         have two children, one aged 9, one aged 8.  The background is that
         in May 2012 the children were removed by social services, and the
         children have remained in foster care ever since. In July 2013,
         there was a care order, whereby the children remained in foster
         care. The issue of contact, I think, is up in the air.


         The parties remain living in Tudor Road but in separate bedrooms,
         and that was the situation on 29 November 2015, when the assault
         took place. There had been an altercation, unpleasant words were
         said by him to her, he pushed her, and her head hit a boiler,
         leaving a lump on her head. Later, he returned to the house, kicked
         the door to try and get in, police were called, and he was
         arrested.


         She was then interviewed by an ABE on 30 November 2015, and she
         described amongst other things, an incident when he had grabbed her
         naked breast, this being without her consent. She thought that had
         taken place probably a month before the ABE interview. What is
         apparently clear is that, whilst he has been on remand in custody,
         she has visited him on about nine occasions.


         The defendant is 39, he has got two convictions: one is for a road
         traffic matter, which is of no concern; and in June 2015, for
         criminal damage, that relates to, I understand, the complainant's
         mobile phone. He was fined. It is accepted by both sides this
         relationship is over, and I am invited to make a restraining order,
         which I will do.


         I am going to turn now to the mitigating factors. He has pleaded
         guilty at trial, but I am asked to bear in mind, this was the first
         time a compromise was discussed. He is anxious that the sentence
         that is passed should not be 12 months or more, because he is on a
         visa and he is anxious to remain in the United Kingdom, and I
         understand that point, because if it is 12 months or more, he is
         likely to be deported.


         In her ABE, she described the incident which has just been outlined
         by the Crown, an incident about a month earlier, but in an earlier
         statement, in November, she described grabbing her breast, but over
         clothes.


         So I turn now to sentence.  The maximum for common assault is six
         months and I have got to give him credit for the late plea of
         guilty, albeit at trial. So far as section 3 sexual assault is
         concerned, it is common ground that, it is a category 2B, starting
         point on a trial, 12 months, with a range of community orders up to
         twenty-four months. He has been in custody now 5 and a half months,
         which is the equivalent of an eleven-month sentence. So, on a
         trial, if I can say, in relation to the assault it would have been
         six months on a trial, five months for the late plea. The sexual
         assault, on a trial it would have been 12 months, but for the late
         plea, it is going to be 10 months, that will be concurrent, so it
         is a total of ten months.  You will serve half of that sentence,
         giving credit for the remand days. I do not have to spell that out,
         it is likely he will be on licence..... I am going to make a
         restraining order.... The Sex Offenders Register applies
         automatically and that is 10 years...."


The appellant's evidence


  13. The appellant adopted his witness statement dated 18th May 2021, in
      which he sets out developments that have occurred since his previous
      statement signed in August 2018.  He states that previously, the
      Family Court ordered that he has supervised contact with his children
      three times a year. Since then, his contact has "greatly increased".
      He confirms the children continue to live with their foster carers and
      in paragraph [4] of his statement, he claims that he was assessed
      during a six-week course and found to be competent to look after the
      children. He states that contact was extended to every month, and he
      now has weekly sessions.  He describes in his witness statement how
      the measures introduced by the government to prevent the spread of
      Covid 19 impacted upon his contact with his children and his ability
      to have face-to-face contact.  At paragraph [6] of his statement, the
      appellant refers to the difficulties caused because he was overzealous
      with buying presents for the children. He refers to his daughter
      wanting a mobile phone, but the foster carers view that that would
      upset the younger children who do not have a phone.  He believes that
      to be the reason contact was decreased. The appellant confirms that he
      wishes to continue his contact with the children and the intends to
      play an active part in their upbringing. The appellant describes being
      very close to his daughter, S and sets out the activities that he
      enjoys with the children.  The appellant states that he is supported
      by his cousin, with whom he lives, and that in his spare time, he
      regularly attends and volunteers at the local Sikh temple where he
      participates in charity work in the kitchens.  He also describes the
      activities he has been involved in to assist the homeless and those
      who could not cope due to the pandemic. He claims that the fundamental
      problem with his return to India is that his children are in the UK
      and he cannot leave them because it would be unbearable for him. He
      claimed he could not maintain the same level of parenting from India
      as he does in the UK and he would never be able to see his children
      face-to-face.  The appellant claims that he does not have a home, job
      or any business assets in India. He confirms his mother lives with his
      brother, sister-in-law and their child. He states he has no intention
      to live in India as this would greatly distress his children.


  14. The appellant maintains that he did not sexually assault his ex-
      partner, who continued to visit him whilst he was in prison.  He
      claims the children have contact with their mother three times a year.


  15. In his oral evidence before me, the appellant confirmed that the
      frequency of his contact is now reduced to monthly but remains under
      review. He last had contact with both children on 19th May 2021, at
      the foster carers home. He is waiting to hear from the social worker
      as to when contact will next take place. I asked the appellant whether
      this contact is supervised. He said that the arrangements keep
      changing and although he said that the contact on 19 May 2021 was
      unsupervised, he confirmed that the foster carers had remained in the
      living room throughout contact, and they were present when the
      appellant had a meal with his children.  He said that as far as he is
      aware, the children have contact with their mother three times a year.
       In cross-examination, the appellant confirmed that the children have
      now lived with their current foster carers for over five years.  He
      has not asked the foster carers to provide a letter or evidence
      regarding his contact, but he had told the children he was attending
      court and asked them to state their feelings, so that he could show
      that to the judge. He confirmed his daughter has provided a letter,
      but there is nothing from his son because he had become distracted by
      a PlayStation that the appellant had brought for him. He accepted that
      following an assessment the local authority concluded that it was not
      in the children's best interests to return to his care. He said that
      was a decision taken by the social worker and not the children.  He
      said they had not explained why it was not in the children's best
      interests to return to his care and he has been told that a meeting
      will be arranged, but arrangements have not yet been confirmed. The
      appellant was referred to an email from the social worker that was
      sent to his solicitors on 7th June 2021, in which the social worker
      states that issues arose during the appellant's separate phone contact
      with his children, which had a detrimental impact on the children and
      his daughter in particular. The appellant claimed that his daughter
      had demanded a telephone and when the appellant refused, she became
      angry and upset with him. He maintains he has a good and close
      relationship with his children, but they are at an age where they are
      demanding and get upset if they do not have what they want.  The
      appellant claimed that the letter written by his daughter, in which
      she states that she has not had that good a relationship with her
      father, but would like to stay in contact, is written in those terms,
      because she was upset that he had not got her a phone.  The appellant
      was also referred to the addendum report completed by the independent
      social worker, in which the appellant is said to have informed the
      social worker that he has unsupervised contact with his children once
      a week at his home.  The appellant explained that he informed the
      social worker of the arrangements in place at that time, but the
      arrangements have subsequently changed.  He said that before 18th May
      2021 he had contact via a video call every week, with each of the
      children separately.  He does not know whether the foster carers were
      present during those contact sessions. The appellant confirmed that he
      does not speak to the children about their mother or how often they
      have contact with her. His focus is upon their schooling, education
      and well-being. He confirmed the children are doing well at school and
      other than S suffering from asthma, neither child has any health
      issues. The appellant said that if he is returned to India, he will
      try to continue his contact with the children, but he does not believe
      that contact will occur because of the time difference, and the
      children believing their father is so far away. He said the children
      may or may not talk to him.  The appellant confirmed that he has
      managed to continue contact with the children until now and that
      contact is going very well. They all live in the hope that they are
      going to see each other face-to-face.


The information from Leicester City Council


  16. At page 12 of the appellant's consolidated bundle, there is a letter
      dated 18th May 2021 from the allocated social worker employed by
      Leicester City Council.  Mr Sebit-Berridge confirms the children
      became subject to interim care orders on 21st May 2012 and full care
      orders on 18th February 2015. They have remained in the care of
      Leicester City Council since. The children's Care Plan is to reside in
      long-term foster care with their current foster carers. He confirms
      the children have regular supervised face to face contact with the
      appellant "which currently takes place monthly".  It is said that the
      frequency of the face-to-face contact between the appellant and his
      children can increase or decrease and that is dictated by the
      children's wishes and feelings, what is felt to be in their best
      interests at the time, and the children's care plans.  The social
      worker confirms that at its peak, the appellant had weekly face-to-
      face contact with his children during periods in 2019 and 2020 when
      assessments were conducted to assess the viability of returning the
      children to their father's full-time care. It was concluded that that
      was not in the best interests of the children and the frequency of
      contact subsequently reduced.  Insofar as the children's contact with
      their mother is concerned, Mr Sebit-Berridge states:


         "The children also have ongoing face-to-face contact with their
         mother which is very positive. As with [the appellant], the
         frequency of her contact with [S] and [T] can increase or decrease.
         Based on the children's wishes and feelings, what is felt to be in
         their best interests at the time and the children's care plans."


  17. In a subsequent email dated 7th June 2021 (page 13 of the consolidated
      bundle), Mr Sebit-Berridge states that in early 2021 the face-to-face
      contact changed to phone contact as a result of the country re-
      entering lockdowns. He states:


         "... Unfortunately issues arose during [the appellant's] separate
         phone contact with his children, which had a detrimental impact
         both children (sic), but his daughter in particular. As a result of
         this, face-to-face contact will be supervised, reduced to once a
         month, but will continue to take place separately.


         In relation to your second query, I am unsure what you are asking
         for clarification on. But as I set out in the letter I forwarded to
         you. (sic) The frequency, duration and type of contact that either
         parent has with their children depends on the children's wishes and
         feelings, and what is felt to be in their emotional best interests
         at the time. If issues and/or incidents arise during the contacts,
         which result in a detrimental impact on the children's emotional
         and mental well-being, then social care would consider whether
         adjustments need to be made, in the best interests of the children.


         Equally, if contact between the children and their parents had been
         particularly positive over a sustained period of time, and the
         children or one of the parents requested in (sic) increase and/or
         adjustment to the contact arrangements, then this would also be
         considered.."


The reports of the Independent Social Workers


  18. At pages 29 to 42 of the appellant's consolidated bundle, I have been
      provided with a report prepared by Angeline Seymour, an Independent
      Social Worker.  She met with the appellant on 8th August 2018 for two
      hours.  She refers to the appellant's account of his relationship with
      his children and the care that he provided whilst they lived together
      as a family unit.  He described himself as being the main carer for
      the children and referred to the diagnosis of depression made in
      respect of his partner, and the impact that had upon their family
      life.  Angeline Seymour refers to the limited contact the appellant
      had with the children following his release from prison.  She saw many
      photographs of the children with the appellant in which their body
      language was relaxed, and she noted many of the photographs involve
      the children hugging their father. She also had sight of several
      letters written by the children to the appellant.  She considered that
      although the contact was only for a limited amount of time, the
      interaction between the appellant and his children indicated to her
      that the appellant is a strong and meaningful person in their lives.
      She stated it is important to remember that children thrive in stable
      and nurturing environments where they have a routine and know what to
      expect. In her experience, major disruptions and changes affect
      children's stability and have a devastating impact on their mental
      health.  She concluded:


         "... From what I was informed and witnessed in photographs, [S] and
         [T] have an established relationship with their father. Given the
         evidence and research I have used in my assessment of the best
         interests of these children, in my opinion it would not be
         appropriate to disrupt their lives any further by their father
         being removed from the UK....


         Finally, in my experience as a mental health practitioner and on
         the basis of my assessment of the current immigration issues [the
         appellant] is currently experiencing, if this situation is not
         resolved in a positive way, his removal would lead to deterioration
         in the emotional well-being of [S] and [T].  I am of the view that
         the permanent removal of [the appellant] from his children's lives
         is likely to cause significant detriment to [S] and [T]."


  19. I have also been provided with an addendum report prepared by Alex
      Darko, a Social Work Consultant.  He met with the appellant on 18th
      May 2021, via a 'Zoom' video call.  In section 1 of his report,
      setting out the "current and up-to-date social circumstances", Alex
      Drako noted the children had been with their current foster carer for
      the past five years and said:


         ".... Of their birth parents, their mother sees them three times a
         year with [the appellant] being the regular and consistent parent
         who has worked hard to maintain contact arrangements agreed with
         the local authority.  [The appellant's] contact with the children
         has progressed from three times a year supervised contact to once a
         week unsupervised contact.


         When I met with [the appellant] on Tuesday 18.05.21, he advised me
         that he had unsupervised contact with his children once a week in
         his house. He picks them up from their foster placement in the
         morning and returns them in the evening.  Due to the national Covid
         locked down in March 2020, contact with the children changed to
         weekly indirect contact by video calls. This continued until
         October 2020. From October 2020 to December 2020 he resumed face-to-
         face contact with them. During this time, he was seeing the
         children in the town centre or at the park. Contact returned video
         calls from December to March 2021. [The appellant] did not see the
         children from March 2021 until 17th May 2021 due to a house and
         school move by the children and their foster parents. [The
         appellant] however saw them on 18 May 2021 for about 45 minutes
         when he attended the foster home to drop some presents for them. He
         then advised that he is now waiting for the new contact schedule
         from the local authority.


         [The appellant] confirmed that he has been working well with the
         local authority around his contact with the children. He remains
         the most consistent and attached parent to the children since they
         were taken into care. He remains available to them physically,
         emotionally and psychologically. Aside from contact, he is also
         involved in their childcare reviews, educational reviews, and any
         school meetings. The school also remains in contact with him to
         send in reports of their progress and anything that he needs to
         know about their education. He agrees and understands that he is
         not the first point of contact by the school and is happy with the
         level of communication between him and the foster carer."


  20. Alex Darko also sets out in the addendum report, the appellant's
      account of his relationship with his children and the activities that
      they engage in together. He states in his professional analysis that
      the appellant is committed to his children and has a strong desire to
      be part of their growing up.  It is said that the appellant's efforts
      need to be acknowledged as contributing to the children's development
      and progress and although he is not the primary caregiver, a lack of
      support and contribution can lead to negative outcomes for the
      children. Alex Darko notes that an assessment carried out regarding
      the possibility of returning the children to their father's care
      concluded that that was not in their best interests. However he is of
      the professional opinion that whatever decision is taken about the
      children's future, their father's involvement in their lives should
      not be discounted. It is said that the appellant's continuous stay in
      the UK should be an important consideration for the continuous
      stability of the children's emotional, mental and psychological well-
      being as well as their placement.  Alex Darko states:


         "[The appellant's] contact has progressed from three supervised
         visits a year to once a week unsupervised session.  This is an
         indication of the trust the local authority has in his ability to
         keep the children safe in his care. In continuing to have contact
         with the children is a demonstration of the children's wishes and
         willingness to see their father."


  21. Alex Darko acknowledges that he has been unable to see or interview
      the children for their comments, but it appears the children are very
      close to the appellant and treasure the time they spend together.  At
      section 3 of the report, Alex Darko refers to the concerns expressed
      by the appellant regarding the adverse impact his deportation may have
      on the children's development and mental health.  Alex Darko states:


         "[The appellant] describes himself as the main person within the
         family that his children are attached to. This allows them to
         freely relate and share their concerns without being worried about
         others. They are also confident that their father will always be
         there for them and will support them where needed. Attachment
         theory therefore provides the foundation for understanding
         objectively that a relationship with a significant adult is
         essential for healthy emotional and cognitive development for
         children and young people. Severing the children's attachment from
         their father through deportation, in my view, risk (sic) having a
         negative impact on the children's emotional health and cognitive
         development. In essence, various studies referred to in this report
         all highlight the importance of positive attachment figures in the
         emotional, mental and psychological development of young people.
         Based on this, I feel it is professional appropriately and, in the
         children's best interest to suggest that [the appellant] is made to
         remain the UK so he can continue to remain relevant in his
         children's life and development."


  22. In his final summary and conclusion, Alex Darko states:


         "From my interaction with [the appellant], I was able to observe
         the emotional and psychological stress that this present uncertain
         future is placing on him. My professional opinion is that if he is
         unable to remain in the UK I would expect his relationship with his
         children to suffer and its stabilising quality to decrease further.
         This shift in stability would then begin to interfere in the
         children's education, emotional development, stability of their
         placement, and social relationships as well as discipline problems.
         The children are likely to move from placement to placement due to
         emotional and behavioural challenges. Currently the local authority
         is considering separating the children during contact with their
         father due to their behaviour in their foster placement post
         contact. This behaviour is likely to escalate should the (sic) lose
         contact with their father through deportation.


         [The appellant's] presence in the UK supports the children to
         understand their cultural background and religious beliefs. His
         presence and contact with the children will help them to develop
         their sense of identity and belonging which is helpful for them in
         their life story/personal narrative considering their mother is
         mostly absent. Studies have shown that developing a positive
         personal identity and sense of personal history is associated with
         high self-esteem and emotional well-being.... Listening to [the
         appellant] I could infer that he is the main contact for the
         children in truly connecting to their family, heritage and
         religious belief. [The appellant] is and will continue to play a
         vital role in this very important part of the children's life and
         story. The life story work involving their father will help them to
         make sense of their family history and life outside the care
         system."


Other evidence


  23. I have been provided with a copy of a manuscript letter said to have
      been written and signed by the appellant's daughter, S.  She states;
      "... I know I have not had that good relationship with my dad, but I
      would like to still stay in contact. Also when I'm 18 I would like to
      go to my dad's house and be close to him, because I have not been with
      him for most of my life. I think it would be easier for me and my
      brother...".


  24. Finally, I have a letter from Raj Manvinder Singh, President of the
      Guru Tegh Bahadur Gurudwara, Leicester, confirming the appellant is a
      regular worshipper and does voluntary work at the Gurudwara.  He
      considers the appellant to be an honest, reliable and trustworthy
      individual.  I also have a number of photographs of the appellant with
      others and undertaking voluntary work.


  25. I heard submissions from both Mr Travelyan and Mr Bates that are set
      out in my record of proceedings and which I have carefully considered.
       I have also had regard to the skeleton argument settled by Mr
      Travelyan dated 24th May 2021.


  26. I have only heard evidence from the appellant.  Neither Angeline
      Seymore nor Alex Darko was called to give evidence and the opinions
      they set out have not been tested in cross-examination.  Equally,
      there has been no attempt to call the children's allocated social
      worker to give evidence and the information that I have before me
      regarding the proceedings before the Family Court is extremely
      limited.  There has been no attempt to seek the permission of the
      Family Court for the Care Plans to be disclosed.  It is of course
      entirely impractical for me to refer in this decision to all the
      evidence that is set out in the bundles before me.  I do however make
      it clear that in reaching my decision I have had regard to all of the
      evidence whether that evidence is expressly referred to or not, in
      this decision.


The Legal Framework


27. The Immigration Rules set out the approach to be followed by the
    Secretary of State where a foreign criminal liable to deportation
    claims that the deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 ECHR.  So far as relevant to this appeal,
    the immigration rules state:


         Deportation and Article 8

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and

             ...

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because, in the
             view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in
             assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or
             399A applies and, if it does not, the public interest in
             deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

        399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
      if -

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
             the UK, and

                (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
                the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

             ...

28. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
    Act") also informs the decision making. Section 117A in Part 5A
    provides that, when a court or tribunal is required to determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's
    right to respect for private and family life under Article 8, and, as a
    result, would be unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998, the court,
    in considering the public interest question, must (in particular) have
    regard to the considerations listed in section 117B and, additionally,
    in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
    considerations listed in section 117C.  So far as is material to this
    appeal, the following provisions set out in s117C are relevant:


         "Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.



         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
         most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
         Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2

         (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."

  29. As I have said before, the issue in this appeal is whether the effect
      of the appellant's deportation on his children would be unduly harsh.
      In his skeleton argument, Mr Trevelyan draws my attention to the
      guidance given by the Court of Appeal in TD (Albania) v SSHD [2021]
      EWCA Civ 619.





Findings and conclusions


  30. The respondent accepts the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
      parental relationship with his children, albeit they are the subject
      of Care Orders.  It is accepted by the appellant that the children
      remain in foster care and that the Care Plan is that the children will
      continue to remain in foster care.  I accept that the appellant
      maintains contact with the children.    I also accept that the love
      and care the appellant expresses towards his children is genuine.


The best interests of the children


  31. S55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires the
      respondent to make arrangements for ensuring that her functions in
      relation to immigration, asylum or nationality are discharged having
      regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
      who are in the UK.  The children are both British citizens and have
      been placed in the care of Leicester City Council.  The respondent
      accepts, and I find it is in the best interests of the children that
      they remain in the UK.  Here, the children are living with foster
      carers who provide for their day-to-day care and there are constraints
      upon the extent to which the parents are able to maintain contact with
      the children, because the children will remain in foster care and the
      contact arrangements are managed by the local authority.  I
      acknowledge the views expressed by S that she would like to stay in
      contact with her father and that when she reaches the age of 18, she
      would like to go to her father's house and be close to him.  The
      appellant informed Alex Darko that his children have expressed wanting
      to travel with him to India one day, to meet with the appellant's
      mother.  They have video calls with her when they visit the appellant.
       He also said the children want to visit the many interesting sights
      they have heard about in India.  I have no doubt that both children
      have an affectionate relationship with their father and that they
      would wish to maintain contact with him.  They have been able to
      maintain contact remotely during the recent pandemic and manage to
      maintain contact with their paternal grandmother through video calls.
      There can be no doubt that it is in the best interests of children to
      continue to have a good and stable relationship with both their
      parents.  This is a primary consideration although it is not the
      primary consideration and can be outweighed by other factors; ZH
      (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 11.


The contact arrangements


  32. I have already referred to the evidence of the appellant and
      independent social workers.  Neither Angeline Seymore nor Alex Darko
      have witnessed the appellant's interaction with the children.
      Equally, neither of them has spoken to the foster carers to get
      further background information regarding the appellant's relationship
      with the children or how they present both before, and after contact.
      Neither appears to have spoken to the children's allocated social
      worker to gain any independent insight into the arrangements for
      contact or to consider the accuracy of the information provided by the
      appellant.  They each rely in large measure upon the appellant's
      account of his relationship with the children, his account of the
      contact that he has, and his account of the children's contact with
      their mother.  That inevitably impacts upon the wight I attach to
      their evidence.


  33. In section 1 of his report, Alex Darko states the appellant informed
      him that he has unsupervised contact with his children once a week, in
      his house.  He said that he picks them up from their foster placement
      in the morning and returns them in the evening.  He also notes the
      appellant did not see the children from Mach 2021 until 17th May 2021
      due to a house and school move by the children and their foster
      parents.  He was told the appellant saw the children on 18th May 2021
      for about 45 minutes when he attended the foster home to drop some
      presents for them.  He was told that the appellant is waiting for a
      new contact schedule from the local authority.  The information
      provided by the appellant to Alex Darko regarding his contact is at
      odds with the information set out in the letter from the childrens'
      allocated social worker.  In his letter dated 18th May 2021, (the same
      date upon which the appellant spoke to Alex Darko and upon which the
      appellant signed his witness statement), Mr Sebit-Berridge states that
      the children "have regular supervised face-to-face contact with their
      father, [the appellant] which currently takes place monthly...". It is
      said in that letter that the frequency of face-to-face contact can
      increase or decrease, and the arrangements are dictated, inter alia,
      by the children's wishes and feelings.  In his oral evidence before
      me, the appellant claimed the information provided to Alex Darko was
      based upon the arrangements in place as at the date of their meeting.
      I reject his explanation.  Alex Darko states that he was told by the
      appellant that he saw the children on 18th May 2021 for about 45
      minutes.  In his oral evidence before me, the appellant said that he
      last saw the children on 19th May 2021.  Whatever the date of the most
      recent contact, the contact arrangements must have been planned in
      advance and in my judgment, it must have been obvious to the appellant
      by 18th May 2021 that the arrangements are, as set out in the letter
      from the allocated social worker of that date, that the appellant has
      supervised face-to-face contact with the children which takes place
      monthly.  Contrary to what the appellant told Alex Darko; the contact
      is supervised.  Furthermore, it must have been obvious to the
      appellant by 18th May 2021 that the arrangement was not that he has
      unsupervised contact "in his house".  It must also have been obvious
      to him that the arrangement was not that he would pick up the children
      from their foster placement in the morning and return them in the
      evening.  I find the appellant exaggerated the extent of, and the
      arrangements for, his contact with the children when he provided
      information to Alex Darko.  In section 1 of his report, Alex Darko
      refers to the appellant's contact having progressed from three
      supervised visits a year to once a week, unsupervised.  Alex Darko
      considered that to be an indication of the trust the local authority
      has in the appellant's ability to keep the children safe in his care,
      and also a demonstration of the children's wishes and willingness to
      see their father.  Alex Darko also refers to the appellant as a safe,
      consistent and significant adult in the life of the children.  That
      view is expressed in a paragraph in which he records being told by the
      appellant that he is a very protective father and that is a reason why
      the local authority trusts him and allows him to have unsupervised
      contact with his children. He was told by the appellant that the local
      authority has given the appellant responsibility to pick up and drop
      off the children for contact.  The inaccurate information provided by
      the appellant has impacted upon the conclusions reached by Alex Darko
      and impacts upon the weight that I attach to his overall conclusions.


  34. In my judgment, the appellant has also sought to marginalise the
      extent of the children's contact with their mother. In his witness
      statement the appellant claims the children have contact with their
      mother three times a year.  Alex Darko proceeds upon the premise that
      of the birth parents, it is the appellant who has been the regular and
      consistent parent who has worked hard to maintain contact through
      arrangements agreed with the local authority. The appellant described
      himself to Alex Darko as the main person within the family that his
      children are attached to.  The appellant's description of the
      children's relationship and contact with their mother, is, I find,
      inconsistent with what is said by the allocated social worker in his
      letter dated 18 May 2021. He states:


         "The children also have ongoing face-to-face contact with the
         mother which is very positive. As with [the appellant], the
         frequency of her contact with [S] and [T] can increase or decrease"


  35. I reject the submission made by Mr Trevelyan that there is no
      inconsistency between what is said by the appellant and the allocated
      social worker because it is perfectly possible to describe contact
      that occurs three times a year, as "on-going face to face contact".
      If the contact was limited in the way described by the appellant, in
      my judgement, it would not have been described by the allocated social
      worker as "ongoing face to face contact with their mother which is
      very positive".  There is no suggestion in the letter, or the
      subsequent email provided by the allocated social worker that the
      contact between the children and their mother is  'supervised' or
      limited.  In fact, the frequency of both parents contact can increase
      or decrease based upon the wishes and feelings of the children and
      what is felt to be in their best interests at any relevant point. The
      allocated social worker describes the children's contact with their
      mother as "very positive", but in his subsequent email refers to
      issues regarding the appellant's separate phone contact with his
      children, which appears to have had a detrimental impact upon both
      children, and in particular, the appellant's daughter. Unlike their
      'very positive' contact with their mother, it appears to be for that
      reason that the appellant's face-to-face contact is supervised and has
      been reduced to once a month.  Again, in my judgment, the inaccurate
      information provided by the appellant regarding the childrens' contact
      with their mother and the extent of her relationship with them has
      impacted upon the conclusions reached by Alex Darko and impacts upon
      the weight that I attach to his overall conclusions.


  36. Having carefully considered the evidence before me, I am satisfied
      that there is a close bond between the appellant and each of his
      children. That is plainly apparent from the way in which the appellant
      described his relationship to the social workers.  I am also satisfied
      that the children enjoy a positive relationship with their mother.  I
      am quite satisfied that the appellant does his best to provide
      emotional and physical support whenever he is able to do so, within
      the constraints of the current Care Plans and the arrangements for
      contact.


  37. The deportation of the appellant will clearly have an impact upon
      those arrangements.  Alex Darko refers to the appellant saying that
      his children are living in fear and worry of the unknown as to what
      will happen to them should he be deported. He expresses the opinion
      that living in a heightened state of anxiety and nervousness is not
      good for the emotional and mental well-being of the children as
      children suffering from anxiety problems can go on to exhibit further
      behavioural problems, and issues that can follow them into their adult
      lives.  Other than what is said by the appellant, who I find has
      sought to exaggerate his claims, there is no evidence before me that
      the children are suffering from anxiety.  The letter written by S does
      not give the impression that the children are living in fear and worry
      of the unknown.  Equally there is nothing in the evidence before me
      that even begins to suggest that the children are exhibiting serious
      behavioural problems or exhibiting signs of mental health problems
      that may require intervention.


  38. Alex Darko concludes that the appellant's presence in the UK supports
      the children to understand their cultural background, and religious
      beliefs.  It is said that the appellant's presence in contact with the
      children will help them to develop their sense of identity and
      belonging which is helpful for them in their life story and personal
      narrative, considering their mother is mostly absent.  That again, in
      my judgement, fails to have regard to the positive contact that is
      enjoyed by the children and their mother and fails to appreciate the
      support she also provides.


  39. In reaching my decision I have regard to all the evidence before me
      and carried out an evaluative assessment of whether the effect of the
      appellant's deportation on the children would be unduly harsh in the
      context of the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign
      criminals. Here, the appellants children have the benefit of the
      stability provided by their foster carers.  In my judgement the
      children have a support network that will be able to assist during any
      initial transitional phase following removal of the appellant. I am
      quite satisfied that the help and support the children currently
      receive from their foster carers and the Local Authority will continue
      and they will receive the support required to maintain contact
      remotely, as they have for a period of several months in the recent
      past.  The appellant will be able to promote the contact that the
      children have with his family and in particular their paternal
      grandmother, by video calls.


  40. I must take into account the Article 8 rights of the appellant, his
      children and the public interest in deportation as expressed in the
      immigration rules and s117C of the 2002 Act.  I have carefully
      considered whether there is anything within the evidence and in
      particular, the reports of the independent social workers, that
      establishes that the effect of the appellant's deportation on his
      children would be unduly harsh, reminding myself that it is an
      elevated threshold denoting something severe or bleak to be evaluated
      exclusively from the effect on the child.  Having carefully considered
      the evidence, in my judgment there simply is not the evidence on which
      I can properly conclude that the threshold is met.  The appellant's
      children might well initially feel a sense of loss because of their
      relationship with the appellant. The consequences of the appellant's
      deportation might just be described as harsh, but the 'commonplace'
      distress caused by separation from a parent is insufficient to meet
      the test.  The appellant's children will continue to receive the love,
      care and support that they need from their current foster carers and
      the support network they have in the United Kingdom.  They will be
      able to continue contact, albeit remotely, with the appellant and they
      will continue to benefit from the positive contact they enjoy with
      this mother.  In the fullness of time, there will be nothing
      preventing the children from travelling to India to visit their
      father.


  41. I accept that reliance upon modern means of communication is no
      substitute for physical presence and face-to-face contact. However, I
      do not accept that in the event of the appellant's deportation,
      contact between the appellant and his children would not be possible
      or will end as the appellant claims in his evidence, albeit it is
      unlikely to be physical contact.  It would in my judgement be entirely
      possible for the appellant to maintain contact with his children via
      regular communication.  In the end, looking at the evidence in the
      round, in my judgment the evidence simply does not provide a basis
      upon which the appellant can establish Exception 2 under s.117C(5) of
      the 2002 Act and paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules.


  42. In NA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Lord Justice Jackson
      held that the fall back protection set out in s117C(6) also avails
      those who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2 and that on a proper
      construction of section 117C(3), the public interest requires the
      person's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies or
      unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
      described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  Mr Trevelyan, quite properly in my
      judgment, accepts that if the appellant cannot avail himself of
      Exception 2, he could not realistically establish that there are "very
      compelling circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions
      1 and 2.  He acknowledges that "very compelling circumstances" is a
      demanding test.   I have already referred to the judge's sentencing
      remarks and although the appellant entered a guilty plea, he
      nevertheless maintains he did not sexually assault his partner.  I
      accept the appellant has not had any further convictions.


  43. The best interests of the appellant's children certainly carry weight
      but nevertheless, it is a consequence of criminal conduct that an
      offender may be separated from their children for many years, contrary
      to the best interests of the child.  The desirability of children
      being with both parents is a commonplace of family life. That is not
      usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh the high
      public interest in deporting foreign criminals. As Rafferty LJ
      observed in SSHD -v- CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:


           "Neither the British nationality of the respondent's children
           nor their likely separation from their father for a long time
           are exceptional circumstances which outweigh the public interest
           in his deportation."

  44. I acknowledge that the public interest in the deportation of a foreign
      criminal is not set in stone and must be approached flexibly,
      recognising that there will be cases where the person's circumstances
      outweigh the strong public interest in removal.  I have had regard,
      inter alia, to the appellant's length of residence in the UK, the
      close ties that he retains with his cousin and his partner, and the
      contribution that the appellant has made to the community from his
      voluntary work.  I have also had regard to the appellant's immigration
      history, and the family circumstances described in the report of the
      independent social worker.  However, there are in my judgment no very
      compelling circumstances which make his claim based on Article 8
      especially strong.


  45. In my final analysis, I find the appellant's and his children's'
      protected rights, whether considered collectively or individually, are
      not in my judgement such as to outweigh the public interest in the
      appellant's deportation.  It follows that in my judgement, the
      deportation of the appellant is in the public interest and not
      disproportionate to the legitimate aim.


  46. I dismiss the appeal.





Decision


  47. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date     30th June 2021

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

