
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)       Appeal Number: HU/14605/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 17 March 2021                     |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |                                     |
|On 25 February 2021                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 olha nosata
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright instructed by Sterling & Law
Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine who was born on 3 February  1968.



 2. On 1 July 2015, the appellant applied for entry clearance as a  visitor
    which was refused on 17 July 2015.

 3. On 2 September 2015, the appellant entered the UK unlawfully.  She  did
    so in order to join her daughter ("D") who had come to the  UK  shortly
    before  in  order  to  study  and  was  living  with  her  father  (the
    appellant's ex-husband) and her brother (the appellant's  son)  in  the
    UK.  D was born on  21  January  2003  and  so,  at  the  time  of  the
    appellant's entry to the UK, was 12 years old.

 4. On 3 December 2018, the appellant was arrested and granted bail.

 5. On 5 February 2019, the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain based upon her private and family life under Art 8 of the  ECHR.
    The  appellant  relied  principally  upon  her  relationship  with  her
    daughter, D, who was in full-time education and  who  had  leave  valid
    until 27 May 2021.

 6. On 12 August 2019, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for leave both under the Rules (the requirements  of  which
    it is not now suggested she could meet) and under  Art  8  outside  the
    Rules.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 21 January 2020, Judge Stedman  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.
    The judge found that the appellant's removal, having regard to D's best
    interests, would be proportionate and that her private and family  life
    was outweighed by the public interest in effective immigration control.



 8. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Keane) on 18 May 2020.

 9. Following directions issued by the UT on 23 June  2020,  the  appellant
    filed submissions in response as did the respondent.

10. The appeal was listed for an oral hearing at the Cardiff Civil  Justice
    Centre to be heard remotely on 25 February 2021.  The court sat working
    remotely and Mr  Plowright,  who  represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr
    Howells, who represented the Secretary of  State,  joined  the  hearing
    remotely by Skype for Business.

The Appellant's Challenge

11. The appellant's grounds and written submissions rely upon three grounds
    which Mr Plowright developed in his oral submissions.

12. First, it is contended that the judge erred in law, when assessing  D's
    best interests, when at paras 42 and 43 of his determination he  stated
    that given that D is now 17 years old, she would naturally be "far less
    reliant on her mother emotionally than might have been the case two  or
    three years  ago".   Mr  Plowright  submitted  that  this  finding  was
    irrational and not based upon any evidence.  The judge,  he  submitted,
    gave undue weight to D being 17 years old rather than a younger age.

13. Secondly, the judge erred in law in finding, in para 48 in stating that
    D's best interests were not "significantly reduced or  compromised"  by
    her mother returning to Ukraine.  Mr Plowright submitted that that  was
    improper reasoning and a perverse conclusion given that the appellant's
    mother had entered the UK a month after D had done so to study  in  the
    UK.  The judge had been wrong to take into account that,  if  being  in
    the UK with her mother was not in D's best  interests,  she  would  not
    have come to the UK to live with her father  knowing  that  her  mother
    might possibly not be able to enter the UK.

14. Thirdly, it is contended that the judge erred in law by failing to give
    primary consideration to D's  best  interests  which  were  undoubtedly
    served by her mother remaining in the UK.  Reliance is  placed  upon  a
    passage in Lord Kerr's judgment in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC  4
    at [46] that where a child's best interests clearly  favour  a  certain
    course, that would ordinarily dictate the  outcome  of  a  case  unless
    there were countervailing reasons of  considerable  force  to  displace
    them.

Discussion

15. The background to this appeal is no longer in dispute.   The  appellant
    and her husband divorced in 2011.  He moved to the UK  at  some  point.
    D, the appellant's daughter, lived with the appellant in  Ukraine.   In
    2015 the appellant's  daughter,  D,  came  to  the  UK  to  study.  She
    travelled here with her father.   She was 12 years of age.   She  lived
    with her father and older brother, in the UK.  The appellant  attempted
    to come to the UK to live in accommodation provided by  her  ex-husband
    with D (and her brother) in  order  to  support  D  while  she  was  in
    education in the UK.  The appellant sought  to  do  this  initially  by
    seeking entry clearance as a visitor.  In that regard, the judge found,
    and it is not now contested, she  provided  false  information  in  her
    application, namely that she did not have family in the UK (whereas her
    son was already here) and she provided false documents as  regards  her
    employment in Ukraine.  All this transpired prior to D coming to the UK
    in the summer of 2015.  Having  been  refused  entry  clearance,  on  2
    September 2015, the appellant entered the UK unlawfully.  She  remained
    here, without the knowledge of the immigration authorities,  until  she
    was arrested on 3 December 2018.  She made no attempt to regularise her
    status in the UK  until  some  two  months  later  when  she  made  the
    application for leave to remain under Art 8, the refusal  of  which  is
    the subject of this appeal.

16. The judge concluded that the appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules, in particular  para  276ADE(1)(vi).   That  finding,
    that there were not "very significant  obstacles"  to  the  appellant's
    integration on return to Ukraine, is not now challenged.

17. The bulk of the judgment concerns Art  8  outside  the  Rules  and,  in
    particular, the circumstances of D and her best interests.

18. At paras 20-26, the judge set out the legal framework to be applied  in
    considering Art 8 outside the Rules.  In particular, at  para  24,  the
    judge cited ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 noting that
    D's best interests were a "primary consideration" but not necessarily a
    "trump card".  A child's best interests  could  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other considerations but  no  other  consideration
    could be treated as inherently more significant.  That is undoubtedly a
    correct  self-direction  in  accordance  with  the   well-known   legal
    principles applicable in this area and  summarised  by  Lord  Hodge  in
    Zoumbas at [10] as follows:
         "10. In their written case counsel for Mr  Zoumbas set  out  legal
         principles which were relevant in this case and which they  derived
         from three decisions of this court, namely ZH (Tanzania) (above), H
         v Lord Advocate 2012 SC (UKSC) 308 and H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor of
         the Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC 338. Those principles are not  in
         doubt and Ms Drummond on behalf of the Secretary of State  did  not
         challenge them. We paraphrase them as follows:
                    (1) The best interests of a child are an integral  part
                    of the proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
                    (2) In making that assessment, the best interests of  a
                    child must be a  primary  consideration,  although  not
                    always the only primary consideration; and the  child's
                    best interests do not of themselves have the status  of
                    the paramount consideration;
                    (3) Although the best  interests  of  a  child  can  be
                    outweighed  by   the   cumulative   effect   of   other
                    considerations, no other consideration can  be  treated
                    as inherently more significant;
                    (4) While different judges might approach the  question
                    of the best interests of a child in different ways,  it
                    is important to ask oneself the right questions  in  an
                    orderly manner in order to avoid the risk that the best
                    interests of a child might be  undervalued  when  other
                    important considerations were in play;
                    (5) It is important to have a clear idea of  a  child's
                    circumstances  and  of  what  is  in  a  child's   best
                    interests  before  one  asks  oneself   whether   those
                    interests  are  outweighed  by  the  force   of   other
                    considerations;
                    (6) To that end there is no substitute  for  a  careful
                    examination of all relevant factors when the  interests
                    of a child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and
                    (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he
                    or she is not responsible, such as  the  conduct  of  a
                    parent."

19. At [13], Lord Hodge offered further comments on the seven principles:

         "...  First,  the  decision-maker  is  required   to   assess   the
         proportionality of the interference with private and family life in
         the particular circumstances in which the  decision  is  made.  The
         evaluative exercise in assessing the proportionality of  a  measure
         under article 8 ECHR excludes any "hard-edged or  bright-line  rule
         to be applied to the generality of cases": EB (Kosovo) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2009] AC 1159, per Lord Bingham
         at para 12. Secondly, as Lord Mance pointed out in H(H) (at  para
         98) the decision-maker must evaluate the child's best interests and
         in some cases they may point only marginally in  one,  rather  than
         another, direction. Thirdly, as the  case  of H(H) shows  in  the
         context of extradition, there may be  circumstances  in  which  the
         weight of another primary consideration can  tip  the  balance  and
         make the interference proportionate even where it has  very  severe
         consequences for children.  In  that  case  an  Italian  prosecutor
         issued a European arrest warrant seeking the surrender of a  person
         who had earlier broken his bail conditions  by  leaving  Italy  and
         ultimately seeking safe haven in the United Kingdom  and  had  been
         convicted of very serious crimes. This court held that  the  treaty
         obligations of the United Kingdom to extradite him  prevailed  over
         his children's best interests. The third principle in para 10 above
         is  subject  to  the  first  and  second  qualifications  and  may,
         depending on the circumstances, be subject to the third. But in our
         view, it is not likely that a court would reach in the  context  of
         an immigration decision what Lord Wilson described in H(H) (at para
         172) as  the  "firm  if  bleak"  conclusion  in  that  case,  which
         separated young children from their parents."

20. In relation to a submission (which  mirrors  Ground  3  in  this  case)
    relying on Lord Kerr's comment in [46] of ZH(Tanzania), Lord Hodge  (at
    [12]) rejected that submission and explained that what Lord  Kerr  said
    was in the context of British citizen children:

         "[Counsel for Mr Zoumbas]  also  founded  on  a  statement  in  the
         judgment of Lord Kerr of Tonaghmore in ZH (Tanzania) at para 46 in
         support of the proposition that what  is  determined  to  be  in  a
         child's best interests should customarily dictate  the  outcome  of
         cases and that it will require considerations of substantial moment
         to permit a different result. In our view, it is important to  note
         that Lord Kerr's formulation spoke  of  dictating  the  outcome  of
         cases "such as the present" and that in ZH (Tanzania) the court was
         dealing with children who were British citizens. In that  case  the
         children by virtue of their nationality had  significant  benefits,
         including a right of abode  and  rights  to  future  education  and
         healthcare in this country, which the children  in  this  case,  as
         citizens of the Republic of Congo, do not. The benefits of  British
         citizenship are an important factor  in  assessing  whether  it  is
         reasonable to expect a child  with  such  citizenship  to  live  in
         another country. Moreover in H(H) Lord Kerr explained (at para 145)
         that what he was seeking to say was that no factor should be  given
         greater weight than  the  interests  of  a  child.  See  the  third
         principle above."

21. Turning again to the present appeal, the judge heard oral evidence from
    both the appellant and D.  Her father did not give evidence as  he  was
    away in Ukraine.  It is difficult to do justice, by way of  a  summary,
    to the judge's very full reasoning.

22. The judge accepted that D enjoyed family life with both  the  appellant
    and her father (see para 33).  The judge noted that D had come  to  the
    UK knowing that her mother (the appellant) had not been  granted  entry
    clearance to come to the UK and that she lived with her father who had,
    at that time, been responsible for her "well-being and care"  and  also
    "financially responsible".  It is D's father who has "always maintained
    and accommodated his daughter".

23. At several points, the judge accepted that the appellant and D enjoy  a
    "close relationship" (see paras 34, 38, 43 and 53).  Also,  she  has  a
    close relationship with her older brother, although the judge  did  not
    accept that this amounted to family life for the purposes of Art 8 (see
    paras  34  and  39).   In  addition,  the  judge  recognised  that  D's
    relationship with her father was "one which is strained,  and  in  some
    ways difficult" (see para 34).  Nevertheless, the judge noted that  D's
    father provided D with a home and, indeed, a  home  for  the  appellant
    since she came to the UK.  He pays a substantial  amount  of  rent  per
    month and is solely financially responsible for D (see para  35).   The
    judge recognised that, despite the appellant's divorce, her  ex-husband
    (D's father) was committed to his family especially his  daughter  (see
    para 36).  The judge did not accept the appellant's evidence that there
    was an "inferior or deficient relationship" between D  and  her  father
    even if, as he had already  accepted,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    relationship was "strained and was not as close in emotional  terms  as
    it might have been".  It was, nevertheless, a  relationship  which  has
    resulted in D's father supporting both D and the appellant for a number
    of years (see para 37).

24. At para 39, the judge noted that whilst accepting  that  the  appellant
    and D enjoyed a  close  and  loving  relationship,  it  was  "simply  a
    statement of fact that, like many parents, the appellant was willing to
    sacrifice being away from her daughter for a higher purpose".  That  is
    a reference to the  fact  that  the  appellant  did  not  obtain  entry
    clearance to come to the UK to accompany D but  that,  nevertheless,  D
    came to the UK to study.

25. I will set out in full paras  40-49  where  the  judge  considered  the
    relationship  between  the  appellant  and  D  and  the  latter's  best
    interests.  Both  Grounds  1  and  2  challenge  some  of  the  judge's
    reasoning in this section of his judgment: at paras  42-43  (Ground  1)
    and para 48 (Ground 2).  At paras 40-49, the judge said this:

         "40. I next  turn  to  the  heart  of  the  appeal,  which  is  the
             relationship between the appellant and her  daughter  and  the
             inevitable impact that would have on  them  if  the  appellant
             were removed, as  well  as  the  rights  of  [D]  to  enjoy  a
             relationship with her mother in terms of her  best  interests,
             and as a free-standing right under the Charter.   I  can  deal
             with each aspect holistically and, as in all such cases,  much
             depends on a fact specific analysis (which [is] why I have set
             out hopefully  with  some  clarity  the  facts  which  I  have
             accepted).

         41.  I find that [D] who will be 17 years of age at the date of the
             promulgation of this decision, has  a  relationship  with  her
             mother and  father  in  terms  of  normal  family  life.   The
             relationship may well be of a different nature and  one  which
             is closer with her mother, but I must have regard to the  fact
             that she has been living with her father for four and  a  half
             years without any major difficulties.

         42.  I also find it significant that [D] was at a young age of just
             12 able to travel to the UK to live with  her  father  and  be
             away from her mother for the purposes of her education, and at
             an  age  where  she  would  have  needed  far  more  care  and
             supervision [than]  she  currently  requires.   While  [D]  is
             closer  to  her  mother  and  I  am  sure  enjoys   a   loving
             relationship with her, I have to  have regard to her  age  now
             at 17 where she will naturally be  far  less  reliant  on  her
             mother emotionally than might have been the case even  two  or
             three years ago.

         43.  I accept that [D] is still a child and  needs  to  maintain  a
             close relationship with  her  mother  but  they  will  not  be
             comparable to a child of say 12 or 13  as  she  was  when  she
             arrived here.  The appellant has been here for  her  over  the
             years and I do not agree that there were any  specific  issues
             with [D] - for  example  from  a  physical  or  mental  health
             perspective - that made her  more  in  need  of  emotional  or
             physical support, or in any way made her  vulnerable  or  more
             dependent or reliant on her mother, compared to another  child
             of a similar age.

         44.  Neither was there sufficient evidence to suggest that [D]  was
             going through a particularly  difficult  time.   I  appreciate
             that she went to her GP  on  18  December  2018  feeling  very
             stressed because of the possibility of her mother leaving  the
             UK, but I have only a summary of  the  consultation  and  from
             that I can see she has not been referred  for  counselling  or
             told that she had anxiety  or  depression  or  prescribed  any
             medication.  I noted that her concern as she related to the GP
             was about the potential impact that her mother leaving the  UK
             would have on her ability to take exams.  I did not  find  the
             GP entry as indicative of any serious concerns as to her well-
             being.  It was natural that she should feel stressed.   Stress
             and family problems  are  unfortunately  part  and  parcel  of
             everyday  life  for  many  people.   There  was  nothing  that
             highlighted any particular or more  acute  concerns;  no  red-
             flags.

         45.  I found [D] to be a credible witness.  She was able to express
             her views and was clearly independent in  her  thoughts.   She
             was adamant for example and I found this very important to the
             decision I finally reach, that she was not prepared to  return
             to Ukraine and wished to complete her studies in  the  UK.   I
             took from that that she was able  to  contemplate  her  mother
             returning and, as much as she would prefer to have her present
             and close in her life (i.e. living in the same house) that she
             was not prepared to compromise her (sic) to continue with  her
             studies to which she was clearly committed.

         46.  [D] did not express in her evidence any cogent reasons why she
             would not be able to  continue  living  with  her  father  and
             brother who were  financially  supporting  her.   I  found  it
             important in my assessment to know that she was close  to  her
             brother and that he would  provide  her  with  some  emotional
             support  and  even  financial   support   as   she   required.
             Essentially, what [D] told me was that her best interests were
             satisfied by her staying in the UK for  the  duration  of  her
             leave, and to continue with her  studies,  and  that  was  not
             something that she was willing to jeopardise  by  leaving  the
             UK, even if it meant being apart from her mother.

         47.  Ultimately, a choice had to be made by [D's] parents a  number
             of years ago that she would come to the UK and  continue  with
             her studies.  That decision was confirmed by  [D]  whose  best
             interests I accept are to continue with her studies.  It  will
             always be preferable to do that with both parents here, but  I
             must look at the specific facts and the person  that  [D]  is,
             and her ability to remain with her father.  I also acknowledge
             that she would be able to visit Ukraine and has done so  since
             being here.  There is a property which the appellant can go to
             and [D] can visit her there.  The relationship  therefore  can
             continue in person to some  degree  and  of  course  over  the
             internet with video and phone calls.

         48.  I cannot say  that  [D's]  best  interests  are  significantly
             reduced or compromised by her mother being  in  Ukraine.   Had
             that been the case she would not have come to  stay  with  her
             father  knowing  that   her   mother   would   possibly   have
             difficulties or delays in coming here.  [D]  can  continue  to
             enjoy her family life with her father and with her brother  in
             the UK.  She has enjoyed a  personal  relationship  with  both
             parents for a number of years and she is  now  just  one  year
             away from adulthood.

             ....

         49.  Looking at the evidence as a whole, I simply  cannot  conclude
             that the rights of [D] will be breached by  reference  to  the
             Charter as a discrete right, or that in terms  of  section  55
             her best interests which are a primary consideration outweighs
             in this  case  the  public  interest  to  which  I  must  give
             significant weight looking at the specific facts of  the  case
             as they pertain  to  her  relationship  with  her  mother.   I
             therefore dismiss this aspect of the appeal".

26. Mr Plowright first contends that the judge's reasoning in paras 42  and
    43 was perverse or irrational in taking into account that D's emotional
    reliance upon her mother would be less at the age of 17 than  it  would
    have been two or three years ago, i.e. when she first came to  the  UK.
    That submission is, in my judgment, without merit.  The judge  was  not
    required to leave his own common sense at the door  of  the  courtroom.
    As a matter of common sense, the reliance of a  12  year  old  daughter
    upon her mother is likely to be much greater than that  of  a  17  year
    old.  The judge does not say that D is not emotionally reliant upon the
    appellant.   Indeed,  he  recognised  on  numerous  occasions  in   his
    determination that there is a "close and loving" relationship between D
    and the appellant.  What would have been wrong  for  the  judge  to  do
    would be to have applied that  view  without  regard  to  D's  specific
    circumstances.  But, as is plainly clear from the detailed  reasons  he
    gave in his judgment, he did not fall into that error.   He  considered
    D's situation as a whole.  There were no specific issues as regards D's
    physical or mental health (see para 43).  D also had the support  (both
    emotional and financial) of her father with whom  she  had  also  lived
    since coming to the UK as a 12 year old.  There was, in  addition,  D's
    brother whom the judge found had, himself, a close relationship with  D
    and could provide emotional support, and if necessary,  also  financial
    support.  Although, the latter was, on the evidence before  the  judge,
    provided by D's father.  The judge recognised that it was in  D's  best
    interests to continue her studies in  the  UK  and  that  it  would  be
    "preferable"  to  do  so  with  both   parents   here.    Reading   the
    determination as a whole, it is plain that the judge  took  fully  into
    account the circumstances of D  including  her  relationship  with  her
    mother, her father and brother and what impact her mother  leaving  the
    UK would have upon D.  I do not accept that the judge erred in  law  by
    giving  improper  weight  to  D's  circumstances  now  based  upon   an
    impermissible comparison with her needs (and reliance upon her  mother)
    as a 12 year old child.  I, therefore, reject Ground 1.

27. Ground 2 contends that the judge improperly reasoned and/or  reached  a
    perverse conclusion when in para 48 he said that he could not say  that
    D's best interests were "significantly reduced or  compromised  by  her
    mother being in Ukraine".

28. That statement has to be seen in context, namely the judge's assessment
    of the support which would be provided by D's father and her brother in
    the UK.  It also had to be seen in the context  of  D's  own  evidence,
    which the judge summarised and made findings upon in  paras  45-46  and
    which are now not challenged, that D herself wished to  remain  in  the
    UK, and would do so, to continue  her  studies  if  the  appellant  was
    required to leave and go back to Ukraine.  D did not  give  any  cogent
    reasons why she could not continue to live with her father and  brother
    with their support.  At para 48, the judge does not say, or find,  that
    D's best interests would not be affected by her  mother  going  to  the
    Ukraine.  What he decides is that  they  would  not  be  "significantly
    reduced or compromised" if that happened.  That was a finding  entirely
    founded in the evidence and not one which can be properly characterised
    as irrational or perverse.  It was a finding open to the judge  on  the
    totality of the evidence before him.   I, therefore, also reject Ground
    2.

29. That then leaves Ground 3, which contends that the judge failed to give
    D's  best  interests  their  true  weight,   namely   as   a   "primary
    consideration".  First, it is clear that the judge, as I  have  already
    pointed out, correctly directed himself that D's best interests were  a
    "primary consideration" (see para 24 and also para 49).   Mr  Plowright
    acknowledged in his oral submissions, quite  properly,  that  D's  best
    interests were not a "trump card".  It is clear from the case law, such
    as ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas, that a  child's  best  interests  can  be
    outweighed by sufficiently weighty other  considerations.   Ground  3's
    reliance upon Lord Kerr's judgment at [46] in ZH  (Tanzania)  where  he
    stated that usually,  unless  countervailing  reasons  of  considerable
    force exist, the outcome of a case should be determined  by  a  child's
    best interests, has to be seen in the  light  of  the  Supreme  Court's
    response to such a submission in Zoumbas, particularly at [12] which  I
    set out above.  There, Lord Hodge pointed out that Lord Kerr  had  made
    that statement in the context of a case where the children were British
    citizens and, indeed, Lord Kerr had himself explained that he  was  not
    intending to elevate a child's "best interests" above that of  being  a
    primary consideration in H(H) at [145].

30. In this case, there were significant public interest  matters  and  the
    judge was entitled to give the public interest in effective immigration
    control significant weight.   The  appellant  had  been  refused  entry
    clearance, had nevertheless entered the UK illegally and had  practised
    deception in her attempt to obtain a visit visa to come to the UK  with
    D.  Despite Mr Plowright's clear and succinct submissions, I am  wholly
    unpersuaded that the judge failed properly to carry out  the  balancing
    exercise having regard  to  D's  best  interests  and  the  appellant's
    immigration  history.   The  argument  does  not  come  anywhere   near
    demonstrating that the judge failed to take into account  all  relevant
    matters and reached a perverse or  irrational  finding  that  the  best
    interests of D were outweighed by  the  public  interest  in  effective
    immigration control.

31. For these reasons, I reject Grounds 1,  2  and  3  and  Mr  Plowright's
    submissions in support of those grounds.

Decision

32. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR did not  involve
    the making of an error of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

33. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               10 March 2021


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Stedman, having  dismissed  the  appeal,  made  no  fee  award.   That
decision also stands.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               10 March 2021

