

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU149002016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 20 July 2017                               |On 31 July 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                           mohammed khuram shezad
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian of Counsel instructed by MJ
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This challenge is brought by  the  respondent  in  respect  of  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge J  Robertson  to  allow  this
         appeal against a deportation order made on 29 December  2016  under
         5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and the refusal of the appellant's
         human rights claim. For ease of reference, I continue to  refer  to
         the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national, born on  12  December  1973.
         He entered the UK in December 1996 with entry clearance to  join  a
         spouse and was granted indefinite leave to remain in December 1997.
         He has four children; the eldest is now 19 and the youngest  is  7.
         They were a year younger at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge.



      3. On 9 November 2015,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  theft  and
         sentenced to 8 months in prison. He had  no  previous  convictions.
         The respondent considered that deportation  was  conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest under paragraph 398  of  the
         Immigration Rules. She accepted that he had a  family  and  private
         life with his wife and children but  considered  it  would  not  be
         unduly harsh for them to accompany the appellant to Pakistan, given
         his  offending.  She  took  the  view  that  there  were  no   very
         significant obstacles to his re-integration on return.



      4. The appellant claimed that whilst working as a carer  for  a  blind
         man named George, he "borrowed" money from him to pay his debts and
         had been unaware he had left him destitute. Although he had  repaid
         about a third, he was convicted of theft. He maintains he has since
         continued to repay the money.



      5. The appeal came before  Judge  J  Robertson  at  Birmingham  on  11
         November 2016. She found that  the  appellant  was  now  remorseful
         after his imprisonment, that there was a strong  bond  between  the
         appellant and his family and that his deportation would  be  unduly
         harsh on the appellant's children and their family life. The appeal
         was allowed.


      6. The respondent sought permission to appeal. On 16 May 2017,  First-
         tier Tribunal Pullig  refused  permission  but  this  decision  was
         overturned by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on  6  June  2017.  In
         granting permission, she considered that it was arguable  that  the
         judge failed to factor in  public  interest  matters  such  as  the
         appellant's criminality and risk of re-offending  when  undertaking
         the  "unduly  harsh"  test  in  paragraph  399(a)  and   that   her
         conclusions were, therefore, inconsistent with MM  (Uganda)  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 617.


         The Hearing


      7. The appellant was present at the hearing before me on 20 July  2017
         when I heard submissions from the parties.


      8. Mr Armstrong relied on three judgments which addressed the approach
         to the assessment of what was "unduly  harsh"  in  the  context  of
         deportation: McLarty (Deportation - proportionality balance) [2014]
         UKUT 00315, MM and another (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 617 and K  M  O
         (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543.



      9. Mr Armstrong submitted that there was a strong public  interest  in
         the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  and  there  had  to  be  a
         compelling reason not to deport such individuals. He submitted that
         when considering the impact of the appellant's deportation  on  his
         children, all circumstances had  to  be  considered  including  the
         offending. It was clear from the determination that this factor was
         not considered when the unduly harsh test was assessed. Further, he
         submitted that the judge did not consider the pre-sentencing report
         assessment of a medium risk of re-offending and she  did  not  give
         weight to the fact that this was not  a  one-off  offence  but  one
         which was committed over a six-week period. The  judge  misdirected
         herself in law and the decision should be set aside.



     10.  In response, Mr Chakmakjian submitted that the judge had  set  out
         the public issue factors at  paragraphs  17-22.  She  assessed  his
         criminality at length and it could not be the case that, when  then
         considering proportionality, she had forgotten those  factors.  The
         determination had to be read as a whole. She undertook a  balancing
         exercise when assessing family  life  after  having  clarified  her
         approach at paragraph 16. Her approach was in  accordance  with  MM
         and another. She considered the  public  interest  first  and  then
         considered family life. No factors were disregarded.



     11. Mr Armstrong submitted that the judge  downplayed  the  appellant's
         criminality in her findings and did not have proper regard  to  his
         offending behaviour and the public interest. She failed  to  follow
         the correct test and the decision should be set aside.


     12. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination, which
         I now give.


             Findings and conclusions

     13. Mr Armstrong relied upon the head note of McLarty. This  emphasises
         Parliament's view on the deportation of  foreign  criminal;  noting
         that the scales are tilted strongly in favour  of  deportation  and
         that for them to swing in an  appellant's  favour,  there  must  be
         compelling  reasons  which  must   be   exceptional.   Where   such
         circumstances are said to exist, they must be weighed  against  the
         public interest. The appellant in that case was a Jamaican national
         with indefinite leave to remain married to a British  national  and
         they had four children aged between 3 and 10. He was  convicted  of
         fraud arising out of the  rental  of  a  motor  vehicle  and  drugs
         offences. The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  and  the
         determination was criticised for failing to clarify to what extent,
         if at all, the serious nature of the crime  and  the  wider  public
         interest in deportation were factors in  the  Tribunal's  findings.
         The court found that the determination lacked  reasoning.  It  held
         that where the  two  important  countervailing  principles  of  the
         public interest in deportation and  the  family  interests  of  the
         appellant collide, fairness requires that the Tribunal  to  provide
         full and proper reasons in relation to its  consideration  of  both
         these factors.  The Tribunal was found to have erred  because  only
         half of the task was said to  have  been  performed.  The  Tribunal
         identified factors in favour of the appellant but then proceeded to
         a finding on proportionality without working through the  essential
         step of measuring those factors against the  general  and  specific
         public interest considerations arising. The Tribunal had failed  to
         apply itself to the proportionality test in that factors in  favour
         of the appellant had not been balanced against the public interest.




     14. In MM and another, the Court of Appeal focused on  the  meaning  of
         unduly harsh in paragraph 399 of the rules  and  s.117C(5)  of  the
         2002 act in the context of the removal of foreign  criminals  under
         s.32 of the Borders Act 2007. MM,  a  Ugandan  national,  had  held
         indefinite leave to remain since 2003 and he had a daughter born in
         December 2004 who was a British citizen. He was convicted of  drugs
         offences.  In allowing his appeal, the Tribunal had  placed  weight
         on the family relationship, the best interests of the daughter  and
         the devastating impact deportation  would  have  on  her  emotional
         development. The Tribunal also took note of  the  appellant's  long
         residence and the fact that he had been drug free  since  going  to
         prison.  The other  appellant  was  KO,  a  Nigerian  convicted  of
         conspiracy to make false  representations  who  had  a  wife,  four
         children aged between 2 and 10 years and a step  child  of  17  who
         regarded him as her father. The First-tier Tribunal had  considered
         that his deportation would be unduly harsh on the children and that
         it was not in the public interest to take away the stability of the
         close family, potentially causing them damage. The Court of  Appeal
         held that the question of undue hardship had  to  be  decided  with
         regard to the force of public interest in deportation and that what
         was due or undue depended on all the circumstances, not merely  the
         impact  on  partners  or  children.  It  found  that  the  relevant
         circumstances certainly included the criminal history.


     15. All these cases have a common theme; that of a strong  family  life
         with wives and children and a lengthy period of  residence  in  the
         UK. Indeed, it is  often  the  case  in  deportation  appeals  that
         appellants have established private and family life in the UK. That
         is  not  an  exceptional  or  unusual  factor  although  particular
         circumstances may be.


     16. Mr Chakmakjian pointed to the judge's  references  to  the  serious
         nature of the appellant's offending and I do not dispute  that  she
         set out his background in her determination (at paragraphs  17-22).
         She also set out the  oral  evidence  and  summarised  the  written
         statements and the submissions made. At paragraph 16  she  directed
         herself as to the factors she had to  consider  when  conducting  a
         proportionality assessment. Mr Armstrong did not suggest  that  she
         failed to refer to any relevant factors in that paragraph; his case
         is that there was no engagement with the public interest factors in
         the judge's conclusions.


     17. The appellant did not enter a plea of guilty and the trial involved
         his victim, a blind and vulnerable man, having to  go  through  the
         process  which  the  sentencing  judge  concluded  he  found   very
         intimidating and distressing. The judge noted  that  the  appellant
         had had a severe gambling habit which he kept  a  secret  from  his
         family, that he had been the victim's carer for a  period  of  time
         and that over a six-week period he had exploited  his  loyalty  and
         friendship by withdrawing monies from his account so  that  he  did
         not even have funds to buy food. The  judge  took  account  of  the
         appellant's previous good character and the repayment  of  a  large
         part of the money but nevertheless  found  the  offence  to  be  so
         serious that only a custodial sentence was justified.


     18. In her determination,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  the
         judge's sentencing remarks (at 17). She also noted this was  not  a
         one off offence but had been repeated over a period  of  six  weeks
         and that the sentence had not been suspended as recommended by  the
         Probation Officer in the pre-sentencing report (at 18).  She  found
         there were several factors which led to the  appellant's  financial
         problems and the offence; specifically, his lack of employment  and
         health issues. She found, however, there was no evidence before her
         of the gambling problem  the  sentencing  judge  had  referred  to;
         noting that the witnesses had all denied such a  problem  and  that
         the PSR "only" referred to buying scratch cards and lottery tickets
         (at 19). The judge noted that the appellant had  been  assessed  as
         having a medium risk of  re-offending,  as  long  as  he  continued
         contact with his victim; otherwise it would be low. She  considered
         that as the appellant's wife was now working and the appellant  had
         not had contact with his victim, the risk  was  low  (at  20).  She
         noted the appellant's alleged remorse and accepted he  was  ashamed
         and embarrassed. She noted that he had undertaken a  rehabilitation
         programme (although there is  no  evidence  of  this).  She  found,
         however, that his lack of remorse at the time of the offence was  a
         strong factor against him (paragraph 21). She took account  of  his
         lawful residence, his integration into the  British  way  of  life,
         although that is not expanded upon,  but  considered,  nonetheless,
         that it was in the public interest to deter others  by  deportation
         where crimes had been committed even when there was remorse  and  a
         low risk of re-offending (at 22). At paragraphs 17-22,  the  judge,
         therefore, set out the factors for the respondent and  against  the
         appellant.


     19. The judge then proceeded to consider the appellant's  family  life.
         She identified that he had four children aged between 18 and 6, all
         born in the UK and all British citizens,  that  the  appellant  was
         hardworking and  supportive  and  played  an  active  role  in  the
         upbringing of the children (at 24).  She  then  stated:  "The  main
         issue was the effect of the deportation on the family", noting that
         either the family accompany the appellant to Pakistan or stay  here
         without him (at 25). She found that the appellant's wife (who is in
         fact his first cousin) was also born in the UK, that she has family
         here, that she  has  only  visited  Pakistan  twice  (in  fact  her
         statement confirms she had been there for 6 weeks for her  marriage
         and twice since but there is no  information  on  earlier  visits),
         that the children have visited once or twice, that they only  speak
         English and that there would be a language and cultural barrier  if
         they moved to Pakistan (at 26-27). She found that  the  appellant's
         wife would find it difficult to cope without him and that their son
         would be unable to motivate himself to complete his  A  Levels  (at
         28). She noted that  some  assistance  had  been  provided  by  the
         appellant's  brother-in-law.  She  observed  that  the  family  had
         suffered stress due to health and financial reasons even before the
         appellant's  crimes  (at  28).  She  took  account  of  a  clinical
         psychology report which suggested that the appellant's  deportation
         could lead to mood difficulties and  disruptive  behaviour  amongst
         the children,  that  they  would  miss  the  support  their  father
         provided and that the wife's mental state  would  deteriorate.  The
         report notes the family's cultural background  and  traditions  (at
         29).


     20. The Judge noted that whilst the appellant's wife found it difficult
         to cope whilst the appellant was in prison, she was  able  to  work
         and she received assistance  from  her  brother;  such  help  could
         continue were the appellant to be deported (at 31).


     21. The judge found that the two older  sons  felt  they  had  to  take
         responsibility for the family during their  father's  incarceration
         (at 32). She concluded that there was a strong  family  bond,  that
         the family had suffered stresses in the past,  that  the  appellant
         was central to the cohesion of the family  and  that  a  long  term
         absence was different to the shorter absence the family dealt  with
         when he was in prison.  She  noted  that  the  report  stated  that
         removal would impact negatively on the children (at 34).  She  then
         concluded that paragraph 399(a) was applicable  as  the  effect  of
         deportation would be unduly harsh on the  children  and  on  family
         life so that the latter outweighed the public interest (at 34).


     22. Notwithstanding the judge's direction  at  paragraph  16,  she  has
         failed to approach the balancing  exercise  correctly.  Whilst  she
         identified factors for the respondent and for the appellant,  there
         is no attempt to then undertake any kind of balancing exercise. The
         conclusions do not suggest that there has been any attempt to weigh
         up the factors identified in the sub-headings  of  Public  Interest
         and Family Life. What the judge has done is identify factors in the
         public interest and those on the side of the  appellant  but  there
         has been no weighing up of the two and certainly  no  consideration
         of the former when the conclusion of undue harshness for the family
         was reached  at  paragraph  34.  Indeed,  it  is  unclear  how  the
         conclusion was reached or why, given  all  the  compelling  factors
         against him, the judge decided  that  family  life  outweighed  the
         public interest. It is plain from the case law  relied  on  by  the
         respondent,  that  all  factors  must  be  considered   when   that
         conclusion is reached but the determination suffers from a lack  of
         such an assessment and the judge fell into the trap  identified  in
         McLarty of  failing  to  balance  the  factors  in  favour  of  the
         appellant against  the  public  interest.  Simply  identifying  the
         factors for and against the appellant is not enough. Her  statement
         in paragraph 25 of what she described as the main issue only serves
         to reinforce her error.


     23. Further, the judge's acceptance of certain matters pleaded  on  the
         appellant's side are unreasoned. Her finding that the children have
         no knowledge of Pakistani cultural norms and  that  the  family  is
         completely Westernised is not supported by the observation  by  the
         author of the psychological report who commented  on  the  family's
         traditional and cultural background, by the appellant  who  claimed
         in his witness statement  that  his  children  went  for  religious
         instruction to the mosque and by  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
         marriage was traditionally arranged and  took  place  in  Pakistan.
         The judge's rejection of  the  gambling  habit  identified  by  the
         sentencing judge was also unreasoned. She found that there  was  no
         evidence because the witnesses all denied it however she failed  to
         take account of the fact that the sentencing judge had  found  that
         it had been hidden from the appellant's family.



     24. There is also no explanation for  why  the  judge  found  that  the
         factors  pleaded  for  the  appellant  were  so   exceptional   and
         compelling as to outweigh the public  interest,  particularly  when
         she, herself, listed a wealth of factors  against  him.  Issues  of
         family life and of wives and children  having  difficulty  managing
         without the husband/father may  be  found  in  a  large  number  of
         deportation cases.  The  judge  is  required  to  explain  why  the
         appellant's case is different.


     25. The respondent's challenge to the determination is, therefore, made
         out. I conclude that the judge made errors of  law  such  that  her
         decision must be set aside and re-made by  another  judge  of  that
         Tribunal at a future date.


     26. Decision


     27. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law.  The  decision  is  set
         aside and shall be re-made afresh by another judge  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

       Date: 26 July 2017


