
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14845/2016
                                                               HU/14847/2016
                                                               HU/14850/2016
                                                               HU/14853/2016
                                                               HU/14857/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 September 2018                          |On 25 September 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     M A
                                     S M
                                     I C
                                     E A
                                     F A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  MA was born on 1  June  1976.
    His wife, SM, was born on 1 April 1978.  They have three children.  The
    eldest child, IC, was born on 2 May 2008.  EA was born  on  4  February
    2013. FA on 4 December 2014.  I have anonymised  the  appellants  since
    three of them are young children.

2.   The appellants appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    on 2 June 2016 to refuse to grant them leave to remain on human  rights
    grounds.  Their appeal was dismissed by Resident Judge JFW Phillips. It
    is not clear to me when  the  decision  was  promulgated;  however,  it
    followed a hearing in Newport  on  19  October  2017.   Permission  was
    granted to the appellants by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin  on  31  May
    2018.  The salient parts of Judge Martin's decision read as follows:

         "It is arguable that in finding it reasonable for the eldest  child
         (who has been in the UK in excess of  seven  years)  to  return  to
         Pakistan (in  considering  Section  117B(6)),  the  Judge  has  not
         identified powerful reasons as indicated by Lord Justice  Elias  at
         paragraph 49 of MA(Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.   It  is  also
         arguable that the judge was mistaken in thinking the appellants had
         a poor immigration history.

3.   The matter came before me on 10 September  2018  to  determine  whether
    the judge made an error of law.

The Background

4.   SM came to the UK on 29 December 2007  having  been  granted  leave  to
    enter as a student migrant which was valid until 31 October 2009.   She
    was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until
    27 May 2012.  She was granted further leave to  remain  under  the  PBS
    until 20 August 2015.  Her husband, MA, came to the UK on 27 July  2010
    with leave to enter as a Tier 1 (Dependant)  Partner  which  was  valid
    until 27 May 2012.  He has been granted periods of leave in  line  with
    SM as a dependant under the PBS.  They made an application for leave to
    remain on Article 8 grounds on 7 August 2015.   This  was  refused  and
    certified as clearly unfounded under s94 (1) of  the  2002  Act  on  31
    January 2016. They then submitted a  Statement  of  Additional  Grounds
    which the Respondent treated as a human rights application. On  2  June
    2016 the application was refused, giving  the  appellants  a  right  of
    appeal.

The Hearing Before the FtT

5.   The judge heard evidence from the adult appellants. The  appeal  turned
    on the facts relating to the appellant, IC.  She was born  in  the  UK.
    She was taken to Pakistan by SM when she was 9 or  10  months  old  and
    left in the care of relatives there.  SM returned to the UK  to  study.
    IC remained in Pakistan for approximately thirteen months. On  27  July
    2010 she returned to the UK where she has remained since.

6.   At the time of the hearing IC had  been  in  the  UK  continuously  for
    seven years and four months.  She was aged 9.  At paragraph 15  of  his
    decision the judge properly identified the law and the  issue;  namely,
    whether it was reasonable to expect IC  to  return  to  Pakistan.   The
    judge at paragraph 15 directed  himself  with  respect  to  R  (on  the
    application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) and Another  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.   He  properly
    directed himself that when considering whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    remove a child from the UK, any court  or  Tribunal  should  not  focus
    simply on the child but should have regard to the wider public interest
    consideration including the conduct  and  immigration  history  of  the
    parents.

7.   The salient findings of the judge are at paragraphs 16, 17 and 18:

         "16. The issue to be decided is straightforward.  Is it  reasonable
             to expect the elder child, [IC], to leave the United  Kingdom?
             In considering  this  issue  I  find  the  following  positive
             factors to be relevant.  Firstly, [IC] has  now  been  in  the
             United Kingdom continuously for a little over 7 years and  her
             total residence is more than 8  years.   She  was  born  here.
             [IC] is doing well in school in this country as  evidenced  by
             the school reports and awards in the Appellant's bundle.   She
             is being educated through the medium of English.   Her  circle
             of friends is in this country.  She will  have  no  memory  of
             life in Pakistan.  I add that the circumstances of her parents
             and siblings are also relevant, that the two younger  children
             have only known life in the United Kingdom,  that  the  father
             plays  cricket  in  this  country  having  obtained   coaching
             qualifications here and that both  parents  have  friends  and
             connections in this country.  Neutral to the balance  is  that
             it is in the best interests of [IC] and of course of the other
             children, for the family to stay together.


         17.  On the other side  of  the  balance  there  are  a  number  of
             factors.  The mother is qualified to Master's degree level  in
             Pakistan and has obtained further qualifications in the United
             Kingdom.   There  is  no  reason  in  my  judgment  why  these
             qualifications cannot be put to use in  Pakistan.   I  do  not
             accept that being outside Pakistan for the last 10 years or  a
             lack of  contacts  in  Pakistan  will  prevent  her  obtaining
             employment there and  no  objective  evidence  was  called  to
             suggest   that   individuals   with    significant    academic
             qualifications have  difficulty  in  obtaining  employment  in
             Pakistan.  The father is also  educated  to  degree  level  in
             Pakistan and  has  obtained  a  coaching  qualification  here.
             Again, no objective evidence was called to  suggest  that  his
             qualifications cannot be put to use in obtaining employment in
             Pakistan.  The family speak  Urdu  at  home  and  parents  and
             children are fluent in this language.  I accept  the  parents'
             evidence that [IC] does not read and write Urdu, but I do  not
             accept that with her oral language skills and her  ability  to
             read and write in English that this is a significant obstacle.
              Her oral skills should be capable of being adapted  in  short
             order.  The Appellants have family in Pakistan and there is no
             reason why this family  cannot  provide  emotional  and  moral
             support and with the parents' qualifications there  should  be
             no need to turn to the family for financial support.  I do not
             accept, and there is no medical evidence in this regard,  that
             any illness  that  [IC]  suffered  from  during  her  stay  in
             Pakistan as a one year old  is  endemic  to  the  country  and
             likely to recur on her return.


         18.  So far as the immigration history of the parents is  concerned
             it is in my  judgment  significant  that  they  came  to  this
             country in  the  full  knowledge  that  their  stay  here  was
             temporary.  Leave to remain  based  on  the  mother's  studies
             expired in August 2015 and the decision to  stay  beyond  that
             time has been one that they have chosen to  make  without  any
             basis under the Immigration Rules.  It is  only  by  remaining
             outside the provisions of the  rules  that  the  family  have,
             just, reached the seventh anniversary of the eldest daughter's
             arrival in the United Kingdom."

The Grounds of Appeal

8.   At the hearing before  me  Mr  Nasim  relied  on  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.  He modified Ground 1  with  reference  to  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin's decision.  He argued that the judge  failed  to
    properly consider IC's private  life  in  the  context  of  Article  8.
    Although she had not lived in the UK continuously for  seven  years  at
    the date of the application; she had at the date of  the  hearing.  The
    judge did not take proper account of this.

9.   Ground 2 argues that the judge failed to apply the principles  set  out
    in MA (Pakistan) and give due  weight  to  IC's  residence  here.   The
    grounds refer to the respondent's guidance. There will be a very strong
    expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK
    with his parents as part of a family unit and that that must rank as  a
    primary consideration in the  proportionality  assessment.   The  judge
    failed to have regard to paragraphs 45, 46 and 49 of MA.

10.  Ground 3 argues that  the  judge  erred  by  attaching  weight  to  the
    parents' immigration status.  The Court of Appeal in MA,  at  paragraph
    103, stated that temporary residence  was  insufficient  in  itself  to
    constitute "powerful" reasons for removing a long resident  child  even
    where there had been a long period  of  unlawful  overstaying.   It  is
    argued in the grounds that the appellants had leave under section 3C of
    the 1971 Act ("3C leave"). Mr Nasim did not pursue this,  but  modified
    the ground arguing that the judge erred in failing to take into account
    that the original applications were submitted prior to  the  expiry  of
    the appellants' leave on 20 August 2015.  The Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds gave rise to an appealable decision.  He  argued  that  it  was
    questionable whether  the  decision  of  31  January  2016  was  lawful
    although he accepted that there was  no  challenge  to  it  by  way  of
    judicial review. However, he argued that this  was  a  material  factor
    when assessing the immigration  status.  The  judge  did  not  properly
    consider the immigration history.

11.  The fourth  ground  argues  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  all
    relevant factors when addressing whether it would be reasonable for  IC
    to leave the UK.   The  judge  failed  to  apply  the  guidance  in  EV
    (Philippines) and Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 when assessing the child's best interests.

12.  Ground 4 argues that the judge failed to  have  proper  regard  to  the
    private life established by IC.

13.  Ground 5 argues that the judge did not  carry  out  a  full  assessment
    under Article 8 properly considering Section 117B (6) of the 2002  Act.
    The judge failed to consider the appellants were not a burden on public
    funds and spoke English.

14.  I heard submissions from both representatives.  Mr  Nasim  stated  that
    the primary findings of fact were not challenged. However,  the  thrust
    of the grounds is that the judge did not identify  strong  or  powerful
    reasons for dismissing the appeal. Ms Isherwood argued that  the  judge
    did not err in law.  I asked her to identify  the  strong  or  powerful
    reasons as found by the judge. She said that  the  decision  should  be
    considered as a whole.  All  factors  taken  together  would  establish
    strong and powerful reasons including the parents' precarious leave.

The Law

15.  In MA Elias LJ held as follows:

         "43.     But for  the  decision  of  the  court  of  Appeal  in  MM
             (Uganda), I would have been inclined to the view that  section
             117C (5) also supported the appellants' analysis. The language
             of "unduly harsh" used in that  subsection  is  not  the  test
             applied in article 8 cases, and so the argument that the  term
             is used as a shorthand for the usual proportionality  exercise
             cannot run. I would have focused on the position of the  child
             alone, as the Upper Tribunal did in MAB.


         44.   I do not find this a surprising conclusion. It  seems  to  me
             that  there  are  powerful  reasons  why,  having  regard   in
             particular to the need to treat  the  best  interests  of  the
             child as a primary consideration, it may be thought that  once
             they have been in the UK for seven  years,  or  are  otherwise
             citizens of the UK, they should be allowed to  stay  and  have
             their position legitimised if it would not  be  reasonable  to
             expect them to leave, even though the  effect  is  that  their
             possibly undeserving families can remain with them. I  do  not
             accept that this amounts to a reintroduction of the old DP5/96
             policy. As the Court  of  Appeal  observed  in  NF  (Ghana)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
             906, the starting point under that policy  was  that  a  child
             with seven years' residence could be refused leave  to  remain
             only in exceptional circumstances. The current provision falls
             short of such a presumption, and of course the  position  with
             respect to the children of foreign criminals is even tougher.


         45.      However, the approach I favour is  inconsistent  with  the
             very recent decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda)
             where the court came down firmly in  favour  of  the  approach
             urged upon us by Ms Giovannetti, and I do not  think  that  we
             ought to depart from it. In my judgment, if the  court  should
             have regard to the conduct of  the  applicant  and  any  other
             matters relevant to the  public  interest  when  applying  the
             "unduly harsh" concept under section  117C(5),  so  should  it
             when considering the question of reasonableness under  section
             117B(6). I recognise that the provisions in section  117C  are
             directed towards the particular considerations which  have  to
             be borne in mind in the case of foreign criminals, and  it  is
             true that the court placed  some  weight  on  section  117C(2)
             which states that the more serious the offence, the greater is
             the interest in deportation of the prisoner. But the  critical
             point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a  free-standing
             provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so  the
             court  in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that  wider   public   interest
             considerations must be taken into account  when  applying  the
             "unduly harsh" criterion. It seems  to  me  that  it  must  be
             equally so with respect to  the  reasonableness  criterion  in
             section 117B(6). It would not be  appropriate  to  distinguish
             that decision simply because I have reservations whether it is
             correct. Accordingly, in line with the approach in that  case,
             I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the Secretary  of
             State's submission on this point is correct and that the  only
             significance of section 117B(6) is that where the  seven  year
             rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some  weight  leaning  in
             favour of leave to remain being granted.


         Applying the reasonableness test


         46.      Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
             that a child has been here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in
             August  2015  in   the   form   of   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in  which  it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing
             leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions  were  not  in  force
             when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,  but  in
             my view they merely confirm what is  implicit  in  adopting  a
             policy of this nature. After such a period of time  the  child
             will have put down roots and developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get  older.  Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


         47.      Even if we were applying the  narrow  reasonableness  test
             where the focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view
             follow that leave must be granted whenever  the  child's  best
             interests are in favour  of  remaining.  I  reject  Mr  Gill's
             submission that the best  interests  assessment  automatically
             resolves the reasonableness question. If Parliament had wanted
             the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of the leave
             application, it would have  said  so.  The  concept  of  "best
             interests" is after all a well established one. Even where the
             child's best interests are  to  stay,  it  may  still  be  not
             unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will  depend
             upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the  links
             in the UK and in the country where it is  proposed  he  should
             return. What could not be considered, however,  would  be  the
             conduct and immigration history of the parents.


         ...


         49.  Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the  wider
             construction of section 117B(6),  the  same  principles  would
             apply in such a case. However, the fact  that  the  child  has
             been in the  UK  for  seven  years  would  need  to  be  given
             significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
             related  reasons:  first,  because   of   its   relevance   to
             determining the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
             interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
             point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
             reasons to the contrary.


         ...


         103.     In my judgment, the observation of the judge to the effect
             that people who come on a temporary basis can be  expected  to
             leave cannot be true of the child. The purpose underlying  the
             seven year rule is that this kind of reasoning ought not to be
             adopted in their case. They are not to be blamed for the  fact
             that their parents  overstayed  illegally,  and  the  starting
             point is that their status should be legitimized unless  there
             is good reason not to do so. I accept that the position  might
             have been otherwise without the seven  years'  residence,  but
             that is a factor which must weigh heavily in  this  case.  The
             fact that the parents are overstayers and  have  no  right  to
             remain in their own right can thereafter  be  weighed  in  the
             proportionality balance against allowing the child to  remain,
             but that is after a recognition that the child's  seven  years
             of residence is a significant factor pointing the other way."

16.      In EV (Philippines) Lord Justice Christopher Clarke  explained  how
    a Tribunal should apply   the proportionality test where  wider  public
    interest considerations are in play, in circumstances  where  the  best
    interests of the child dictate that he should remain in the UK  (paras.
    34-37):

         "34.     In determining whether or not,  in  a  case  such  as  the
             present, the need for immigration control outweighs  the  best
             interests of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the
             relative strength of the factors which make it in  their  best
             interests to remain here; and also  to  take  account  of  any
             factors that point the other way.


         35.  A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.


         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.


         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex hypothesis,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain. The immigration history of  the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully."

17.  In MT and ET (child's best interests; extempore pilot)  Nigeria  [2018]
    UKUT 0088.  The UT made the following findings:

         "30. We conclude firmly that as regards those aspects of the  third
             Appellant's life highlighted above, his best interests, viewed
             through the lens of Article 8 private life, would be served by
             remaining in the United Kingdom. The  four  dominant  factors,
             summarised, are his length of residence in the United Kingdom,
             his full integration in United Kingdom society,  his  age  and
             his minimal ties with his country of origin.  We observe  that
             this conclusion is expressly foreshadowed in the Secretary  of
             State's IDI, an instrument  which,  having  the  status  of  a
             material consideration, serves to inform the Article 8 private
             life analysis.


         31.   However,  the  assessment  of  the  third  Appellant's   best
             interests from the perspective of his  private  life  only  is
             necessarily  incomplete.  We  must  also  consider  his   best
             interests through the prism of his family life.  He is an only
             child and we find that he  has,  vis-�-vis  his  parents,  the
             bonds of love, affection, respect  and  dependency  which  one
             would expect of any child of 14 in a stable,  settled  family.
             This is not  diluted  by  the  truism  that  teenagers  become
             progressively independent, resilient and self sufficient.   In
             this context we refer to our assessment in [28] above.  Viewed
             from the twin perspectives of the  third  Appellant's  private
             and family life, the conclusion that his best interests  would
             be best served by continuing to live in  the  United  Kingdom,
             with his parents, follows inexorably.


         32.  At this juncture, we remind ourselves that the best  interests
             of the third Appellant have,  by  statute,  the  status  of  a
             primary  consideration.   We  are  also   mindful   that   our
             assessment of the best interests of the third Appellant is not
             determinative of the question posed by both paragraph 276  ADE
             (1)(iv) of the Rules and Section 117B (6)  of  the  2002  Act,
             namely whether it would be reasonable to expect him  to  leave
             the United Kingdom. This question cannot be  answered  without
             considering the parents' appeals, to which we  now  turn.   At
             this  juncture,  we  turn  to  consider  the  claims  of   the
             Appellant's parents, the first two Appellants. Their Article 8
             claims cannot succeed under  the  Rules.   They  do  not  come
             remotely close to doing so.  They can succeed only outwith the
             Rules,  which   involves   them   satisfying   the   test   of
             compelling/exceptional circumstances prescribed in MF  Nigeria
             (infra).


         33.  The main ingredients in the cases  of  the  parents  are  that
             their presence in the United Kingdom  was  lawful  during  the
             first half of the 11 year period  under  scrutiny;  they  have
             been unlawful overstayers  since  early  2010;  they  are  the
             parents of a teenage child who has lived continuously  in  the
             United Kingdom for  11 years; they  have  established  private
             lives in the United Kingdom; they are law  abiding  and  self-
             sufficient citizens; and they have spent most of  their  lives
             in their country of origin, Sri Lanka.


         34.  At this point of the analysis, we ask  ourselves  whether  the
             dismissal of the parents' appeals would interfere  with  their
             rights to respect for their private  lives.   The  answer  is,
             clearly, affirmative.  Since the  impugned  decisions  are  in
             accordance with the law and are in furtherance of a legitimate
             aim, namely the maintenance of immigration control,  the  next
             question to be addressed is whether  they  are  proportionate.
             Proportionality is the "public interest question"  within  the
             meaning of Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act.   By  section  117A(2)
             thereof we are obliged to have regard  to  the  considerations
             listed in section 117B.  We consider that section 117B applies
             to these appeals in the following way:


             (a)  The public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
                  immigration controls is engaged.


               b) There is no infringement of the "English speaking"  public
                  interest, given the uncontested  finding  that  all  three
                  Appellants are fluent English speakers.


               c) While the economic self-sufficiency of both parents is not
                  in dispute and we have no  evidential  basis  for  finding
                  otherwise, we consider that this public interest  must  be
                  engaged since the  third  Appellant  has  been,  and  will
                  continue to be, educated at  public  expense  and  if  all
                  three Appellants remain in the United  Kingdom  they  will
                  have the capacity to access other publicly funded services
                  and benefits.


               d) That part of the private lives established by the  parents
                  during the second half of their 11  year  sojourn  in  the
                  United Kingdom qualifies for  the  attribution  of  little
                  weight only."


The Error of Law

18.  The grounds to a great extent overlap. As I see it,  the  challenge  is
    essentially a complaint that the judge did not properly  consider  IC's
    best interests or proportionality in the light of  s.117B  (6)  of  the
    2002 Act and present law.

19.    I conclude that the judge's assessment  of  IC's  best  interests  is
    flawed. The judge considered IC's best interests in the context of  the
    child's family life, finding that  she  would  be  returning  with  her
    family. The judge made findings relating to IC's private life here, but
    he did not consider how that would impact on the assessment of her best
    interests, having regard to the length of time she has  been  here  and
    that she is in education here.  The assessment does not have regard  to
    the factors listed by the Court of Appeal  in  EV  (Philippines).   The
    judge recognised the significance of seven years insofar  as  it  meant
    that he had to consider reasonableness (and that section 117B  (6)  was
    triggered), but in terms of the child's best interests  it  is  unclear
    what, if any, significance he attached to it.  Considering  the  length
    of time IC has been here and her age at the hearing, it  was  necessary
    for the judge to assess whether it was in her best interests to  remain
    with her family in the UK or to return to Pakistan with her family.  In
    the light IC's circumstances, it  was  not  sufficient,  to  limit  the
    assessment to whether it is in her best interests  for  the  family  to
    stay together.  This was a material error of law because it impacted on
    the assessment of proportionality. I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    judge to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

20.      I make a further observation about the  decision.  The  judge  fell
    into error when assessing reasonableness and proportionality because he
    failed to identify strong reasons (see MA para 46 above and Home Office
    Guidance[1]);


21.      Whilst the best interests of the child  are  not  determinative  of
    proportionality,  MA  makes  it  clear  that  seven   years   residence
    establishes a starting point that leave should be granted unless  there
    are powerful reasons to the contrary. This is the view of the Secretary
    of State set out in his own guidance.  The parents' immigration history
    was not sufficient to amount to strong or powerful reasons.  The  judge
    did not identify strong reasons.  The  judge  attached  weight  to  the
    parents' immigration history; however, they were  run-  of-  the-  mill
    overstayers with an additional factor, arguably in their  favour,  that
    the respondent went on to make an appealable decision after  certifying
    their claim. Nothing turns on this.

Conclusions

22.  There was no further evidence submitted  by  the  appellants  following
    the directions issued by the Upper Tribunal.  I heard submissions  from
    both parties, with a view to remaking the decision.

23.     There was no challenge to the primary findings of fact made  by  the
    judge.  IC has been here continuously since the age of 2.  She  is  now
    10. She has been in education here since the age of 4 or  5.    She  is
    now aged 10. It is without doubt that she  has  established  a  private
    life here.  This was accepted by the judge who found  that  she  has  a
    circle of friends here. He found that she had  no  memory  of  life  in
    Pakistan. The findings at paragraph 16  would  lead  to  a  very  clear
    conclusion that IC's best interests  would  be  to  remain  here.   The
    findings at paragraph 17 relate to circumstances that  the  family  can
    expect on return to Pakistan. These are sound findings  and  impact  on
    the assessment of the child's best interests.  However,  they  are  not
    sufficiently significant  to  undermine  the  finding  that  IC's  best
    interests would be to remain here with her family; although taking them
    into account, it is by less of a margin.

24.  I conclude that it would be in IC's best interests to remain in the  UK
    with her family.  Her best interests are a primary  and  not  paramount
    consideration.  I  must  consider  reasonableness  and  proportionality
    taking into account all matters.

25.  Applying MA, I need to consider whether powerful reasons exist  why  IC
    who  has  been  in  the  UK  over  seven  years  should   be   removed,
    notwithstanding that her best interests lie in remaining here. I  heard
    further submissions from Ms Isherwood who was unable to identify strong
    or  powerful  reasons  in  this  case.   She  relied  on  the  parents'
    immigration history.  It is unarguable that this amounts to  strong  or
    powerful reasons.

26.  I go on to consider all s117B of the 2002 Act.  IC's parents came  here
    on a temporary basis. They have no  legitimate  expectation  that  they
    would be able to remain here.  Their  stay  is  precarious.   It  is  a
    material factor, in favour of removal that the children of  the  family
    will be educated at the expense of the British taxpayer. However, these
    factors do not amount to powerful reasons.  It was not argued otherwise
    by Ms Isherwood. There is no suggestion that the family  is  unable  to
    support itself or that there are any  language  problems.   Whilst  the
    public interest lies in removing the family, weighing  up  all  factors
    and applying the law as it currently stands, the appeal succeeds on the
    basis that it would be unreasonable to expect IC to return to Pakistan.
    The decision is not proportionate to the  legitimate  aim.  The  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control is outweighed by the
    family's Article 8 rights.

27.    The appeal is allowed under Article 8.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam
                                                      Date 21 September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------

         [1] Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family  Life  (as  a
         Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes (Version 1.0 of
         106 Published for Home Office staff on 22 February 2018) p75  reads
         as follows;


             "The requirement that a non- British citizen child  has  lived
             in the UK for a continuous period of at least the seven  years
             immediately preceding the date of application, recognises that
             over time children start to put down roots  and  to  integrate
             into life in the UK, to the extent that it may be unreasonable
             to require the child to leave the UK. Significant weight  must
             be given to such a period of continuous residence. The  longer
             the child has resided in the UK, and  the  older  the  age  at
             which they have done so, the more the balance  will  begin  to
             shift towards it being unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to
             leave the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order  to
             refuse a case where the outcome will be  removal  of  a  child
             with continuous UK residence of seven years or more.


         Such strong reasons may arise where, for example, the child will be
         returning  with  the  family  unit  to  the  family's  country   of
         nationality, and the parents have deliberately sought to circumvent
         immigration control or abuse the immigration process  for  example,
         by entering or remaining in the UK illegally or by using  deception
         in an application for leave to enter or remain.  The  consideration
         of the child's best interests must not be affected by  the  conduct
         or immigration history of the parent(s) or primary carer, but these
         will  be  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the  public  interest,
         including in maintaining  effective  immigration  control;  whether
         this outweighs the child's best  interests;  and  whether,  in  the
         round, it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK".


