
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14427/2017
     HU/14433/2017
     HU/14436/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 April 2019                               |On 2 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mrs Aklima [I]
                             mr Md Mahabubul [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                 master M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by KC Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 4 October 2018 Judge Ferguson of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) allowed the appeal of  the  respondents  (hereafter  the
    claimants) who are husband and wife and son (aged 13), all citizens  of
    Bangladesh, against the decision made by the appellant  (hereafter  the
    Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  on  27  October  2017  refusing  their
    applications for leave to remain  based  on  family  and  private  life
    grounds.   The  judge  concluded  that  the  first  claimant  met   the
    suitability requirements of the Rules (paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of  Appendix
    FM) as well as paragraph 276ADE(iv) (in respect of the third  claimant)
    and paragraph EX.1  (in  respect  of  the  first  two  claimants),  the
    claimants also being able to benefit from  S117B(6)NIAA 2002.

2.   The SSHD's grounds lack clarity, as Mr  Clarke  conceded.   In  essence
    they appear to raise two main points.  First, it is submitted that  the
    judge erred in treating the child claimant's best interests as a "trump
    card", since "accepted law dictates [such interests are to  be]  always
    with their parents as a starting point".  Second, it is contended  that
    the judge erred in failing to observe that there  were  "countervailing
    reasons that would override the fact that the minor [claimant] has been
    in the UK for over 7 years ...", in particular: the fact  as  found  by
    the judge that there were no very significant obstacles  to  the  first
    two claimants returning to Bangladesh (paragraphs 16 and 17); that they
    had the opportunity to pursue an asylum claim but chose not  to  do  so
    and had not established any asylum-related  obstacles  (paragraph  18);
    the fact that the first claimant used a proxy to sit his ETS test;  and
    the fact that "none of the family members have ever had entitlement  to
    permanent stay and in fact they have only  benefited  from  Section  3C
    leave since the curtailment  of  Mrs  [I]'s  leave  due  to  no  longer
    satisfying the terms of her Tier 4 visa in April 2016".

3.   I heard helpful  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr  Clarke
    submitted that the judge  was  required  to  consider  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK and whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances outside the Immigration Rules.  In the case of
    the third claimant, although he had been in the UK for 8 years, he  was
    not at the GCSE or AS/A level stage of his education; the  judge  found
    that he had some level of understanding  of  Bengali  and  it  was  not
    suggested there were any health issues.  The judge had failed to follow
    the guidance set out in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKHL [2018] UKSC 53 and  by
    the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

4.   I am not persuaded that these grounds are  made  out,  for  three  main
    reasons.

5.   First, it is quite clear that the judge did not treat the child's  best
    interests as a "trump card", he himself noting  at  paragraph  21  that
    they could  be  "outweighed  by  the  force  of  other  circumstances".
    Further, Mr Clarke conceded that it was open to the judge to find  that
    the third claimant's best interests lay in remaining in the  UK.   That
    represented a  resilement  from  the  position  taken  in  the  written
    grounds.

6.   Second, so far as the judge's treatment of the reasonableness issue  is
    concerned, KO (Nigeria) has confirmed at paragraph  17  that  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and S117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 are directed solely to  the
    position of the child and  contain  "no  requirement  to  consider  the
    criminality or misconduct of a parent as a  balancing  factor".   Hence
    the judge did not err in conducting  an  assessment  of  reasonableness
    that did not factor in such conduct.

7.   Third, whilst KO makes clear that in both contexts it remains  relevant
    to consider where the parents, apart from the relevant  provision,  are
    expected to be, in the case of the third  claimant  in  this  case,  he
    being a qualifying child resident in the UK for over 7 years, he  stood
    to benefit from the guidance given in MA (Pakistan)  (not  in  my  view
    contradicted by KO (Nigeria)) requiring "strong reasons"  to  be  shown
    why he should be expected to leave the UK.  (The judge noted that  this
    was also the Home Office guidance applicable at the  date  of  decision
    (paragraph 24)).

8.   Whilst the judge's application of that  guidance  may  have  been  more
    generous than some other judges may have made, it cannot in my judgment
    be said to be outside the range of reasonable responses.  At paragraphs
    21-24 the judge stated:

         "21. As Lord Hodge said in Zoumbas: 'it  is  important  to  have  a
             clear idea of a child's circumstances and  of  what  is  in  a
             child's best interests before one asks oneself  whether  those
             interests   are   outweighed   by   the   force    of    other
             considerations'.  M's circumstances  are  not  in  significant
             dispute: he came to the UK aged 5 and is now  aged  13  having
             lived here for eight years.  He is well settled in school  and
             has positive school reports set out at pages 43 -  64  of  the
             bundle.  The reports show that he is engaged in all the  range
             of activities offered by the school and he  has  a  centre  of
             interest well beyond her home life with his parents.  He is no
             longer a very young child but has just begun his third year of
             secondary school  (Year  9)  and  so  the  disruption  to  his
             secondary schooling and friendships will be significant.


         22.  His mother and father tried to minimise the extent to which he
             could communicate in Bengali.  His education has  been  wholly
             in English since the age of 5 but Bengali is the language used
             at home and he arrived in the UK at the age of  five  speaking
             only that language.  He must have a good understanding  of  it
             and could speak it if he was required to do so.  He  would  be
             able to become fluent in it again much more quickly than  when
             his parents uprooted him at the age of  five  and  voluntarily
             moved him to a country where he did  not  know  the  language.
             There was no evidence that he could read or write Bengali with
             any  proficiency  however.   He  would  have  to   leave   the
             supportive environment of the education system in which he has
             completed primary school and the first two years of  secondary
             school, for  a  country  with  which  he  now  has  much  less
             connection, although he is a  national  of  that  country  and
             lived there until the age of five.


         23.  It would be highly disruptive if M was required to  leave  the
             UK: as set out at paragraph 46 of MA, his best  interests  are
             undoubtedly to remain in the UK.  The rules afford  weight  to
             seven years residence as a  child,  particularly  seven  years
             starting from an older age such as 5.  As  the  President  set
             out in PD: 'Other legal tests which have gained much  currency
             in this sphere during recent years - insurmountable obstacles,
             exceptional circumstances, very compelling factors -  have  no
             application in the exercise we are performing.  Self-evidently
             the test of reasonableness poses a less exacting and demanding
             threshold than that posed by the other tests mentioned.'


         24.  The Home Office guidance has been updated since  the  decision
             in MA but applies only to decisions  made  on  or  after  22nd
             February 2018.  The applicable guidance acknowledges that when
             balancing the  child's  best  interests  with  whether  it  is
             reasonable to leave the UK, strong countervailing reasons  may
             arise 'where for example the child will be returning with  the
             family unit to the family's country  of  nationality  and  the
             parents have deliberately  sought  to  circumvent  immigration
             control'.  That is not the situation  for  this  family.   The
             respondent's guidance  also  sets  out  what  has  been  well-
             established in  case  law  that:  'the  consideration  of  the
             child's best interests must not be affected by the conduct  or
             immigration history of the parents but these will be  relevant
             to  the  assessment  of  the  public  interest...whether  this
             outweighs the child's best interest...and whether  ...  it  is
             reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.'"

9.   So far as concerns the factors raised by the  SSHD's  grounds  as  ones
    said to count against the claimants in any assessment of reasonableness
    and of proportionality, it is clear that the judge did take  them  into
    account, but  did  not  find  they  crossed  the  threshold  of  strong
    countervailing reasons.  Thus I consider the points made regarding them
    to amount to mere disagreement with the judge's assessment.

10.  Given that the judge found the claimants met the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, it was clearly open to him to conclude that there was no  public
    interest in requiring the claimants to leave the UK.

11.  The judge did consider in  the  alternative  whether  even  if  Mr  [H]
    deception was serious enough to justify refusal under  the  suitability
    requirements, the claimants were entitled to succeed outside the  Rules
    (see paragraph  26).   In  relation  to  this  aspect  of  the  judge's
    decision, Mr Clarke did not seek  to  pursue  the  argument  concerning
    whether the suitability requirement had been  met.   In  any  event,  I
    consider the judge was entitled to regard  S117B(6)  as  the  "complete
    answer" to the balancing exercise required by the circumstances of  the
    claimants' case (see  paragraph  27).   That  is  consistent  with  the
    guidance given by the Supreme Court in KO.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that whilst on the generous side,  the
    judge's  assessment  is  not  vitiated  by  material  legal  error  and
    accordingly it must stand.

13.  To conclude:

    The judge did not materially err in law.


    Accordingly, his decision to allow the claimants' appeals must stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  third  claimant
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the third  claimant  and  to  the  respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 30 April 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

