

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: HU/14005/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 March 2019                  |On 7 March 2019                 |
|                                 |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                             Mr ZUBEYIR AKBULUT
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS










        1. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Foudy on 2 December 2017 against the  decision  to  dismiss  the
           Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Plumptre in a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  20
           December  2017.   Judge  Plumptre  found  that  the   First-tier
           Tribunal had no jurisdiction because  there  was  no  appealable
           decision.


        2. The Appellant is a national of Turkey, born on 15 January  1994.
           He had sought leave to remain as a  business  person  under  the
           1963 European Community Association Agreement with Turkey.   The
           judge found that the refusal decision fell outside section 82 of
           the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended),
           and  that  in   effect   the   Appellant's   only   remedy   was
           Administrative Review  under  Appendix  AR  of  the  Immigration
           Rules.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had not  correctly  interpreted  section
           82, in the light of Akturk v SSHD [2017] EWHC 297  (Admin).  The
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal was stayed to await the decision of
           the Court of Appeal, now reported as CA (Turkey) [2018] EWCA Civ
           2875.  Akturk was  overturned.   Following  that  decision,  the
           Appellant's solicitors indicated by letter dated  4  March  2019
           that the Appellant was content for the appeal to  be  determined
           on the papers and so there would no appearance.


        3. Ms Holmes for the Respondent relied on CA (Turkey).   There  was
           no jurisdiction in the First-tier Tribunal.


      4.    There is nothing which the tribunal  can  usefully  add  to  the
           Court of Appeal's comprehensive decision.  The very  experienced
           First-tier Tribunal Judge's cautious interpretation  of  section
           82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
           amended) has been vindicated. The tribunal finds that there  was
           no error of law and the onwards appeal must be dismissed.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      There was no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
      reasons, which stands unchanged.


      Signed                            Dated 5 March 2019
      Deputy         Upper          Tribunal          Judge          Manuell















































































































































































































































































































