
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14793/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2021                    |On 29th July 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Kevin Anthony Hearne
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer to
the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant is a national of
Jamaica born on 29 July 1975. His appeal against the decision to refuse his
application for indefinite leave to remain and his human rights claim was
allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi for the reasons given in her
decision promulgated on 16 February 2021.


2.   The grounds submit the judge failed to consider the appellant's
failure to meet the suitability requirements, failed to explain the
exceptional and compelling circumstances warranting the exercise of
discretion in the appellant's favour and failed to properly conduct the
balancing exercise having erred in finding that the appellant satisfied the
immigration rules. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
Kekic on all grounds on 23 April 2021.

3.   Mr Clarke submitted that there was no challenge to the judge's finding
that section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act applied and therefore the errors
identified in the grounds were not material. He conceded the appeal should
be dismissed.

4.   I find the judge erred in law in finding that the appellant satisfied
the immigration rules. The appellant could not satisfy the suitability
requirements given his conviction for possession of heroin in July 2006 for
which he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment. The appellant's
immigration history demonstrated he did not have 10 years continuous lawful
residence.

5.   However, given the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship
with his British citizen children and the unchallenged finding that it
would not be reasonable for them to leave the UK, the errors identified in
the grounds were not material to the decision to allow the appeal on human
rights grounds.

6.   I conclude there was no material error of law in the decision to allow
the appeal on human rights grounds. The respondent's appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 16 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
