
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14277/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 March 2021                      |On 23 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                          Mudashiru Adebayo Atooki
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Mohsin, Counsel, instructed by Lawmatic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against  the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
       of the Respondent on 7 August 2019 refusing him leave to  remain  on
       human rights grounds.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  who
       decided to

  "... grant permission on the basis that the Tribunal arguably  failed  to
  take material evidence into account, identified as birthday cards sent to
  the Appellant by the children, photographs of  them  together  when  they
  visited and stayed with him, and membership cards for a library based  at
  his location.  It is further arguable that the Tribunal  failed  to  have
  regard to the Appellant's financial circumstances when it  drew  negative
  inference from his  failure  to  make  'significant  purchases'  for  his
  children."

    3. That said, Ms Mohsin indicated that she intended to rely on all  the
       grounds set  out  in  a  somewhat  discursive  document  running  to
       nineteen paragraphs prepared by Mr Paul Turner of Counsel.   She  is
       clearly entitled to do that and I have read  them  but  I  have  not
       found it necessary to comment on each of them.

    4. I begin by looking  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The
       Appellant entered the United Kingdom irregularly  in  October  2004.
       As far as I can see he has never had permission to be in the  United
       Kingdom although he has applied for  permission  on,  I think,  two
       occasions.  An application under the Immigration (European  Economic
       Area) Regulations 2006 was refused in July 2015 and on 25  September
       2018 he made the application leading to the present appeal.

    5. His circumstances include cohabiting in the United Kingdom with  one
       "OC" and their having two children, a son born in October 2007 and a
       daughter born in June 2010.  The relationship with his partner ended
       in 2013 but it  was  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  continued  to
       maintain his children financially and emotionally. It has been shown
       that the appellants son is a British citizen  and  his  daughter  is
       entitled to British citizenship, or will  become  so  entitled  very
       soon, if she is not presently a British citizen.

    6. As will be well understood by anyone familiar with this area of law,
       by reason of Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 in the case a of person (such as the Appellant), who
       is not liable to deportation, the public interest does  not  require
       his removal where the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
       relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be  reasonable
       to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

    7. This is not a case where there is any suggestion that  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom and it
       is accepted that the two children are "qualifying  children"  within
       the meaning of the Act.  An important question,  but  not  the  only
       important question, in this appeal was whether there was a  "genuine
       and subsisting parental relationship" with a qualifying child.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal examined the  evidence  and  concluded  that
       there was not.  I consider the decision in more detail now.

    9. I note that the Appellant claims to have had temporary admission  to
       the United Kingdom in 2010 subject to the condition that he did  not
       work.

   10. The Appellant's statement shows that he lives in the  "E5"  postcode
       district of London which I understand is Hackney  and  Newham.   His
       former partner and their children live in Doncaster.

   11. The Appellant made a statement dated 3 December 2019 in  support  of
       his appeal.  Two paragraphs are particularly  important  and  I  set
       them out below:

  "6. In 2013, our relationship with my  partner  was  broke  down  due  to
  family issues.  We start living  separately.   Despite  the  relationship
  breakdown, I look  after  my  son  and  daughter  both  financially  and
  emotionally.  I am still transferring some money to my partner's  account
  for my child support (please  see  the  attached  bank  transfers/deposit
  receipt).  Despite the bank deposit I gave  some  cash  whenever  I  meet
  them.

  8.     I have a very good relation and close ties with my children.  They
  are living at [address Doncaster].  Some time I visit them and they  also
  come to me when they had school vacation  and  I  took  them  to  Hackney
  Library, park and other places.  When we meet I bought foods, clothes and
  other necessary things  for  my  children.   I  cannot  live  without  my
  children.  I cannot think their  absence  in  my  life.   Thus,  I  have
  established my family and private life."

   12. The Appellant gave evidence before the judge and was cross-examined.

   13. At paragraph 46 of the Decision and Reasons the judge noted that the
       Appellant confirmed that he and his former partner had separated  in
       April 2013 and he did not know the whereabouts of his former partner
       or their children until 2017.

   14. The Appellant said he had made  other  efforts  to  establish  their
       whereabouts, including asking the school where his son had attended,
       but he agreed that his former partner was the sole carer until he re-
       established contact with the family.

   15. He said how he had travelled to Doncaster from London on some six or
       seven occasions although he also said how in 2019 he had  made  nine
       trips by coach.

   16. The judge referred at paragraph 40 to receipts  tending  to  confirm
       payment for items.  At paragraph 54  he  referred  to  the  children
       having provided a greetings  card  which  was  in  the  bundle.   At
       paragraph 48 the judge referred to photographs taken  and  submitted
       in evidence.  At paragraph 63 of the Decision and Reasons the  judge
       noted submissions to the effect that although the Appellant  was  in
       poor financial circumstances he did what he could for his  children,
       entertaining them cheaply at libraries  and  parks  and  paying  for
       groceries.  The judge's attention was drawn to bank  statements  and
       transfer details.

   17. The judge was reminded that the children are generally entitled to a
       relationship with both birth parents and it was submitted  that  the
       children could not live in Nigeria.

   18. At paragraph 73 of the Decision  and  Reasons  the  judge  expressed
       scepticism about the claims that the Appellant  had  maintained  his
       children by sending payments to their mother.  There was evidence of
       payments. The first payment was dated 4 October 2016 but,  according
       to the Appellant, he did not know the children's  whereabouts  until
       2017 and the judge could not make sense of that strand of evidence.

   19. At paragraph 76 the judge reminded himself of  the  decision  in  KO
       (Nigeria) and Others [2018] UKSC 53 and  directed  himself  that  he
       must consider the  matter  from  the  perspective  of  the  children
       involved and he also  reminded  himself  of  his  obligations  under
       Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  to
       consider the best interests of the children.   The  judge  found  it
       "surprising" that there was no statement from  the  former  partner,
       that there  was  not  an  independent  social  worker's  report  and
       "Although both children are of course minors, no  letters  or  other
       expressions as to their views have been submitted to the Tribunal."

   20. At paragraph 70 the judge found the purchased items did  not  amount
       to "evidence of significant purchases".  At paragraph  81  he  found
       himself "not satisfied that the Appellant has discharged the  burden
       of establishing that he has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
       with either child". Clearly there is almost certainly some  kind  of
       relationship but for the purposes of section  117B(6)  a  subsisting
       parental relationship was required.

   21. Also at paragraph 81  the  judge  fell  short  of  disregarding  the
       evidence of financial contributions but said they did not  establish
       a genuine and subsisting relationship with the children.

   22. At paragraph 85 the judge found that the Appellant  would  not  face
       "very significant obstacles" on return to Nigeria.   He  had  family
       there and could obtain employment there.

   23. I consider first the grounds of appeal.  This informs  me  that  the
       "main ground of challenge is that the FtJ erred in the consideration
       of the children and their best interests."

   24. This develops into a criticism of the  judge  failing  to  expressly
       follow the five stage stages in Razgar [2014] UKHL 27 and failing to
       consider properly the best interests of the children.

   25. At paragraph 8 in the grounds the judge is  criticised  for  drawing
       adverse inferences from the absence of a statement from the  partner
       or indeed the children and points out that there was in fact a  card
       from the children.

   26. It is said the judge was wrong to record that the Appellant was only
       able to establish contact with his partner in  2017.   It  was  said
       that the Appellant said he traced his partner in 2016.

   27. The grounds point out the Appellant has little money and this should
       have been reflected in the analysis of the  contributions  he  made.
       The children had current Hackney Library cards.

   28. The grounds contended the judge was given  an  explanation  for  how
       they managed to  lose  contact.   That  does  not  explain  why  the
       Appellant's former partner did not contact him.

   29. It was contended the Appellant did  take  things  to  the  children,
       including African food when he visited and this, together  with  his
       lack of resources, should have been considered and  illuminated  the
       findings about his maintaining them.

   30. The judge was then criticised for not  expressly  following  leading
       authorities about the best interests of the children.  Then  he  was
       criticised for not engaging with the reasonableness of expecting the
       child to leave the United Kingdom.

   31. It was said there were no clear findings on credibility.

   32. In her submissions Ms Mohsin went further and pointed out there were
       no adverse credibility findings.  In the absence  of  clear  adverse
       credibility findings she submitted it was not clear  how  the  judge
       could conclude that the relationship had not been established.

   33. Mr Howells submitted there was no material error.

   34. The judge plainly was concerned about the welfare of the  child  and
       was plainly not impressed with the evidence  about  the  Appellant's
       involvement.

   35. I have reflected on these things.   There  was  clearly  theoretical
       merit in the grounds of appeal.  However this is not  a  case  where
       there is clear evidence of significant financial contribution  being
       made.  It may be that the Appellant's resources  are  very  limited,
       indeed they almost certainly are.  He is  not  being  penalised  for
       poverty.  The point is that he is not in a position to show that  he
       has maintained a  relationship  by  providing  financially  for  the
       children.  On any version of events there was a  clear  gap  in  the
       evidence in the contact of some years.  There is no indication  that
       the Appellant moved house at any stage.  If the  mother  had  wanted
       contact, contact could have been arranged presumably by  her  simply
       writing  to  him.   There  is  an  element  in  the  case  that   is
       unsatisfactory but on any reckoning there has  been  a  big  gap  in
       contact.  There was no supporting evidence of contact continuing  or
       that improved the lives of the children.  The  judge  was  perfectly
       aware of one card expressing affection for the  Appellant  but  that
       does not take matters very far at all.  There really is nothing here
       that establishes a "subsisting parental relationship" as required by
       the 2002 Act.  At its highest there is evidence of some contact  but
       there is nothing independent to show that it is  encouraged  in  any
       way by the children's mother or that the relationship  is  parental,
       rather than avuncular or friendly.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate
       playing a guiding role in the children's lives.

   36. The judge could have made  clearer  findings  but  on  any  sensible
       reading of the Decision he was unimpressed and that  influenced  his
       decision.  He was entitled to be unimpressed.  He has  given  proper
       reasons.  The evidence that was provided was scanty and  there  were
       obvious routes for further evidence which did not seem to have  been
       explored.

   37. There is nothing in the criticism  about  failing  to  consider  the
       reasonableness of the children removing with him to  Nigeria.   That
       was not on anybody's agenda.  Again there is  theoretical  merit  in
       the criticism of not making an express finding about the  children's
       best interests, but, given that there is a perfectly  clear  finding
       that the Appellant has little contact with the children  and  theirs
       is not in a parental relationship that would have been  an  academic
       exercise.   Whilst  the   matters   that   concerned   Judge   Bruce
       particularly when she gave permission to appeal are,  with  respect,
       plainly arguable I am satisfied the judge was perfectly aware of the
       library cards  and  the  photographs  and  the  difficult  financial
       circumstances of the Appellant.  The judge considered  them  because
       he mentioned them but they did not amount to much.

   38. The core point is the judge, having heard all the evidence, found it
       unsatisfactory and insufficient to prove the necessary relationship.

   39. For the sake of completeness I note  that  the  Secretary  of  State
       refused to engage with something that looked like a protection claim
       unless the Appellant chose to make a protection claim which  he  has
       not done.  There is nothing wrong in deciding he could return to his
       country of nationality.  He is a man coming up to about 50 years old
       with family in Nigeria.  There is  no  reason  he  cannot  establish
       himself there.

   40. There is no material error of law established in this decision and I
       dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

   41. This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 June 2021                   |

