
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14427/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2020                   |On 5 November 2020                   |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  ENAS [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, born on 2 September 1935 (aged  84
    at the time of the hearing in the  FtT).   On  30  November  2018,  the
    respondent refused her application for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
    dependent relative.  Having subsequently entered the UK as  a  visitor,
    she applied on 2 April 2019 for leave to remain on family  and  private
    life grounds.  The respondent refused that  application  on  15  August
    2019.  FtT Judge Cohen dismissed her appeal by a  decision  promulgated
    on 8 January 2020.

 2. The appellant sought leave to appeal to the UT  on  9  grounds.   By  a
    decision issued on 4 August 2020, UTJ Kekic granted leave on grounds 1,
    2, 8 and 9 only, and issued directions with a view to deciding  without
    a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in law, and, if so, (b) whether its
    decision should be set aside.  Parties were also given the  opportunity
    to submit on  whether  there  should  be  a  hearing  to  decide  those
    questions.

 3. In a response filed on 14 August 2020, the SSHD says that a hearing  is
    not required.  She submits that the FtT made no material error and  its
    decision should stand.

 4. In a response filed on 17 August 2020, the appellant submits  that  the
    UT should "accept the 4 grounds of appeal and  overrule  Judge  Cohen's
    decision".  Nothing is said about any need for a hearing.

 5. In a further submission filed on 25 August 2020, the appellant asks for
    a hearing, citing authorities on the value of oral argument, and saying
    under heading (1), "procedural fairness", that a  hearing  "will  allow
    the witnesses to be re-examined" and under heading (2) that  an  appeal
    on the papers "risks a lack of focus on the appellant as an  individual
    ... rather than a number".

 6. The request for a hearing is confused.   It  relates  to  remaking  the
    decision, rather than to error of law.  At the error of law stage there
    is no re-examination of witnesses or evaluation of the appellant as  an
    individual; the first question is whether the FtT  erred  on  the  case
    which was put before it.  Both sides have said all they have to say  on
    that question, so the UT  may  now  proceed  to  answer  it  without  a
    hearing, in terms of rules 2 and 34.

 7. The submissions for the appellant are  also  rather  confused,  and  in
    parts irrelevant, being based on evidence which was not before the FtT,
    and on deterioration in the appellant's condition  since  the  hearing.
    Error of law must ordinarily be shown by reference to what  was  before
    the FtT.  The appellant does not advance an argument for any  exception
    to that general principle.

 8. I have resolved the error  of  law  issue  without  taking  account  of
    anything which was not before the FtT.

 9. Ground 1 is directed against [31] of the decision:

         "The appellant has submitted a medical report and update from  Miss
         Jasdeep Kaur Gahir who is to all  intents  and  purposes  a  breast
         implant and cosmetic surgeon.  She is  known  to  the  sponsor  and
         works in the same hospital as him.   She  has  prepared  a  medical
         report which appears significantly outside her area  of  expertise.
         The medical report appears prone  to  exaggeration.   It  indicated
         that the appellant was virtually bedbound. The  appellant  attended
         her appeal before me and  walked  independently  ...  the  evidence
         indicated that the appellant remained  at  home  alone  whilst  the
         sponsor and his wife went to work at 7 am and did not return  until
         5 pm.  She was alone until 3:30  pm  when  her  grandchildren  were
         brought home by a childminder.  She would watch  tv  and  eat  food
         that was prepared for her and go to the  toilet  independently.   I
         find  that  the  evidence  in  the  medical  report  is  prone   to
         significant exaggeration and I attach very little weight to it."

10. The reports by Miss Gahir are dated 8  August  and  28  November  2019.
    They are headed and signed off with her qualifications,  "MB  ChB  FRCS
    Consultant Breast Oncoplastic and General Surgeon - GMC"  (registration
    number given).  They are addressed from BMI King's Oak and Cavell,  and
    from the North Middlesex, which are among the UK's leading private  and
    NHS hospitals,  respectively.    Oncoplastic surgery  combines  breast
    cancer tumour removal with breast conservation surgery.  The author  of
    the reports has impressive medical qualifications, both specialised and
    general, and holds senior posts.  Those are all public matters.

11. The judge does not explain the basis on which she  considers  that  the
    reports go beyond the author's expertise - which  would  be  a  serious
    professional impropriety.

12. The description of the author as "to all intents and purposes a  breast
    implant and cosmetic surgeon" takes an oddly belittling tone.

13. The appellant does not dispute that the author "is known to the sponsor
    and works in the same hospital".  It is not error of law accurately  to
    record facts, even if they are  irrelevant.   However,  why  does  that
    sentence appear?  So far as pertinent, it seems intended to convey that
    the author has allowed herself to become  partial,  a  serious  charge.
    Judges should not shrink from such findings, where justified, but  they
    should be stated explicitly, not by innuendo, and they  should  not  be
    made without good reasons.

14. The reports follow on from an earlier report, which was not before  the
    FtT.  They disclose that the  author  first  saw  the  appellant  after
    discovery of an abdominal swelling while the sponsor's wife was bathing
    the appellant, raising concern  whether  there  might  be  a  need  for
    surgery.  The appellant is assessed at level 7, "severely frail"  on  a
    clinical frailty scale of 9 levels.  The earlier report says  that  she
    is "totally dependent" on  her  relatives  "in  most  aspects  such  as
    getting up from bed, bathing and even when  walking  a  few  steps  she
    needs to be supported".  The later report confirms that score, and says
    she has "an unsteady gait" and is "susceptible to falls".

15. The judge does not go into detail of her observation of  the  appellant
    "walking independently", but presumably that was within a hearing  room
    over a short distance.  The appellant offers to prove by witnesses that
    she was assisted over those few steps,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to
    explore the matter by  evidence.   The  suggestion  of  obtaining  CCTV
    footage from the hearing centre does not need to be followed up either,
    although I suspect that any record may by now have gone, or at least be
    difficult to trace.

16. A judge is entitled to rely on her own  observations,  but  has  to  be
    careful when rejecting expert findings.

17. The frailty scale is appended to the  reports.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that it is for use only by geriatricians, rather  than  by  all
    medical professionals.

18. Level 6, "moderately frail", is illustrated by a person using  a  frame
    to stand,  and  defined  thus:  "People  need  help  with  all  outside
    activities and with keeping house.  Inside, they  often  have  problems
    with  stairs  and  need  help  with  bathing  and  might  need  minimal
    assistance ... with dressing".

19. Level 7 is illustrated with a person  in  a  wheelchair,  and  defined:
    "Completely dependent for personal care... even so, stable and  not  at
    high risk of dying (within 6 months)."

20. The appellant's submissions point  out  that  level  7  does  not  mean
    bedbound, which is level 8, and that the reports do not  say  that  the
    appellant is bedbound.

21. The reports, read in detail, and the evidence as a  whole,  might  have
    justified an observation that  the  appellant  was  on  the  borderline
    between 6 and 7, moderate and severe.  I cannot see  justification  for
    saying that the reports engaged in "significant exaggeration".

22. The FtT's overall reasoning at [31] is legally  inadequate  to  justify
    giving the reports "very  little  weight".   Ground  1  shows  material
    error.

23. Ground 2 shows that in saying there was no evidence of medication,  the
    FtT overlooked evidence that the  appellant  was  prescribed  an  anti-
    depressant in Egypt.  I doubt whether consideration of  the  report  by
    the Egyptian doctor was so inadequate as to amount to  material  error.
    Ground 8 is only  disagreement  with  the  proportionality  assessment.
    Ground 9 shows that the appellant was a vulnerable witness, which might
    have made some difference when assessing discrepancies in the evidence.
     In view of the outcome on ground 1, it is  not  necessary  to  resolve
    grounds 2, 8 and 9 any further than that.

24. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  There is  no  need  for  further
    submissions on procedure.  The nature of the case is plainly such  that
    it is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for  a  fresh  hearing,  not  before
    Judge Cohen.

25. (The best starting point will probably be the adult dependent  relative
    rule.)

26. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    3 November 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
covering letter or covering email.

