
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14277/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2018                         |On 8th January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  maria [c]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rene, Counsel instructed by Thoree & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For  convenience  I  shall  employ  the  appellations  "Appellant"  and
    "Respondent" as at first instance.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bolivia who appealed against the decision
    of the Respondent dated 25th October 2017 refusing her indefinite leave
    to remain here based upon her family and private life.  Her  subsequent
    appeal to First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg was allowed on Article 8  human
    rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 17th August 2018.

 3. The judge noted the terms of the Respondent's refusal to her claim  and
    set out the evidence given on the  Appellant's  behalf  in  the  appeal
    before her namely by the Appellant, her son  John  and  her  other  son
    Johan.

 4. In her decision and  reasons  commencing  at  paragraph  19  the  judge
    applied the civil standard of proof on a balance of probabilities.  She
    said it was common ground that the  Appellant  did  not  come  to  this
    country until she was 35  years  old  and  she  was  granted  temporary
    admission only (paragraph  21).   She  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    overstayed by a very significant  period.   She  took  account  of  the
    previous determination of Immigration Judge Horvath in accordance  with
    the case  of  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   She  found  that  the
    Appellant's  credibility  was  damaged  by  the  lies  she   had   told
    immigration officials (paragraph 24) and concluded  that  she  did  not
    meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration   Rules
    (paragraph 26).  She went on to refer to well-known case law and  noted
    (paragraph 32) that the Appellant had a particularly close relationship
    with her son Johan.  She found  the  evidence  of  Johan  was  credible
    (paragraph 35).  Although she said at paragraph 37  that  she  had  not
    worked in her home country since she left in 2010,  it  is  clear  that
    date should be 2003.  She had no home of her own  to  return  to.   She
    said she took into account the facts that had happened since the  first
    judge's determination and found that the Appellant  was  acutely  aware
    that her family had been fractured by two of her children being granted
    leave to remain in this country and two of her children  being  removed
    to Bolivia.  She found that given the strength  of  her  ties  to  this
    country, particularly with her two sons, the length  of  residence  and
    her family background here that any interference now in her  Article  8
    rights would be disproportionate.  She found she had family life within
    the meaning and purpose of Article  8  with  her  sons  in  the  United
    Kingdom and  any  interference  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for her.

 5. The Secretary of State lodged grounds of  application  which  are  wide
    ranging and start with the proposition that the judge was wrong to find
    there were emotional ties beyond the norm.  As this ground was departed
    from by Mr Jarvis no more need be said about that.  The  second  ground
    was in relation to public interest and proportionality  it  being  said
    that the Appellant was an overstayer who had worked  illegally  and  it
    was not  in  the  public  interest  to  allow  such  an  abuse  of  the
    immigration  system.   The  third  ground  was  that  there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's return to Bolivia  and  the
    conclusion  was  that  the  Secretary  of  State's   decision   was   a
    disproportionate and necessary response and was of paramount importance
    to the legitimate aim pursued.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes in
    a decision dated 9th October 2018 and thus the matter came before me on
    the above date.  Before me Mr Jarvis relied on his grounds - indicating
    he was not relying on ground  1.   Mr  Jarvis  emphasised  that  little
    weight should be given to private life when someone's presence here was
    precarious or unlawful.   This  Appellant  was  someone  who  had  been
    working illegally.  Reliance was placed on paragraphs 41, 43 and 49  of
    Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58.  In  particular  in  paragraph  43  the
    bright line interpretation of the word "precarious" in Section  117B(5)
    was  said  to  be  linguistically  and  teleologically  legitimate  and
    consistent with the way the  ECHR  expressed  itself  in  other  cases.
    Reference was also made to ZS (Jamaica) and Another v SSHD [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1639.

 7. Essentially for the Appellant to succeed in this case  she  must  prove
    that there was an exceptional element to this case  which  was  lacking
    here.  As such the decision could not be relied on and  should  be  set
    aside and the decision remade dismissing the appeal.

 8. For the Appellant Mr Rene said that this was a  well-balanced  decision
    by Judge Beg and she had considered all  the  necessary  factors.   The
    exceptionality of this case was that there was a family  unit  in  this
    country and the judge had relied heavily on that in paragraphs  36  and
    37.  She had taken account of the public interest.  While the  decision
    was a generous one it could not be said that there was an error in law.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. The judge referred to  well-known  case  law  in  making  her  decision
    referring to Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and VW (Uganda)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5
    where the court held that there must be more than a degree of  hardship
    to amount to a breach of the fundamental right protected by Article  8.
    Of importance is that she referred to Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 where
    the court held that the Secretary of State had not imposed  a  test  of
    exceptionality but the word exceptional meant  circumstances  in  which
    refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    individual such that the  refusal  of  the  application  had  not  been
    proportionate.

11. It seems to me that the  key  finding  of  the  judge  is  set  out  in
    paragraph 32.  She found  that  the  Appellant's  sons  in  the  United
    Kingdom were adults and both were at university.  She  found  that  the
    Appellant's relationship with her  adult  sons  did  go  beyond  normal
    emotional ties to  a  relationship  of  real  committed  and  effective
    support.  The Appellant had always lived with them being their  primary
    carer when they were minors and supported them against  the  background
    of fractured relationships with  her  two  children  in  Bolivia.   She
    accepted the evidence of the Appellant  that  she  had  a  particularly
    close relationship with her son Johan.

12. Johan had given evidence that he did not visit Bolivia last  year  with
    his father and brother because he could not  leave  his  mother  alone.
    The  judge  further  noted  that  her  two  children  in  Bolivia  were
    effectively estranged from  her  because  they  blamed  her  for  their
    detention and removal  to  Bolivia  (paragraph  34).   The  judge  took
    account of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  The judge was, in  fact,  applying  the  reasoning  set  out  in
    Agyarko  that  her  removal  would  result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences for the Appellant such that the refusal of the application
    would not be proportionate.

13. The judge was quite entitled to find that she had  family  life  within
    the meaning and purpose of Article 8 with  her  sons  here.   She  gave
    sound reasons for finding that these  relationships  were  particularly
    close.  Against that background while it could be said that this was  a
    case where another judge might have moved in the other direction, there
    was nothing perverse or irrational about the judge's findings which, in
    my view, were entirely open to her on the evidence before her; she  was
    therefore entitled to allow the appeal under Article 8.

14. As such there is no error of law in the  judge's  decision  which  must
    stand.

Notice of Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.

17. No anonymity order is made.


Signed       JG Macdonald                             Date    18th  December
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

