
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14824/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2019                    |On 11th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Tahir [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, HUMD Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  O'Hanlon
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 24th April 2018.

 2. He applied for leave to remain on the basis of his family  and  private
    life on 23rd March 2016 but was refused on 9th September  2016.   Judge
    O'Hanlon dismissed his  appeal.   The  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Judge O'Hanlon accepted that he
    enjoyed a family life with his son and that he had very regular contact
    with him.  His son's mother has refugee status in the UK and there  was
    realistically no question of the appellant's son returning to  Pakistan
    with him.  Nevertheless Judge O'Hanlon considered that the decision  to
    remove the appellant was proportionate.

 3. This matter came before Judge Bagral on  28th  September  2018.   Judge
    Bagral set aside the decision of Judge O'Hanlon and listed  the  appeal
    to be resumed before her so that the parties could make submissions  in
    relation to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 4. At the time of the hearing before Judge Bagral the appellant's son  was
    not a qualifying child but by the date of the  hearing  before  me,  Mr
    Malik produced evidence that he had been granted British citizenship.

 5. Mr Diwnycz said that he could not confirm the grant of citizenship from
    his own file, but assuming that the document shown by Mr Malik  accords
    with Home Office records, he accepted that the child was  a  qualifying
    child and it would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  He
    agreed in the circumstances  that  the  appeal  ought  to  be  allowed.
    Accordingly, the Secretary of State's position is no longer that it  is
    in the public interest for the appellant to be removed.

Decision

 6. The original judge erred in law and his decision has  been  set  aside.
    It is remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]
Signed                              Date 2 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



