
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14253/2019_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|hearing                              |On 14 September 2020                 |
|On 9 September 2020                  |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                       Mr Prem Prashanth Rao Gudivada
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


This is  a  decision  on  the  papers  without  a  hearing.  There  were  no
submissions  from  the  Secretary  of  State  whether   a   decision   could
appropriately be made on  the  papers.  The  respondent  requested  an  oral
hearing. The documents described at para 4 below were submitted. A  face-to-
face hearing or a remote hearing was not  held  for  the  reasons  given  at
paras  6-21  below.  The  order  made  is  set  out  at   para   53   below.
(Administrative Instruction No. 2 from the Senior President  of  Tribunals).



Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:     Ms A Jones, of Counsel, instructed by Farani  Taylor
Solicitors.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Herlihy who, in a decision  promulgated  on  15  November
    2019 following a hearing on 29 October 2019, allowed the appeal  of  Mr
    Gudivada, a national of India born on 28 December 1982  (hereafter  the
    "claimant") on human rights grounds (Article 8) against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State of 7 August 2019 to refuse his application of 13
    November 2017 for leave to remain on human right grounds (Article 8).

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  in
    a decision signed on 20 April 2020 and sent to the parties  on  26  May
    2020.

 3. On 24 June 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent to the  parties  a  "Note  and
    Directions" issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley dated 22 June 2020.
    Para 1 of the "Note and Directions" stated that, in light of  the  need
    to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, Judge Lindsley  had
    reached the provisional view, having reviewed the file  in  this  case,
    that it would be appropriate to determine questions (a) and (b) set out
    at para 1 of her "Note & Directions", reproduced at my para 5(i)(a) and
    (b) below,  without  a  hearing.  Judge  Lindsley  gave  the  following
    directions:

         (i)  Para 2 of the "Note and Directions"  issued  directions  which
         provided  for  the  party  who  had  sought  permission   to   make
         submissions in support of the assertion of an error of law  and  on
         the question whether the decision of the FtT should be set aside if
         error of law is found, no later than 14 days after  the  "Note  and
         Directions" was sent to the parties; for any other  party  to  file
         and serve submissions in response, no later than 21 days after  the
         "Note and Directions"  was  sent  to  the  parties;  and,  if  such
         submissions in  response  were  made,  for  the  party  who  sought
         permission to file a reply no later than 28 days  after  the  "Note
         and Directions" was sent to the parties.

         (ii) Para 3 of the "Note and Directions" stated that any party  who
         considered that despite the  foregoing  directions  a  hearing  was
         necessary to consider questions (a) and (b) may submit reasons  for
         that view no later than 21 days after the "Note and Directions" was
         sent to the parties.

 4. In response to the  "Note  and  Directions",  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    received the following:

         (i)  on the Secretary of State's behalf, a  letter  dated  29  June
         2020 from Ms Aboni and the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MA
         (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 000450 (IAC),  submitted  to  the
         Upper Tribunal under cover of an email dated 29 June 2020 timed  at
         12:46 hours; and

         (ii) on the claimant's behalf, a  document  entitled:  "Appellant's
         Submissions July 2020 " dated 15 July 2020 by Ms  Jones,  submitted
         under cover of an email dated 16 July 2020 timed at 05:52 hours.



The issues

 5. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

         (i)  whether it is appropriate to decide  the  following  questions
         without a hearing:

             (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the making  of
             an error on a point of law; and

             (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be set aside.



         (ii) If yes, whether the decision on the claimant's appeal  against
         the Secretary of State's decision should be re-made  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal or whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 6. In her letter dated 29 June 2020, Ms Aboni did not make any submissions
    as to whether or not it is appropriate to decide questions (a) and  (b)
    set out above without a hearing.

 7. At para 3 of her written submissions, Ms Jones  submits  that  an  oral
    hearing by telephone or video is the appropriate  way  of  "considering
    permission to appeal". This does not make sense  because  the  claimant
    and his representatives must already be aware that permission has  been
    granted. Furthermore, no reasons have been  given  in  support  of  the
    submission of Ms Jones that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  not  make  a
    decision on questions (a) and (b) without a hearing.

 8. I do not rely upon the mere fact that the Secretary of  State  has  not
    made any submissions or the mere fact that Ms Jones  has  not  provided
    reasons in support of her submission that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    not make a decision on questions (a)  and  (b)  without  a  hearing  as
    factors that justify proceeding without a hearing.  I  have  considered
    the circumstances for myself.

 9. The appeal in the instant case is straightforward.

10. I am aware of, and take into account, the force of the points  made  in
    the dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta  v  Holmes  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 1104 to the effect, inter alia, that "oral argument is perhaps
    the most powerful force there is, in our legal process,  to  promote  a
    change of mind by a judge"; Keene LJ at para 47 of  Sengupta  v  Holmes
    concerning the impact that oral submissions may have on  the  decision-
    making process; paras 35 and 48 respectively of the judgments  of  Lord
    Bingham and of Lord Slynn in Smith v Parole Board [2005]  UKHL  1;  the
    dicta at para 17(3) of Wasif v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 82  concerning  the
    power of oral argument; the  dicta  in  the  decision  in  R  v  Sussex
    Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB 256 to the effect that  justice
    must be done and be seen to be done; and the  dicta  at  para  8  of  R
    (Siddiqui) v Lord Chancellor and others [2019] EWCA  Civ  1040  to  the
    effect that it is an "undeniable fact that the oral  hearing  procedure
    lies at the heart of English civil procedure", to mention just a few of
    the cases in which we have received guidance from judges in the  higher
    courts on the issue that I have to decide.

11. I am aware of and have applied the guidance of  the  Supreme  Court  at
    para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013]  UKSC
    61.

12. Given that my decision is limited to the Issues, there is  no  question
    of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence  or  considering
    any evidence at this stage.

13. In addition, I take into account the seriousness of the issues  in  the
    instant appeal for the claimant. He has been accused of having obtained
    a test certificate by the use of a proxy test taker. The  instant  case
    therefore relates to an important matter, as it goes to his  character.
    It is a matter of some seriousness.

14. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

15. Taking a preliminary view at the initial stage of deciding  whether  it
    is appropriate and just to decide  the  Issues  without  a  hearing,  I
    considered the Judge's decision, the grounds and the submissions before
    me. I was of the view, taken provisionally at this  stage,  that  there
    was nothing complicated at all in the assessment of the Issues  in  the
    instant case, given that the grounds are simple and straightforward and
    the Judge's decision straightforward. I kept the  matter  under  review
    throughout  my  deliberations.  However,  at  the  conclusion   of   my
    deliberations, I was affirmed in the view I had taken on a  preliminary
    basis.

16. At para 38 of my assessment below, I have  said  that  there  were  two
    possible constructions of ground  2.  If  there  had  been  a  hearing,
    whether face-to-face or remotely, I would have asked the  Secretary  of
    State's representative to clarify which of the  two  constructions  was
    relied upon. Whichever construction is relied upon by the Secretary  of
    State, my reasoning at  paras  40  and  41  below  is  a  complete  and
    determinative answer.

17. No other issues arose during the course  of  my  deliberations  that  I
    would have asked the parties to address if there had  been  a  hearing,
    whether a face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing.

18. Whilst I acknowledge that the Tribunal is now listing  some  cases  for
    face-to-face hearings and using technology to hold hearings remotely in
    other cases where it is appropriate to do so, the fact is  that  it  is
    not possible to accommodate all cases in  one  of  these  ways  without
    undue delay to all cases.

19. Of course, it is impermissible, in my view, to proceed to decide a case
    without a hearing if that course of  action  would  be  unfair  in  the
    particular case. If it would be unfair to proceed to decide  an  appeal
    without a hearing, it would be unfair to do so whatever  the  delay  in
    convening a hearing or the consequent delay on other cases being heard.
    The need to be fair cannot be sacrificed.

20.  There  are  cases  that  can  fairly  be  decided  without  a  hearing
    notwithstanding that the outcome of the decision may not be  in  favour
    of the party  who  is  the  appellant.  In  the  present  unprecedented
    circumstances brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, it is my  duty
    to identify those cases that can fairly be decided without a hearing.

21. Having considered the matter with anxious scrutiny, taken into  account
    the overriding  objective  and  the  guidance  in  the  relevant  cases
    including in particular Osborn and others v Parole Board,  I  concluded
    that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my  discretion
    and proceed to decide the Issues without a  hearing,  for  the  reasons
    given in this decision.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether the Judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  her
decision should be set aside

The Secretary of State's decision

22. The Secretary of State refused the claimant's application for leave  to
    remain because she considered that he  did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. This was because she  considered
    that, in connection with a previous application for leave to remain, he
    had submitted a TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational  Testing  Service
    ("ETS") which was subsequently found to have been fraudulently obtained
    by the use of a proxy test taker at a test on 12 March  2012  at  South
    Quay College ("SQC").

23. The Secretary of State considered that the  claimant  had  displayed  a
    flagrant disregard [pic]for the public interest.  She  found  that  his
    presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good and
    refused the application under paragraph S-LTR 1.6  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

24. In addition, the Secretary of State considered that the claimant  would
    not experience very significant obstacles to his reintegration in India
    and therefore  that  he  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  para
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. Finally, the Secretary of State
    concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances to  warrant  the
    grant of leave on the basis of Article 8. In reaching this  conclusion,
    the Secretary of State  took  into  account  her  conclusion  that  the
    claimant did not meet the suitability requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

The Judge's decision

25. As can be seen, a key issue before the Judge was whether  the  claimant
    had used a proxy test taker at the test on 12 March 2012 at SQC.

26. At para 20, the Judge stated that it was  conceded  on  the  claimant's
    behalf that the evidence produced by the Secretary of  State  satisfied
    the initial evidential burden.

27. The Judge then turned to consider whether the claimant had  provided  a
    plausible innocent explanation, at paras 21-22 and concluded,  at  para
    22, that the claimant had provided a credible innocent  explanation  to
    rebut the claim made by the Secretary of State and that  the  Secretary
    of State had failed to show that the claimant's application  should  be
    refused  on  suitability  requirements.  She  found  that  he  met  the
    suitability requirements.

28. At paras 25-26, the Judge considered the  judgments  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 and Khan and  others  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1684 and concluded (at para 26) that the clear ratio of  both  Khan
    and Ahsan is that a person who has been the  subject  of  an  erroneous
    decision in relation to an ETS decision must not  be  put  in  a  worse
    position than if  the  adverse  decision  -  in  the  instant  case,  a
    curtailment decision - had not been made. She considered  that  if  the
    Secretary of State followed this binding authority, it  would  mean  in
    the instant case that the claimant would have to be given a  period  of
    leave during  which  it  would  be  open  to  him  to  make  a  further
    application for extension of leave as a student or some other basis. At
    para 27, the Judge said that she found that the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law as it fell foul of principle (3) of  the  five-
    step approach in R (Razgar) v SSHD (No.2) [2004] UKHL 27 and,  further,
    that the decision was not proportionate given the binding decisions  of
    the Court of Appeal. She therefore allowed his appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.

The grounds

29. The grounds challenge the Judge's assessment of the key issue that  was
    before her, i.e. whether the claimant had used a proxy  test  taker  at
    the test on 12 March 2012 at SQC. They do not challenge her  assessment
    at paras 25-27, summarised at my para 28 above.

30. Although the Secretary of State's application refers  to  "ground  one"
    only in the heading, the grounds  pleaded  at  paras  1-5  beneath  the
    single heading raise more than one ground. Paras  1-5  of  the  grounds
    raise the following separate grounds which I have numbered grounds 1 to
    4 for ease of reference:

         (i)  Ground 1 (para 2 of the grounds): The Judge failed to consider
         video evidence, provided in the  form  of  a  DVD  to  all  hearing
         centres, of a BBC Panorama programme which showed students at  Eden
         College standing next to terminals while a proxy  test  taker  took
         the test for them. Given this evidence, the grounds  contend  that,
         even if the claimant had attended SQC, this does not mean  that  he
         had personally taken the test.

         (ii) Ground 2 (para 3 of the grounds): The Judge misinterpreted the
         Secretary of State's generic evidence and evidence relating to  the
         claimant which  was  sufficient,  pursuant  to  SM  and  Qadir,  to
         discharge the  evidential  burden  of  establishing  that  the  ETS
         certificate had been fraudulently obtained.

         (iii)    Ground 3 (para 4 of the grounds): In taking  into  account
         the claimant's English language  ability,  the  Judge  applied  the
         wrong test, in that, the test is not whether  the  claimant  speaks
         English but whether he had employed deception; and the Judge failed
         to apply MA in which the Upper Tribunal said, at para 57:

             "Second, we acknowledge the suggestion that the Appellant  had
             no reason to engage in deception which we have  found  proven.
             However, this has not deflected us in any  way  from  reaching
             our main findings and conclusions. In the abstract, of course,
             there is a range of reasons why persons proficient in  English
             may engage in TOEIC  fraud.  These  include,  in-exhaustively,
             lack  of  confidence,  fear  of  failure,  lack  of  time  and
             commitment and contempt  for  the  immigration  system.  These
             reasons could conceivably  overlap  in  individual  cases  and
             there is scope for other explanations for deceitful conduct in
             this sphere. We are not required to make the  further  finding
             of why the Appellant engaged in deception and to this  we  add
             that this issue was not explored during the hearing. We resist
             any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter."

         (iv) Ground 4 (para 5 of the grounds): The  Judge  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for holding that a person who speaks English would
         therefore have no reason to secure a test certificate by deception.







Submissions

31. In her letter dated 29 June 2020, Ms  Aboni  states  the  Secretary  of
    State continues to rely upon her grounds of appeal and MA. She does not
    advance any further submissions.

32. In her written  submissions,  Ms  Jones  advances  her  submissions  in
    response to the Secretary of State's grounds at  paras  6-44  and  then
    states, at para 45: "Permission to appeal should be refused".

33. Para 45 of Ms Jones's written submissions does not make  sense  because
    (as I have said above) the claimant and  his  representatives  must  be
    aware that permission has already been granted.

34. I will refer to or incorporate the remainder of the submissions  of  Ms
    Jones in my  assessment  below,  to  the  extent  that  I  consider  it
    necessary or appropriate to do so.

Assessment

35. Ground 1 can be dealt with briefly. If the Secretary of State  intended
    to rely upon the video evidence mentioned in ground 1, it was incumbent
    upon her representative to draw the Judge's  attention  to  it  at  the
    hearing notwithstanding that the video evidence may have been available
    at the hearing centre. If the Judge's attention had been drawn  to  the
    video evidence, not only would she (the Judge) have been alerted to the
    evidence, the  claimant  and  his  representative  would  have  had  an
    opportunity to consider the evidence and address the Judge on it. There
    is nothing before me that confirms that the Judge's attention was drawn
    to the video evidence. There is nothing in the Judge's  decision  which
    suggests that her attention  was  drawn  to  the  video  evidence.  The
    grounds do not suggest that the Judge's  attention  was  drawn  to  the
    video evidence. I agree with Ms Jones that the fact that  the  DVD  was
    available at the hearing centre is irrelevant, if the Judge's attention
    was not drawn to it.

36. For the reasons given above, I am not satisfied that the Judge erred in
    law by failing to consider the video evidence. On the  material  before
    me, I am satisfied that her attention was simply not drawn to the video
    evidence. I therefore reject ground 1.

37. Ground 2 is that the Judge  misinterpreted  the  Secretary  of  State's
    generic evidence and evidence  relating  to  the  claimant  which  (the
    grounds contend) was sufficient, pursuant to SM and Qadir, to discharge
    the evidential burden of establishing that the ETS certificate had been
    fraudulently obtained.

38. It is not clear whether ground 2 relates to:

         (i)  the Judge's consideration of whether  the  initial  evidential
         burden had been discharged by the Secretary of State;

         or

         (ii) the Judge's overall conclusion that the Secretary of State had
         failed to establish that the claimant obtained his test certificate
         by the use of a proxy test taker.

39. I shall consider each construction in turn.

40. If ground 2  relates  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  whether  the
    Secretary of State's evidence was sufficient to discharge  the  initial
    evidential burden and if it contends that the Judge misapprehended  the
    evidence in concluding that it was not sufficient,  then  ground  2  is
    wholly misconceived and simply ignores the following paragraphs of  the
    Judge's decision:

         (i)  para  9  where  the  Judge  directed  herself  concerning  the
         applicable burden and standard of proof;

         (ii) para 15  where  she  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         evidence at Annex A of the Secretary of State's bundle;

         (iii)    paras 16-17 where she summarised  the  witness  statements
         submitted by the Secretary of State, i.e. the witness statements of
         Rebecca Collins and Peter Millington;

         (iv) para 19 where she noted that the result of the claimant's test
         was categorised as invalid according to the document at Annex A;

         (v)  para 19  where  she  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         evidence at Annex B of the Secretary of State's bundle; and

         (vi) para 20 where the Judge then said:

             "...  The  [claimant's]  representative  conceded   that   the
             [Secretary of State] had met the evidential  burden  based  on
             the evidence of the look up tool and  the  statements  in  the
             [Secretary of State's] bundle ..."

41. On the  other  hand,  if  ground  2  relates  to  the  Judge's  overall
    conclusion that the Secretary of State had failed to establish that the
    claimant obtained his test certificate by the use of a proxy test taker
    and if it contends, in this regard and in reliance upon the  conclusion
    in SM and Qadir, that the Secretary of State's evidence was  sufficient
    to discharge not only  the  initial  evidential  burden  but  also  the
    overall legal burden upon the Secretary of State, then ground 2 is also
    misconceived. This is because it conflates two steps,  the  first  step
    being  consideration  of  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's  generic
    evidence in the form of the witness statements from Rebecca Collins and
    Peter Millington taken together with the evidence of the "look up" tool
    in relation to the specific individual is sufficient to  discharge  the
    Secretary of State's initial evidential burden. If  it  is  sufficient,
    which the case-law establishes is the case and which  was  conceded  by
    the claimant's representative before the  Judge,  the  second  step  is
    consideration of  whether  the  individual  has  provided  an  innocent
    explanation. SM and Qadir does not state that the Secretary of  State's
    evidence in the form of the witness statements of Rebecca  Collins  and
    Peter Millington taken together with the "look-up tool" relating to the
    specific individual satisfies both stages and that there is no need  to
    consider whether the individual in question has  provided  an  innocent
    explanation.

42. I therefore reject ground 2.

43. Ground 3 is that the Judge applied the wrong test, in that, the test is
    not whether the claimant speaks English but  whether  he  had  employed
    deception; and that the Judge failed to apply para 57 of MA.

44. Ground 3 relates to paras 21-22 of the Judge's decision.  These read:

         "21. I have carefully considered all the evidence before [sic]  and
             I found that [the claimant] demonstrated a very good level  of
             spoken English, he clearly had no difficulty in  understanding
             any of the questions that were put to  him  and  he  gave  his
             evidence in a clear and fluid manner  without  any  hesitancy.
             [The Secretary of State's] representative conceded  that  [the
             claimant's] English was good. In considering  the  evidence  I
             note that [the claimant] has  submitted  documentary  evidence
             that he conducted  his  education  in  India  in  the  English
             language and from an examination of results from his exams  in
             India it is clear that his highest  scores  were  achieved  in
             English. The evidence before me is that  [the  claimant]  then
             enrolled for an ESOL course in the United Kingdom at the Royal
             College of London in 2011 but the college was closed  in  2012
             and [the claimant] then applied for [sic] was granted leave to
             undertake a business management course at Barking  &  Dagenham
             College being a local authority funded college to undertake  a
             BTEC Level 3 in business. [The claimant] obtained  a  pass  in
             his BTEC course which was conducted in English in August 2013.
             [The claimant] undertook a secure English language  test  with
             Pearson in March 2014 and achieved a level CEFR Level B2 which
             is confirmed by the  document  at  page  88  and  the  further
             documents at pages 90 and 108. This test was taken in order to
             secure admission onto a university place which was granted  to
             [the claimant] as evidenced by the document at page 88.  There
             is evidence of [the claimant] having completed his  first-year
             degree course at Sunderland University in his BA business  and
             management course and the evidence is that he was clearly able
             to follow and complete a university course which was taught in
             English. [The Secretary of State]  has  never  challenged  the
             result of the Pearson test, and the integrity of  the  Pearson
             tests has not been impugned.

         22.  I found [the claimant] to be  a  credible  witness  and  I  am
             satisfied from my examination of the totality of the  evidence
             that he has given a credible and  consistent  account  of  his
             chronology and history. There is evidence that [the  claimant]
             was educated entirely in the English language when undertaking
             his education in India and he has demonstrated that two  years
             after the impugned TOEIC test he was able to pass the  Pearson
             English language test in  all  four  components  and  that  he
             achieved a level sufficient for him to gain admission  to  the
             University of Sunderland (scoring 83 out of 90 in speaking and
             90 out of 90 in pronunciation) and completed  and  passed  his
             first year undergraduate study. It is not disputed  that  [the
             claimant] was unable to continue his university course as  his
             leave as a student was curtailed in 2015 due  to  the  alleged
             deception. [The claimant] has provided a credible  explanation
             as to why he took the TOEIC test at South Quay College and the
             circumstances which led him to having to take the  test.  [The
             claimant] says that the voice recording supplied to him is not
             of his [pic]voice.  I  find  [the  claimant]  has  provided  a
             credible explanation and has produced evidence to support  his
             claim that he did not need to utilise  a  proxy  to  take  the
             TOEIC  test  for  him  in  March  2012  as  he   had   already
             demonstrated at that time  he  was  entirely  capable  of  and
             taking and passing an English language test having  undertaken
             all his studies in India in English and having studied in  the
             UK [sic] r initially on an ESOL course. I  see  no  reason  to
             doubt [the claimant's] explanation that  the  scores  that  he
             achieved on the TOEIC test were genuinely achieved by him that
             he did not deploy a proxy. I note that other data  which  [the
             claimant] requested from ETS has not been supplied such as the
             sheet that he signed when he registered at the college to take
             the test and the photographs that were taken  on  the  day.  I
             find that [the claimant]  has  provided  a  credible  innocent
             explanation to rebut the  claim  made  by  [the  Secretary  of
             State]. I find that [the Secretary of  State]  has  failed  to
             show that the application should have been refused  under  the
             suitability [pic]requirements. Accordingly I  find  that  [the
             claimant] met the suitability requirements of the  immigration
             rules."

             (My emphasis)

45. Para 22 and a large part of para 23 of  the  Judge's  decision  plainly
    show not only that the Judge did,  as  ground  3  contends,  take  into
    account the claimant's ability in the English language  but  also  that
    she placed considerable weight on  that  fact.  However,  MA  does  not
    decide that it is never possible to take into account  an  individual's
    ability in the English language. In MA, the Upper Tribunal  found  that
    the evidence of the appellant was incredible for  several  reasons.  In
    contrast, the Judge found the claimant a credible witness. Furthermore,
    in addition to the claimant's ability in the English language, she gave
    other reasons for reaching her finding that the Secretary of State  had
    not discharged her overall burden, as the text that I  have  emboldened
    and underlined above shows. It is plain from  her  reasoning  that  she
    found no reason not to accept his evidence that  he  had  attended  the
    test centre and taken the test himself. Indeed, it is  plain  from  her
    decision as a whole that nothing at all  emerged  from  the  claimant's
    evidence, whether written or oral, that  was  in  way  adverse  to  his
    evidence that he had not used a proxy test taker and that he had  taken
    the tests himself.

46. In these circumstances, it is difficult to see how the Judge could have
    justified making  an  adverse  finding  and  rejecting  the  claimant's
    evidence that he had taken the tests himself.

47. Although I accept that the Judge did place considerable weight upon her
    assessment of the claimant's ability in the English  language,  matters
    going to weight are rarely sufficient to establish a material error  of
    law, a hurdle that is not reached in the  instant  case.  This  is,  of
    course, subject to the important proviso, that the  factor  upon  which
    considerable weight has been placed  is  not  shown  to  have  been  an
    irrelevant  consideration.  However,  MA  does  not  decide   that   an
    individual's ability in the English language is totally irrelevant.

48. For the reasons given above, I have concluded that ground  3  does  not
    establish that the Judge had materially erred in law.

49. Ground 4 is that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for  holding
    that a person who speaks English would  therefore  have  no  reason  to
    secure a test certificate by deception.

50. In my view, ground 4 invites speculation of the  sort  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MA refused to undertake. The question for the Judge was not
    whether the claimant, who she found speaks English, had  no  reason  to
    secure a test certificate by deception but  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State had established that he had done so.

51. For the reasons given at para 45-47  above,  the  Judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for her finding that the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    establish that the claimant had obtained his test  certificate  by  the
    use of a proxy test taker.

52. For all of the reasons give above, I am satisfied that  the  Judge  did
    not materially err in law. The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore
    dismissed.



Notice of Decision

53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of law such that it fell  to  be  set  aside.  The
    Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore
    dismissed.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

     Date: 9 September 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
  a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such  application  must
  be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after
  this decision  was  sent  to  the  person  making  the  application.  The
  appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location  of  the
  individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision  was  sent:




2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
  United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to  appeal
  is made, and  is  not  in  detention  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  the
  appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice  of
  decision is sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
  Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7  working  days  (5  working
  days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
  the United Kingdom at the time that the  application  for  permission  to
  appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working  days,  if
  the notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
  Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
  letter or covering email

