

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/14830/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th November 2017                      |  On 19th December 2017          |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           Mr ARIF HUSSAIN BHATTI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S A Salam, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  2nd  March  1974.   The
    Appellant's lengthy immigration history is set  out  at  page  2  of  a
    reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  27th  May  2016.    That   letter
    specifically makes reference to the Appellant having lodged his current
    application on the basis of ten years' continuous lawful  residence  on
    14th March 2016.

 2. That appeal was considered by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Dhanji
    sitting at Harmondsworth on 29th November 2016.  The appeal  was  dealt
    with on the papers and I am advised by Mr Salam that that  was  at  the
    request of the  Appellant.   Judge  Dhanji  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal under Article 8.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal  on  19th  January
    2017.  On 25th July 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Lambert noted that the grounds take  issue
    with the judge's failure to consider  in  relation  to  Article  8  the
    Appellant's  position  with  regard  to  ten  years'  residence   under
    paragraph 276B.  She noted that the refusal in this respect was on  the
    grounds of dishonesty in a previous application in 2011.   However  the
    grounds are correct in stating that a decision by Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Alis records the Appellant having been found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge not to have been dishonest in that application  and  the
    submission of forged documents as having been out of his  control.   In
    those circumstances whilst the appeal was on human rights grounds only,
    she considered that the judge had arguably erred in not considering the
    Appellant's ability to meet the ten year Rule.

 4. A holding 24 response was filed by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  25th
    August 2017.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed solicitor, Mr Salam.  The Secretary of State appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Mr Salam contends that the judge made no findings with  regard  to  the
    long residence of the Appellant and thereafter had gone on to  consider
    human rights but failed  to  engage  with  the  grounds.   Mr  Harrison
    acknowledges the manner in which the judge  has  dealt  with  this  but
    considers that if there is any failure,  it  relates  to  that  of  the
    Secretary of State in the manner in which the Secretary  of  State  has
    addressed the renewed application in March 2016.

The Law

 6.   Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 8. The basis upon which the Appellant makes his case is that he meets  the
    considerations under paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules,  namely
    that he seeks  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
    residence in the United Kingdom in that:

          a) (a)  he has at least ten years' continuous lawful residence in
             the United Kingdom;

      b) having regard to the public interest there are no  reasons  why  it
         would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain
         on the ground of long residence and also for the considerations  to
         be made under 276B(iii) to (v).

    Where the Secretary of State's  representative  has  erred  is  in  the
    findings set out at the bottom of pages 3 and top  of  page  4  of  the
    Notice of Refusal.  They state:

         "As false representations have been made in relation to a  previous
         application it is refused under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration
         Rules ... In your current application at D10, you  have  said  that
         you have never used deception when seeking leave to remain.   I  am
         satisfied that  the  statement  was  false  because  of  the  above
         reasons.  For the above reasons I am satisfied that you  have  used
         deception in  the  current  application  therefore  it  is  further
         refused under Section 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules".

 9. The problem with that finding is that it fails to take into account the
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis heard at Manchester on 7th
    April 2015.  That was an appeal from a previous decision and there  are
    certain paragraphs therein that  are  of  extreme  importance  to  this
    decision.  At paragraph 13 it is recorded that the previous  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, Judge Fox, accepted that the Appellant  had  not  acted
    dishonestly and had gone on to state:

         "I am satisfied that the  agent  acted  entirely  unilaterally  and
         independently of the Appellant and the bank statements submitted on
         behalf of the Appellant by his agent were forged.  This was out  of
         his control ... It would be wrong in my view for the Respondent  to
         hold an allegation of dishonesty against this Appellant in light of
         the facts established in this case".

10. As Mr Harrison has indicated, whilst there was  an  act  of  dishonesty
    that act of dishonesty was by an agent and not by  the  Appellant.   He
    acknowledges that that finding may not have actually been noted by  the
    decision-maker.

11. In such circumstances Mr Salam urges me not just to find that there  is
    a material error of law but to go on and re-make the  decision.   I  am
    not prepared to go that far  today.   It  is  clear  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     In many respects this is due to the decision of the Appellant  to  ask
    for the matter to be addressed on the papers.  However, the  judge  has
    not addressed the initial basis upon which  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative started from the  basis  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    dishonest.  That in itself does not however enable me to go on and  re-
    make the decision.  The  consideration  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules as to whether or  not  the  Appellant's  claims  long
    residence have not been aired before effectively the original decision-
    maker nor before the judge on appeal.  It is not  merely  a  matter  of
    endorsing  the  application.   The  Rule  has  to  be  met  and   needs
    consideration before a Tribunal.  In  such  circumstances  the  correct
    approach is to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to remit the matter  back
    for re-hearing.  Directions are given hereinafter for the re-hearing of
    this matter.

Decision and Reasons

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  None of the findings of fact to stand.

 2) The appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Manchester to be heard before any  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    other than Judges Dhanji, Lambert, Alis, or Fox on the first  available
    date 28 days hence with an ELH of two hours.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file  an  up-to-date  bundle  of
    evidence upon which they seek to rely at least seven days prior to  the
    restored hearing.

 4) That in the  event  of  the  Appellant  requiring  an  interpreter  his
    instructed solicitors do notify  the  Tribunal  within  seven  days  of
    receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
