
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14870/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                           |On 21 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                            ms Uju Agathia Machar
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Record (Counsel), Chambers of Celia Record
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of  Nigeria  who  made  an  application  to
    remain in the United Kingdom which was unsuccessful.  She exercised her
    right of appeal and that appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie who dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  5th
    September 2018.  The judge found that the best interests of  the  child
    were to remain with the primary carer, her mother, and to have  regular
    contact with her father in the UK (paragraph 10).  He  found  that  the
    best interests of the child were to remain in the  UK  (paragraph  12).
    He attached significance to the fact that the child  was  British.   He
    noted that the Appellant was in good health, that she had spent most of
    her life in Nigeria and she would not have difficulty  in  integrating.
    Her child, a British citizen, would be able to return to  the  UK  when
    she was of age.  The child was at a very young age and would in  effect
    grow up in Nigeria and there would be relatively little  disruption  to
    her life.  In regard to the public interest it was found that it  would
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  He  therefore  went
    on to dismiss the appeal.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged, it being noted that the child was a
    British citizen and was too young to  be  separated  from  her  mother.
    Reference was made to Rule EX.1 of the Immigration Rules  and  to  what
    was said in SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT
    00120 (IAC).  It was said that there was an impact on the  welfare  for
    the British child who would lose her mother if her mother was  returned
    to Nigeria and it would be wrong to make a decision where the child was
    forced to leave here.  Other grounds were put forward on the basis that
    there no findings of any kind under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Boyes  in  a
    decision dated 10th October 2018 and thus the matter came before me  on
    the above date.

 4. At the outset Mr Jarvis  helpfully  indicated  that  while  SF  was  of
    limited assistance since there was a  new  IDI  in  February  2018  the
    decision could not stand because the child was British  and  the  judge
    appeared to be saying that the child had to be removed with the mother.
     Further enquiry was required and the decision should be set aside  and
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  What the judge had not taken into
    account of was the impact on the child in leaving the United Kingdom.

 5. For the Appellant Ms Record stated that the decision was unsafe and she
    sought no more than a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. It is transparently clear, for the reasons set  out  above,  that  this
    decision is not safe and must be set aside in light  of  existing  case
    law.  It would seem reasonable to conclude that further fact-finding is
    necessary and on that basis, it is a case which should be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Devittie.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The making of the decision to the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 9. I set aside the decision.

10. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. No anonymity order is required.


Signed          JG   Macdonald                                  Date    14th
December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

