

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14375/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated        |
|on 5 December 2017                  |on 6 December 2017                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                AMHAD OTHMAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Arthur Decka, who appeared to provide assistance
                    to the appellant by speaking on his behalf as a friend.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Shergill  promulgated  on  31  January  2017  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Jordan  born  on  10  May  1980  who
        currently has extant leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) valid until 5
        August 2018. The appellant lives in the  United  Kingdom  with  his
        wife and children. The appellant applied for  indefinite  leave  to
        remain on the grounds of ten years continuous residence. The  Judge
        notes  the  appellant's  immigration  history  before  setting  out
        findings of fact from [12] of the decision under challenge.
     3. In relation to the decision under the immigration rules; the  Judge
        was satisfied that the respondent correctly established  a  gap  of
        four months and twenty-eight days  in  the  appellant's  continuous
        lawful  residence.  The  appellant  tried   to   contact   previous
        solicitors who he had blamed for errors and delay, in  addition  to
        an alleged delay blamed upon the Secretary of State, all  of  which
        were considered by the Judge.
     4. The appellant asserts a legitimate expectation but no such argument
        was established before either the  Judge  or  Upper  Tribunal  when
        considering the correct test  for  establishing  a  claim  on  this
        basis.   A  legitimate  expectation  will  only  arise  in  limited
        circumstances. Lord Justice Simon Brown in R v Devon County Council
        ex p Baker [1995] 1 All ER 73 set out three sets  of  circumstances
        where such may arise being:


         a. Where the decision maker  has  made  a  clear  and  unambiguous
            representation  regarding  a  substantive  right  which  it  is
            reasonable for the claimant to rely on.  The  claimant  may  be
            entitled to that benefit.
         b. Where the claimant has an interest  in  some  ultimate  benefit
            that he hopes to retain  (or  possible  attain),  fairness  may
            require the  claimant  to  be  given  an  opportunity  to  make
            representations about the withdrawal of that benefit; and
         c. Where the decision maker has promised that he will  adopt  some
            form of procedure that he would not otherwise  be  required  to
            adopt, the claimant may be entitled  to  require  the  decision
            maker to adopt that procedure.


     5. None of the above criteria were satisfied.
     6. The Judge considered the respondent's policy  relied  upon  by  the
        appellant in support of his case which is dealt with at [24] in the
        following terms:


             24.  I note the policy relied upon but I am not satisfied that
                  the appellant's situation falls into the examples of  gaps
                  in lawful residence. The period to be  met  as  a  gap  is
                  fairly significant and much  more  than  the  twenty-eight
                  days that is ordinarily permitted. I am not satisfied when
                  looking at the immigration history of the  appellant;  the
                  various  applications  which  were  made;  and  the   late
                  pursuance of the solicitors alleged misconduct  sufficient
                  to bring this  case  within  the  realms  of  'exceptional
                  circumstances' as envisaged  in  the  policy  document.  I
                  would echo the same rationale for the issues  raised  with
                  regards the Home Office processing the applications.


     7. The Judge concluded that the evidence supported  the  finding  that
        the appellant did have a break in  residence  as  set  out  in  the
        refusal  letter  and  could  therefore  not  meet  the  ten   years
        continuous residence requirement either under the Rules or  as  per
        the exceptions set out in the policy [25].
     8. Thereafter the Judge considered the issue outside  the  Immigration
        Rules, concluding at [26 - 27]:


             26.      I am not satisfied that there are sufficient  grounds
                  to look outside the rules given  that  the  appellant  has
                  extant leave until 05/08/18.  If  I  was  required  to  go
                  outside the rules I would note the following  which  would
                  not take the appellant's case any further in any event.


             27.  I am not satisfied that there are any  article  8  rights
                  being interfered with at the present time. He is with  his
                  wife and children in this country  enjoying  family  life.
                  There  are  no  removal  direction;  he  is  running   his
                  business; he has eighteen months left to run on his leave;
                  and all the evidence suggests he could make  a  future  in
                  time application.


     9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a  number  of  grounds
        which has been granted by another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        on the basis that "In an otherwise focused and nuanced decision and
        reasons it is nonetheless start arguable that the judge  failed  to
        take account of the public interest consideration in  Section  117B
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended. The
        public  interest  considerations  are  statutorily  mandatory.  The
        arguable  failure  to  take  account   of   the   public   interest
        considerations is an arguable material error of law".




Discussion



    10. It was agreed between the parties that the only  ground  of  appeal
        available to the appellant is that  pursuant  to  article  8  ECHR.
        There is no ground of appeal under the Immigration  Rules.  It  was
        also conceded on the appellant's behalf that  the  finding  of  the
        Judge that  there  had  been  a  break  in  the  appellants  lawful
        residence and that the appellant was unable to  succeed  under  the
        Rules is a legally correct finding.
    11. The task facing the appellant therefore was to  establish  arguable
        legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  by
        making out an arguable breach of article 8.
    12. The appellant in his challenge relied upon four grounds  the  first
        being that the Judge erred  in  failing  to  address  or  give  any
        consideration to the core of the  appellant's  complaint  which  is
        that delay in making the new application was partly as a result  of
        the respondent taking seven weeks to return his documents  and  the
        fees he had paid for the  application  therefore  rendering  him  a
        unable to  make  the  new  application  until  his  documents  were
        returned on 27 December 2011 which was said to  also  be  a  factor
        relevant  to  the  respondent's  policy.  This  ground  is  without
        arguable merit as the Judge was clearly aware of the chronology  of
        events and did not find that even taking the  appellant's  case  at
        its highest in relation to the date  the  respondent  returned  the
        paperwork, that this provided an explanation for all of the  period
        of delay which was found to be for a considerable period. The Judge
        clearly considered the application of the policy but did  not  find
        this ground relied upon by the appellant  established  'exceptional
        circumstances'.
    13. It is also not made out that the period taken by the respondent  to
        consider the application, which was declared invalid,  was  in  any
        way unlawful or unreasonable. The appellant did  not  pay  for  the
        expedited 24-hour service but made a normal application  which  was
        dealt with by the respondent within an arguably reasonable period.
    14. As stated, there is no appeal under the  Rules  and  the  appellant
        fails to make out any arguable merit on this ground.
    15. Ground two asserts the First-tier Tribunal erred in criticising the
        appellant for not complaining about his solicitors sooner but  this
        is a matter relating to the Rules against which the  appellant  has
        no right of appeal and does not establish arguable legal  error  in
        the manner in which the Judge considered this aspect of the case in
        any event.
    16. Ground  three  asserts  the  Judge  erred  in  the  proportionality
        assessment under article 8 ECHR  by  making  a  series  of  factual
        errors. As stated above, the only ground of  appeal  the  appellant
        has is that relating to article 8 ECHR.
    17. When considering an appeal on this basis any decision-maker  should
        consider the structured approach set out by the House of  Lords  in
        Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27   which  requires  consideration  of  five
        questions:


             (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?


             (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?


             (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


             (4)  If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


             (5)   If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?


    18. The  complaint  in  Ground  three  that  the  Judge  erred  in  the
        proportionality assessment jumps  straight  to  the  fifth  of  the
        Razgar questions without properly considering the other four steps.
    19. The alleged errors of fact set out in the grounds do  not  arguably
        establish legal error material to the decision when all aspects are
        considered as a whole.
    20. Ground four should perhaps have been pleaded as Ground three as  in
        this ground the appellant asserts the Judge erred in the assessment
        of article 8 stating there was no interference with the  appellants
        Convention rights and that even if there was the  interference  was
        justified although at this point it is claimed there was no  regard
        for Part 5, section 117B of the 2002 Act.
    21. In light of the limited scope of the  appellant's  appeal  and  the
        findings under challenge it was necessary  to  repeatedly  draw  Mr
        Decka's attention back to those issues the Upper Tribunal needed to
        be addressed upon, namely whether the finding  by  the  Judge  that
        article 8 ECHR was not engaged as there  will  be  no  interference
        with a protected right, was infected by any arguable legal error.
    22. It is not disputed by either  party  that  the  decision  will  not
        interfere with the family life the appellant enjoys with  his  wife
        and children as they will continue as they have within  the  United
        Kingdom during the period of any  extant  leave  and  there  is  no
        direction for the removal of any  family  member  from  the  United
        Kingdom.
    23. Mr Decka sought to argue on the appellant's behalf that there would
        be a disproportionate interference  with  the  appellant's  private
        life.
    24. When asked what private life was being  relied  upon  the  Tribunal
        were advised that it was the appellants accommodation and issues in
        relation to renting accommodation. It was submitted that  landlords
        were not grant long leases  to  individuals  who  only  have  short
        periods of leave. The written grounds refer  to  both  the  letting
        issue and also the inability of the appellant to secure a  mortgage
        to enable him to purchase a property.
    25. It is accepted that  an  individual's  home  forms  part  of  their
        private  life.  The  home  occupied  by  the  appellant  is  rented
        accommodation under the terms of an Assured Shorthold  Tenancy  the
        duration of which mirrors the appellants grant of leave  to  remain
        in the United Kingdom.
    26. It is not made out that there is a right recognised  by  article  8
        for an individual to be able to occupy a property with a  long-term
        rent of his or her choice or a right to purchase  a  property  with
        the assistance of a mortgage. The appellant has  accommodation  and
        it is not suggested that he  will  have  to  vacate  or  lose  that
        accommodation or that he or his family members will not be able  to
        remain as they currently are in their accommodation as a result  of
        the respondent's decision.
    27. Article 8 does not allow a person to choose where they wish to live
        and does not arguably allow a person to circumvent the  immigration
        rules or difficulties that may be experienced as a  result  of  the
        letting practices of private landlords or lending criteria  of  the
        financial  institution's  which  they  have  a  lawful   right   as
        businesses to impose upon any potential customers.
    28. The appellant has a home. That home will not be lost.  The duration
        of the tenancy may not be that the appellant wishes to have but  it
        is not made out the appellant will not be able to apply for further
        leave in the future and if he is able to succeed in relation to the
        same it is likely he will be able to secure a longer  lease  as  he
        has been able to do to date.  If  the  appellant  cannot  secure  a
        longer lease because he no longer has leave to remain in the United
        Kingdom as  he  is  unable  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
        Immigration Rules or because any interference with  any  family  or
        private life at that stage is found to be warranted, it  cannot  be
        said that will be a disproportionate consequence.
    29. The appellant also sought to rely upon his work and connections  in
        the community which it is accepted he has formed. It was  not  made
        out that these are rights protected by article 8 as this is a  fact
        sensitive assessment. The evidence before  the  Judge  was  not  as
        strong as it might have been but, again, it  is  not  suggested  or
        made out that there will be any interference with  the  appellant's
        ability to continue working or maintaining connections  within  the
        community.
    30. The appellant also argued that  the  Judge  did  not  consider  the
        impact upon the children.  The Judge was aware of the existence  of
        the children  and  when  considering  the  best  interests  of  the
        children by reference to section 55 it is clearly a case  that  the
        best interests of the appellant's children are to remain with their
        mother and father, namely the appellant and his wife. There  is  no
        suggestion there will  be  any  interference  with  the  children's
        ability to do so and to continue  to  be  educated  in  the  United
        Kingdom and to live at home as they do now.
    31. Whether the children acquire a right  to  make  an  application  on
        their own behalf or as part of an application made by their parents
        on a later occasion is a matter for which  the  appellant  will  be
        able to take proper advice.
    32. Mr Decka's reference to the respondent's policy does not  establish
        arguable legal error as this  was  an  aspect  clearly  taken  into
        account by the Judge who  found  that  it  did  not  establish  the
        existence of circumstances warranting a  grant  of  leave  on  that
        basis.
    33. The finding by the Judge that  all  factors  have  been  considered
        under the Rules is a finding within the range of  those  reasonably
        open to the Judge on the evidence. The Judge, however, did consider
        the matter outside the Rules by reference to  article  8  ECHR  but
        concluded that article 8 was  not  engaged  as  there  will  be  no
        interference  with  any  protected  right,   family   or   private,
        sufficient to engage article  8.  This  primary  finding  is  fully
        within the range of those available to the Judge on  the  evidence.
        The purpose of article 8 is  to  prevent  unwarranted  interference
        with a protected right. In this case there is no  interference.  It
        was therefore not necessary for the Judge to consider section  117B
        as that  is  relevant  to  assessing  the  proportionality  of  any
        interference with a view to considering whether it is warranted  or
        not.
    34. It is well established that where the appellant is in  the  UK  and
        removal will interfere with the family life/private  life  he,  and
        since Beoku-Betts v SSHD 2008 UKHL 39 his family, already enjoy  in
        the UK, then Article 8 can be engaged but in this case  no  removal
        directions have been set and the appellant and his family  continue
        to enjoy extant leave. The appellant and members of his family  are
        able to continue to enjoy their family  and  private  life  in  the
        United Kingdom with no interference in the same  having  been  made
        out.
    35. The appellant has failed to establish any legal error, material  or
        otherwise, in the decision of the Judge to dismiss the appeal.





Decision

    36. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    37. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 5 December 2017











