
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14446/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 March 2019                      |On 29 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                    NRSP

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr S Woodhouse
For the Respondent:     Mr D Mills


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. On 16 May 2016 the Secretary of State refused the claimant's
         application for leave to remain. The claimant appealed and on 22
         December 2017 the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) dismissed her
         appeal. The claimant subsequently obtained permission to appeal to
         the Upper Tribunal and on 12 November 2018 I set aside the
         tribunal's decision and decided to remake the decision in the Upper
         Tribunal. On 8 March 2019 there was a hearing before me so that
         issues relevant to the remaking of the decision might be addressed.
         I have decided to remake the decision by allowing the claimant's
         appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of 16 May 2016. What
         follows constitutes an explanation as to why I have done so.

2.    By way of background, the claimant is a national of India and she was
born on 30 November 1985. She married in India and, on 18 November 2008,
entered the United Kingdom (UK) as a dependent of her spouse who had been
granted limited leave to remain in the UK. The claimant says, however, that
the marriage had been difficult because her husband had been violent
towards her at various times. The marriage broke down but the claimant
sought to remain in the UK. She obtained leave as a student but such was
curtailed on 7 October 2014 because the educational institution which she
had been attending had lost its relevant license. On 19 September 2014 she
applied for leave to remain (as I understand it outside the Immigration
Rules) but that application was refused on 31 December 2014. She appealed
that decision and in pursuing it, asserted entitlement to international
protection on the twin basis that if she were to have to return to India
she would be harmed by her husband and that her mental health was such that
if she were to be returned she would commit suicide.  That appeal was
considered by a tribunal on 29 April 2015 but the appeal was dismissed, the
tribunal having found against her with respect to both of the above
contentions.

3.    The claimant then made the application for  leave  which  led  to  the
decision of 16 May 2016. By that time  the  claimant  had  obtained  further
medical evidence regarding her mental health difficulties. As  noted  above,
she appealed that decision but she did not pursue the appeal  on  the  basis
that she was entitled to  international  protection.  Rather,  she  asserted
that her appeal should succeed under what are sometimes called  the  Article
8 related Immigration Rules. Specifically, she asserted  that  she  met  the
requirements contained at paragraph 276 (ADE) of those Rules  on  the  basis
that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  in
India. She also relied upon Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
Rights (ECHR) itself, outside the Immigration Rules. Whilst reasserting  her
claim to have been a victim  of  domestic  violence  at  the  hands  of  her
husband (though not now seeking international protection on that basis)  and
to have significant mental health problems, she also said that she had  been
a victim of domestic violence at the hands of her father  and  a  victim  of
abuse at the hands of other family members  when  living  in  India  in  the
past.

4.    The detailed reasons  why  I  decided  to  set  aside  the  tribunal's
decision of 22 December 2017 are contained in my  decision  of  12  November
2018. I need not set all of that out here. But in a  nutshell,  I  concluded
that the tribunal  had  erred  through  failing  to  undertake  an  adequate
consideration as to the position under paragraph 276 (ADE) (1) (vi)  of  the
Immigration Rules. So, the hearing before me of 8 March 2019 was a  complete
rehearing with respect to  the  position  under  that  paragraph  and  under
Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Rules. As to both, it was  ultimately  for
the claimant to demonstrate, to a balance of  probabilities,  that  she  met
the requirements as at the date of the hearing before me.

5.    At the hearing I had the  documentation  which  had  been  before  the
tribunal together with the Home Office Country Policy and  Information  Note
version 2.0 of July 2018 relating to India; a supplementary bundle filed  on
behalf of the claimant for the purposes of  that  hearing;  and  a  complete
copy of the previous decision of the tribunal which it had made in April  of
2015. I mention I had a full copy because at the time of the  hearing  of  8
March 2019 I did not have. What was on file was a copy comprising  half  the
pages of the tribunal's decision. But  I  have  subsequently  been  provided
with a full copy which I have been able to read and take into account.

6.    At the hearing of 8 March 2019 representation was as stated  above.  I
am grateful to each representative. I did not hear oral  evidence  from  the
claimant because, as I understand it, it was felt inappropriate to call  her
bearing in  mind  her  mental  health  difficulties.  I  did,  though,  hear
evidence from two witnesses on her behalf being Reverend Alison  Taylor  and
Fionnuali Mary Casey. I have referred to that evidence, where  necessary  or
otherwise appropriate, below. I also received oral submissions from the  two
representatives. Mr Mills, in his submissions, accepted  that  the  evidence
disclosed some previous  suicide  attempts  by  the  claimant.  However,  he
suggested that there did not appear to have been any such  attempts  in  the
very recent past. He accepted that appropriate  diagnoses  with  respect  to
mental illness had been made but asserted she  would  probably  be  able  to
access family support in India and that what had been found by the  previous
tribunal in 2015 might be relevant  to  a  consideration  as  to  that.  If,
however, she would be without family support in India and  would  be  alone,
then she would face some difficulty. As to Article 8 outside of  the  Rules,
there was evidence showing a support network in the UK.  But,  as  a  church
going Christian, she would be able to attend churches  in  India  where  she
might secure some  assistance  and  support.  If  she  could  not  meet  the
requirements of the Immigration Rules then there was nothing  to  show  that
she could successfully rely upon Article 8 outside the Rules.

7.    Mr Woodhouse argued that there would be very significant obstacles  to
the claimant's reintegration in India through  an  accumulation  of  various
factors. At the forefront was her mental health difficulties.  Further,  the
evidence suggests that there is still a stigma attached to those who  suffer
mental health problems in India. In the UK she has a protective  environment
stemming from her friends,  her  church  connections  and  the  professional
support she is receiving. She  would  not  have  that  in  India.  Whilst  a
tribunal had made adverse findings in 2015, there was now much more  medical
evidence available than there had been then.  So,  relevant  findings  about
mental health can be departed from.

8.    The appeal before me has, essentially, been  pursued  under  paragraph
276(ADE) of the Immigration Rules and Article 8  of  the  ECHR  outside  the
Rules. I did not detect any serious attempt on the part of Mr  Woodhouse  to
persuade me that I should now allow this appeal under Article 3 of the  ECHR
on the basis of suicide risk.  Nor,  indeed,  had  any  such  argument  been
pursued before the tribunal at the appeal which had led to the  decision  of
22 December 2017. The above paragraph of the Rules relevantly provides:

           Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life

           276 ADE (1). The requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the  UK  are
           that at the date of application, the applicant:...

           (vi) Subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  eighteen  years  or
           above, has lived continuously in the UK  for  less  than  twenty
           years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would
           be very significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's  integration
           into the country to which he would have to  go  if  required  to
           leave the UK.

9.    Pausing there, 276 ADE (2) has no application in the circumstances  of
this case.

10.    I  must,  then,  make  my  relevant  findings  concerning  the  above
provision. My starting point, given the  tribunal's  decision  of  29  April
2015, will be the findings of that tribunal. That is so because of what  was
decided in the well-known case of Devaseelan (second appeals,  ECHR,  extra-
territorial effect) Sri  Lanka  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.  But,  although  those
findings will be my starting point,  I  am  able  to  depart  from  them  in
certain  circumstances  including  where  fresh  evidence   not   previously
available is now available and where matters have altered  as  a  result  of
the passage of time.

11.   As to the claimant's mental health, the 2015  tribunal  accepted  that
she suffered from depression and that, in September/ October 2014,  she  had
been displaying symptoms of acute anxiety. But it did not  accept  that  she
was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (see paragraph 19 of  that
decision). The tribunal bemoaned the "unfortunate and  somewhat  surprising"
lack  of  up  to  date  evidence  from  a  psychiatrist  or  a  psychologist
(paragraph 24). It did not accept she would be at real  risk  of  committing
suicide in consequence of being removed to India or that her return to  that
country would "exacerbate her problems to such an extent that  she  will  be
unable to function in the community, unable to support herself  or  face  an
increased risk of suicide" (paragraph 37).

12.   Pausing there, it might be thought that although the tribunal did  not
make a clear finding as to the possible application of paragraph 276  (ADE),
that the findings regarding ability to function in the  community  in  India
had direct relevance to a consideration under that provision.

13.   The medical  evidence  before  me  is  significantly  fuller  than  it
appears  to  have  been  before  the  2015  tribunal  and  much  of  it  is,
importantly, very  recent.  Whilst  I  have  looked  carefully  at  all  the
documentation before me I have  paid  most  attention  to  the  most  recent
evidence particularly in the context of mental health which, of course,  can
vary over time.

14.   There is in the claimant's most recent  bundle  a  psychiatric  report
prepared by one Dr M Shaffiullha, who is a Consultant Psychiatrist. He  has,
in fact,  seen  the  claimant  on  four  occasions.  He  says  that  she  is
"suffering from severe depressive  disorder  with  co-morbid  post-traumatic
stress disorder". He also notes that she suffers from "social  anxiety"  and
indicates that she does not like to venture out  alone.  He  suggests  as  I
understand it (see page 48 of  the  most  recent  bundle)  that  her  mental
health difficulties have worsened, his observing that in the  past  she  had
been given  a  diagnosis  of  adjustment  order  with  prolonged  depressive
reaction but that in his view "her current symptoms  have  progressed  to  a
clinically significant  depression".  He  does  express  the  view  that  if
deported she would be "most likely to try and harm  herself".  I  also  have
what amounts to an updating report on the claimant  prepared  by  one  Dr  F
Mantia-Conaty who is a Senior Clinical Psychologist who has had  involvement
with the claimant's treatment. It is stated, therein, that the claimant  has
been receiving  assistance  from  an  organisation  known  as  ASSIST  which
"offers specialist intervention for women who present with  high  levels  of
vulnerability and risk and who are  deemed  to  have  multiple  and  complex
needs". Reference is made to there being a risk of  self-harm  and  also  to
the claimant having talked to members of ASSIST  (presumably  including  the
author of this report)  about  what  was  described  in  that  report  as  a
"persistent and pervasive history of physical, emotional  and  sexual  abuse
from her husband, and physical and psychological abuse from her  father  and
uncles, all of which live in India". There is then a letter  of  9  November
2017 (and so not quite as recent as the two reports  I  have  just  referred
to) written by one Hannah Jell of an organisation called  Anawim,  which  is
associated with ASSIST, and which sets out some  historical  detail  of  her
treatment which has included medication and psychiatric input.  It  is  said
that she receives a considerable amount of support from her local  Community
Mental  Health  Team,  from  Anawim,  from  ASSIST,  and  from  her   church
community.

15.   The 2015 tribunal did accept  that  the  claimant  had  mental  health
difficulties though not to the extent there  would  be  a  suicide  risk  or
that, as it put it, she will be unable to  function  in  the  community,  if
returned to India. Nor did it accept the diagnosis of post-traumatic  stress
disorder. But it did note what it  felt  to  be,  to  an  extent  at  least,
inadequate written evidence concerning  the  extent  of  her  mental  health
difficulties. I have much more medical evidence. Further, it seems to me  as
a matter of common sense that mental  health  ailments  are  susceptible  to
change over time. Putting all of that together I have concluded that  it  is
appropriate, in this case,  for  me  to  depart  from  the  2015  tribunal's
findings and  to  assess,  whilst  respecting  and  keeping  in  mind  those
findings, the current  situation  on  the  basis  of  the  totality  of  the
evidence as it now is.

16.   There is some cause  to  treat  the  content  of  the  above  evidence
concerning the claimant's mental health with a  degree  of  caution  because
the relevant caseworker  and  psychiatrists  do  appear  to  have  accepted,
uncritically, the history which the claimant has offered. But  it  does  not
seem to me that that should significantly detract from the substance of  the
actual findings as to the claimant's current mental health  state,  whatever
her history might be and whatever the causes might  be.  I  have  found  the
report of Dr Shaffiullha to be of particular  assistance.  That  is  because
the report is detailed and considered and because it is based  (unlike  many
such reports I have seen) on more than one attendance upon the  claimant.  I
accept, therefore, that the claimant  is  currently  suffering  from  severe
depressive disorder with co-morbid post-traumatic stress disorder  and  that
she is also suffering from social anxiety. I accept that,  putting  together
all of the evidence, but especially in light  of  Dr  Shaffiullha's  report,
that her current mental  health  difficulties  are  of  real  and  troubling
substance. Indeed, although I would have reached that view  any  way,  I  do
not think Mr Mills was seeking to persuade me that the evidence indicated  I
should reach any other view.

17.   The second important issue, though,  with  respect  to  paragraph  276
(ADE) is what the claimant might  or  might  not  receive  with  respect  to
support if she is to be returned to India. She  says,  of  course,  although
her claim for international protection  has  not  been  repeated,  that  her
husband is present in India and is likely to harm  her.  The  2015  tribunal
rejected that claim, pointing out that there was no evidence  before  it  to
demonstrate that the husband was  in  India  (paragraph  21).  Although  the
claimant has continued to maintain to the Home Office  and  to  others  that
she fears her husband I do not see anything in the material before me  which
would cause me to conclude that the 2015 tribunal's  findings  as  to  that,
should not remain in place. It does appear  that  the  marriage  has  broken
down and I am prepared to accept that, on  balance,  the  husband  has  been
violent to her in the past. But I find that  whilst  she  has  a  subjective
fear of her husband (she has been  consistent  about  this  to  a  range  of
health professionals for many years) such is not objectively made  out.  So,
if she is to be returned to India, her integration will not be  affected  by
anything her husband might do. There is  then  the  question  of  her  wider
family. The 2015 tribunal did not accept her evidence that her family  would
be unwilling to support her. In a witness statement of  20  June  2017,  the
claimant said that her family in India, due to matters relating to  religion
and custom, would try to force her to live with her  husband  and  that  she
has not been supported by her family in the past. There  are  references  in
various of the medical reports and letters before me,  to  her  having  told
those involved in her treatment and support, that she has  been  the  victim
of ill-treatment and abuse in various ways by her own father  and  by  wider
family members in India.

18.   I have asked myself whether there is anything, bearing  in  mind  what
is said in Devaseelan, to cause me to depart from the findings of  the  2015
tribunal with respect to prospective family support in India. I did not,  of
course, have the advantage of hearing oral evidence from the claimant  about
that matter. There are, as I have said, indications in the  evidence  before
me that she has asserted ill-treatment at the hands of her family  to  those
affording her assistance. For example, she  had  told  Dr  Shaffiullha  that
when a child she had been "sexually abused by her  uncle"  that  her  mother
had instructed her not to talk to anyone about that,  and  that  her  father
had  "neglected  her  and  physically  abused  her"  (see  page  46  of  the
claimant's most recent bundle).  Although  the  focus  of  the  letter  from
Hannah Jell is largely upon the nature of support that she is  receiving  in
the UK, that letter does make reference to the claimant having  disclosed  a
history of physical and psychological abuse from her father and her  uncles.
Going back a little further, there is a letter of 23 June 2017 written by  a
forensic and clinical psychologist associated with Anawim, which  refers  to
the claimant having  indicated  that  she  was  a  victim  of  physical  and
emotional abuse from her father and that "her father did  not  want  her  as
she was a girl". Reference once again to her having indicated that  she  had
been the victim of sexual abuse as a child is to be found in a letter of  11
February 2016 from another clinical psychologist one Dr F Anwar.

19.   Of course, it is possible that the claimant has invented  the  history
of abuse and ill-treatment at  the  hands  of  family  members  because  she
thinks that if she does so  and  asserts  such  a  history  to  a  range  of
professionals, that will assist her  in  securing  the  immigration  outcome
which she seeks. Another possibility, though this is merely speculation,  is
that there has been no such history but as  a  consequence  of  her  various
mental health difficulties, she has genuinely come  to  believe  that  there
has been. However, I have concluded, on balance, that the claimant has  made
these assertions, which appear  to  be  consistent,  because  that  is  what
actually happened to her. Much of the material in which it is recorded  that
she has asserted such a history to those supporting her was not  before  the
2015 tribunal. I have decided therefore, this is an area where I am able  to
depart from the findings of that tribunal. I find that the claimant was  the
victim of sexual abuse as a child and that she has been unsupported  by  her
family  and,  effectively,  disowned  by  her  father.  I  would   conclude,
therefore, that she will be without family support if she is to be  returned
to India.

20.   I have  before  me  an  expert  report  from  one  Dr  Panjwani  which
addresses various aspects of life in India and  the  sorts  of  difficulties
the claimant might face in India.  There  is  a  section  addressing  mental
health care, the thrust of which asserts that there is a shortage of  mental
health facilities in India. But it  is  not  suggested  that  mental  health
treatment is unavailable. So, whilst I  would  conclude  that  the  claimant
will not  receive  the  sort  of  intense,  personalised  treatment  she  is
receiving in the UK, I do conclude  she  will  receive  a  level  of  mental
health treatment which would reach, at least, a basic level.

21.   It is against all  of  the  above  that  I  must  decide  whether  the
paragraph 267 (ADE) (1) (vi) test is met. I have decided that  it  is.  That
is  because  I  have  concluded  that  the  combination  of  the  claimant's
significant  mental  health  problems  and  the  lack  of  family   support,
notwithstanding the availability  of  some  mental  health  treatment,  will
result in there  being  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  into
Indian society. Of course, she would be returning to a  country  with  which
she is familiar. She no doubt speaks  an  appropriate  language.  I  do  not
discount the possibility that she might be able to obtain some support  from
a Christian church. But  the  mental  health  difficulties  seem  to  me  to
significantly outweigh all of  that,  particularly  in  circumstances  where
they will not be significantly ameliorated by family support. I  would  also
make the point that despite the quality and intensity of the  mental  health
treatment she has received  in  the  UK,  that  has  not,  according  to  Dr
Shaffiullha, prevented  her  condition  from  declining  and,  against  that
background, there is no reason to suppose that that will be reversed by  any
treatment she will receive in India. In terms of finding herself a means  of
income and  accommodation,  she  will,  in  my  judgment,  be  significantly
disadvantaged by the nature and extent of  her  mental  health  difficulties
including the post-traumatic stress disorder and  the  social  anxiety.  So,
her appeal does succeed under the Immigration Rules.

22.   My having reached the above view I do not consider it necessary to  go
onto decide whether she would have succeeded under Article 8 outside of  the
rules. The evidence I heard from the two witnesses,  whilst  I  am  grateful
for it, seemed to me to touch largely upon the outside the  Rules  sorts  of
issues. So, I have not found it necessary for me to  address  that  evidence
to any extent in my written reasons.

23.   Finally, the tribunal granted the claimant anonymity. Because  of  the
highly sensitive nature of aspects of this appeal's subject matter,  I  have
decided to continue the grant of anonymity.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  has  already  been  set  aside.  In
remaking the decision, I allow the claimant's appeal under  the  Immigration
Rules against the Secretary of State's decision of 16 May 2016.

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008. Accordingly,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  identify  the
claimant or any member of her family. This applies to  all  parties  to  the
proceedings. Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Dated: 23 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




To the Respondent
Fee award

No fee is payable and, therefore, there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Dated: 23 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

