
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/14473/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre| Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 July 2019                         | On 08 August 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               PEARLINA THOMAS
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hoare
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a female citizen of Jamaica who was  born  on  31  March
    1955, appealed against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  dated  3
    July 2018 to refuse her application to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The First-tier Tribunal in a  decision  promulgated  on  13  May  2019,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

    Immigration History

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on  29  September
    2002. Following the expiry of her visit visa,  she  took  no  steps  to
    regularise her immigration status until she applied unsuccessfully  for
    leave  to  remain  in  March  2010.  She  made  a  series  of   further
    applications, all of which were refused by the Secretary of State.  The
    appellant's natural child, Garrett (date of  birth:  18  August  1988),
    entered the United Kingdom in June 2005. He claims to continue to  rely
    upon the appellant for 'emotional support'. Both  parties  accept  that
    the appellant divorced a violent husband with whom  she  had  lived  in
    Jamaica. The appellant lives with her brother, Thomas Lawrence  in  the
    United Kingdom. Mr Lawrence is blind in one eye and has  other  health,
    including mobility, problems for which he receives assistance from  the
    appellant. One of Mr Lawrence's adult  sons  also  lives  at  the  same
    property.

    The Occupational Therapy (OT) report: Ms J Summerfield

 3. The judge had before her report from Ms  Summerfield,  an  occupational
    therapist (the OT report). She also had letters from Mr Lawrence's  GP.
    The judge summarises those letters follows:

    There are two letters from the appellant's brother's GP, one dated  one
    Fabry 2017, which says he has no vision in his left eye and his  sister
    assist him in daily living and the second dated 1  October  2018  which
    says he has difficulty walking because of osteoarthritis. There was  no
    medical evidence to support the suggestion that [Mr Lawrence] needed  a
    high level of care or that he was unable to read with his right eye nor
    was  there  any  evidence  that  his  health  would  deteriorate  as  a
    consequence of having to receive help from a son or a carer provided by
    the local authority. The available medical evidence  does  not  support
    the conclusions in the [OT report].




 4. The judge was critical of the OT report.  The  OT  had  concluded  that
    social services would be able  only  to  provide  limited  and  erratic
    assistance; Miss Lawrence would not be able to live safely and maintain
    his stable physical and emotional and  mental  well-being  without  the
    support of his sister; the removal of the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom would leave her 'dislocated and distressed in a territory  that
    is unfamiliar and potentially hostile'; the appellant's  removal  would
    constitute 'a deed which would  be  unjust  and  unfair  and  inhumane'
    (sic). At [63-64], the judge accepted the criticisms of the  OT  report
    made by the presenting officer. She criticised the failure of the OT to
    say how long she spent at the appellant's home or whether she  met  the
    appellant's brother, although she did, nevertheless, give an opinion of
    the removal of the appellant upon him. The judge  also  criticises  the
    willingness of the OT to comment on the appellant's human  rights  and,
    more importantly, to offer an opinion regarding the deterioration of Mr
    Lawrence's health in the event that the appellant is removed. The judge
    considered that these opinions went  'significantly  beyond  the  remit
    described in the introduction.' The OT's CV did not indicate  that  she
    possessed any legal or medical qualification. The judge concluded  that
    the OT 'does not appear to appreciate that the limits of her  role  and
    has not confined herself to commenting on  matters  for  which  she  is
    qualified. In consequence, I place limited weight on this document.'

 5. The appellant criticises the judge's approach to the OT report. The  OT
    had given valid opinion evidence on matters within her competence  and,
    even if she had strayed into areas on which he  was  not  qualified  to
    comment, the judge should have attached  appropriate  weight  to  those
    parts  of  evidence  which  lay  within  her  competence  rather   than
    discounting the entire report. There is some force in that  submission.
    However, having read the report in detail,  I  am  satisfied  that,  by
    straying into areas outside her professional  competence,  the  OT  has
    diminished the overall evidential value of her report. This is  because
    the report gives the impression  that  the  author,  by  commenting  on
    medical matters and on human rights law and  by  her  use  of  somewhat
    florid language, is straining to advocate the appellant's  case  rather
    than to comment clinically and objectively on  the  care  needs  of  Mr
    Lawrence. Secondly, the judge has considered  the  OT  report  in  some
    detail and has quoted at length from her analysis of Mr Lawrence's care
    needs; it cannot be said that the judge has ignored the entirety of the
    report. Thirdly, referring to [65] quoted above, I believe it was  open
    to the judge to limit her reliance upon the OT report having found that
    the medical evidence did not support the OT's conclusions.  Whilst  the
    judge should perhaps have not limited the weight which he gave  to  the
    whole report, she was entitled to voice the criticisms  of  the  report
    and to incorporate those criticisms into her overall  analysis  of  the
    evidence. So far as the treatment of the OT report is concerned,  I  do
    not find that the judge has erred in law.

    Integration in Jamaica: Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 not applied.

 6. The appellant also asserts that the judge has failed properly to assess
    the ability of the appellant to reintegrate into Jamaican society.  She
    relies on Kamara at [14]:

    The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment  to  be
    made as to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms
    of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other  country  is
    carried on and a capacity to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a
    reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a
    day-to-day basis in that society and to build up  within  a  reasonable
    time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the
    individual's private or family life.

 7. Other than asserting the judge had made a material misdirection in law,
    the grounds completely fail to explain how  the  judge  has  failed  to
    apply this case. The judge refers to Kamara at [24] in  her  discussion
    of the appellant's  representative's  submissions.  The  representative
    submitted that the appellant has no close relatives in Jamaica and  had
    a history of abuse from her violent husband. She had  no  home  and  no
    support in Jamaica having lived in the United Kingdom since  2002.  The
    judge turned again to the question of integration in her conclusions at
    [68]. She noted that the appellant in Kamara had  been  only  been  six
    years old when she left Sierra Leone. By contrast, the appellant was 47
    years old  when  she  left  Jamaica.  The  judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that she  had  no  remaining  ties  of  family  in
    Jamaica; that was a finding clearly available to her on  the  evidence.
    The judge did not accept that the  appellant's  violent  husband  would
    represent a significant obstacle to her return or a threat  to  her  in
    Jamaica in the future; again, these were findings plainly available  on
    the evidence. The judge's analysis of the appellant's reintegration  in
    Jamaica is, in my  opinion,  legally  sound  and  supported  by  cogent
    reasons. She has applied  the  relevant  case  law  appropriately.  The
    grounds of appeal, by contrast, amount to no more  than  an  assertion,
    unsupported  by  detailed  reasoning,  that  the  judge  has,  in  some
    unspecified way, made a mistake.

    The judge's conclusions: the care needs of Mr Lawrence




 8. The appellant relied on the case of MS (Malaysia) [2019] EWCA  Civ  580
    in particular at [42]:

    The availability of state-funded medical and social care will, in  many
    cases, make it hard for  those  who  provide  care  for  their  elderly
    relatives to bring themselves within the Regulation.  The  availability
    of state care is not, however, to be treated as a trump card  in  every
    case, irrespective of the nature and quality of the dependency  on  the
    carer which is relied on. Just as the availability  of  an  EU  citizen
    parent to be a carer of a minor child does not  render  unnecessary  an
    enquiry into the nature of the dependency of the child  on  her  non-EU
    parent (see Chavez-Vilchez), the availability of state  care  does  not
    avoid the need to enquire into the actual dependency of the EU  citizen
    on her adult carer. The availability of alternative care is a relevant,
    but not always decisive factor.

 9. At [79-80], the judge sought to distinguish the  circumstances  in  the
    present appeal from those in MS. Having regard to all the evidence, she
    found that the care needs of Mr Lawrence had not been  demonstrated  to
    be extensive and that the  OT  report  supported  the  conclusion  that
    assistive aids and visits from carers could  meet  Mr  Lawrence's  care
    needs adequately. She noted the comments of the Court of Appeal  in  MS
    that the availability of alternative care from social services may  not
    be 'decisive' but she also took account of the fact that Mr  Lawrence's
    adult son (who did not give evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)
    would continue to live with his father 'and  could  meet  many  of  his
    needs such as assisting with cooking and washing' activities which  the
    OT had considered it unsafe for Mr Lawrence  to  attempt  unaided.  She
    rejected, legitimately in my view, the OT's opinion that, save for  the
    care which  she  provided,  there  existed  any  exceptional  level  of
    emotional dependency between Mr Lawrence and the appellant. Read  as  a
    whole, I do not find, as the appellant  asserts,  that  the  judge  has
    failed to follow the guidance provided in  MS  or  any  other  relevant
    jurisprudence. Rather,  the  judge  has  reached  findings  which  were
    available to her on the evidence. I find that the appellant has  failed
    to established that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

10. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed



    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.



          Signed                             Date 30 July 2019


          Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

