
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14729/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 March 2021                      |On 19 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                      SANDIP KUMAR BHUPENDRABHAI PATEL
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Lindsay, Counsel instructed by Habib Quadri,
Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision   of   the
    respondent on 12 August 2019 refusing him  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He was born in 1976.  He  entered
    the United Kingdom with permission in 2016 but  his  leave  expired  in
    April 2017 and he remained in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  applied  for
    asylum in June 2018 but withdrew the application  in  March  2019.   He
    made a further application that was  rejected  in  May  2019  and  then
    applied for leave to remain as an unmarried partner  on  13  June  2019
    leading to the decision complained of which can  only  be  appealed  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. I begin by considering carefully the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 4. The judge appropriately, began by identifying the  decision  complained
    of and  noting  that  at  the  time  of  the  application  it  was  the
    appellant's contention that he was in a durable relationship  with  his
    partner who is a British citizen.  The judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant married his partner on  4  January  2020  which  was  shortly
    before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge  was  clearly
    aware that she was dealing with the human rights of a married couple.

 5. Both the appellant and his present wife have been married before.

 6.  The  judge  considered  the  respondent's  reasons  for  refusing  the
    application.  First, the appellant had not satisfied  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules by  proving  his  competence  in  the  English
    language.  Second, he was not eligible because at the  time  of  making
    the application Mrs Patel was not his wife and they had not been living
    together for two years.  Further,  he  did  not  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements because his previous leave had expired on  20  April  2017
    and he had been living in  the  United  Kingdom  for  about  two  years
    without  permission  before  he  applied  for  leave.    However,   the
    respondent was expressly satisfied that the appellant met the financial
    requirements of the Rules.

 7. The appellant and his wife gave evidence which the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge considered.

 8. The judge found the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules because he had not passed his English language test.   The  judge
    also found that the papers did not  show  premarital  cohabitation.   I
    disagree with Ms Lindsay that this is in any way relevant.   The  judge
    recognised that he was dealing with a married couple.  Nothing turns on
    his apparently correct finding that there was no evidence of premarital
    cohabitation.  The judge did note that the appellant had  said  in  his
    application form that he speaks English, Hindi and Gujarati  "fluently"
    which contradicted the evidence he gave at the hearing which  was  that
    he spoke only a little English and only Gujarati.  The appellant relied
    on his professed limited linguistic ability to support his claim  there
    were significant obstacles in his returning to India.

 9. The judge clearly  found  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and that there was now a marriage.  She  also  found  that
    the appellant lived with his wife's adult son  and  that  removing  the
    appellant would interfere with the  private  and  family  life  of  the
    appellant, his wife and his wife's son.

10.  The  judge,  appropriately,  reminded  herself  of  Part  5A  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She found  that  in  the
    event of the appellant's return  to  India  his  wife  would  be  in  a
    difficult position.  She did not want to go and live in India.  She did
    not like the heat and did not want to  leave  behind  her  son  or  her
    business  which  supported  the  appellant.   She  accepted  that   her
    departure would create significant problems for the appellant's  wife's
    son.

11. At paragraph 39 the judge made it plain that she did not  believe  that
    the appellant could not return to  India  safely  and  with  reasonable
    ease.  He had built his case on concern about family  members  and  his
    language abilities.  He said that his first wife's family had not  come
    to terms with the divorce and would make things difficult.   The  judge
    found that the appellant had lived in India  for  many  years  and  she
    found no "insurmountable obstacles" or  anything  else  that  presented
    "very significant difficulties".

12. She found the decision to refuse his claim on human rights  grounds  to
    be lawful.  Any interference was entirely proportionate.

13. The main reason for giving permission to  appeal  was  it  was  thought
    arguable that the judge had gone  behind  the  respondent's  acceptance
    that the relationship was genuine and subsisting  and  when  conducting
    the proportionality exercise the judge had erred  by  failing  to  make
    clear findings about where the public interest lay, and particularly if
    it is still in the public interest to  remove  the  appellant  and  the
    impact on family life especially if, as was thought to be the case, the
    appellant could qualify for return.

14. I have considered the papers before me including the extensive  grounds
    and skeleton argument but I find no merit whatsoever in the  contention
    that the judge did not appreciate  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    enjoyed a genuine and subsisting relationship.  In a sense that  hardly
    matters because it was clearly accepted that the relationship  was  one
    of marriage and in that event the length of the relationship before  is
    not of great importance.

15. In her skeleton argument Ms Lindsay sets out much of Section 117 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and refers, appropriately,
    to well-known cases including Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40  and
    Younas [2020] UKUT 129.  Younas, of course, although a decision of this
    Tribunal rather than the Court of Appeal, was made after  there  was  a
    statutory  basis  for  saying  that  the   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.   I  disagree  with  Ms
    Lindsay if she was arguing that qualification under the Rules  entitles
    a person to return and therefore extinguishes the  public  interest  in
    removal.  I recognise, as the Tribunal did  in  Younas,  that  where  a
    person is certain to be granted leave to enter it  might  be  the  case
    that there is no public interest in  removing  the  applicant  but  the
    whole case has to be considered.  This appeal  concerns  a  person  who
    came to the United Kingdom on one basis  and  overstayed  and  made  no
    attempt to regularise his position until he  developed  a  relationship
    that might have been existing in embryonic form in  any  event  with  a
    person who is now his wife.  In other words, at a time when  he  should
    have left the United Kingdom and returned to India he was  building  up
    his personal life.  As crimes against the state go this is probably not
    very high up the  list  but  it  is  a  cynical  attempt  to  undermine
    effective immigration control and indulging it is unfair to people  who
    might have similar desires but respect the law.  Whilst it is right  to
    say the appellant has no criminal convictions and can maintain  himself
    when allowed to (this is very likely to be the case) and  can  maintain
    himself now by living on his wife because  this  has  been  established
    these are not strong reasons to allow him to stay, they  are  just  not
    reasons to require him to go.  This is also a case where it can only be
    described as likely that he will satisfy the requirements of the Rules.
     There is a problem with his language.  It may be the case that he  was
    discouraged from applying for a test because the Secretary of State had
    his passport but there is no indication that he  made  any  efforts  to
    apply and get permission from the Secretary of State.  The Secretary of
    State is capable in appropriate cases  of  giving  an  indication  that
    satisfies the test centres but this  was  not  tried  here.   There  is
    uncertainty about the appellant's command of the English language.   He
    has claimed it was fluent and then claimed he cannot speak English.  It
    may well be a case that he is a person not disinclined to speak English
    and capable of getting it together if he tried a bit harder.   However,
    this is not a case where it can be said confidently  he  would  satisfy
    the requirements of the Rules.  I cannot agree that there is no  public
    interest here in maintaining effective immigration control by requiring
    him to follow the approved procedures.

16. Neither can I see any argument there is any great disruption consequent
    on his removal.  Of course the appellant's wife would prefer for him to
    remain in the United Kingdom with her.  She wants to be with him  which
    is why she married him and she has had an unhappy time in  her  private
    life which now seems to be turning round.  However, she seems perfectly
    capable of managing on her own, she is not a person with  high  degrees
    of dependency and has established a business and a life with  her  son.
    The inconvenience and disappointment to her of being separated from her
    husband whilst he made an application is not analogous, for example, to
    a mother being separated from a small child. Neither was anything  done
    to suggest that if the process were delayed in  India  the  appellant's
    wife could not travel to India to be  with  her  husband  for  a  time.
    Clearly there would be costs involved  but  she  is  earning  a  steady
    income and there is no basis in the evidence for saying that  it  would
    be unaffordable to keep  contact  by  occasional  visits  if  necessary
    assuming that it is the appellant's intention to  make  an  application
    and meet the requirements of the Rules.

17. Similarly, her adult son has rights and it seems perfectly plain on the
    papers that he is more than happy for his now stepfather to be involved
    in his life but he is an independent adult and there is  no  suggestion
    of great disruption even though they live together as a family.

18. Ms Lindsay's grounds refer to the decision of the Court of Appeal in GM
    (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1630.  She asserts in  her  skeleton
    argument that there is a "six test criteria" set out in GM (Sri  Lanka)
    although that is entirely consistent with other parts of  her  skeleton
    argument where a list of six items is given and it is asserted that the
    list is "not closed".  Ms Lindsay is right in the sense that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge could  have  done  more  to  set  out  a  balancing
    exercise.  It may well be the case that that is a criticism that  could
    be made of every balancing exercise ever conducted.   There  is  always
    more that can be said and sometimes more  that  could  have  been  said
    usefully but this is why I spent so much time at the beginning  looking
    at the decision that was actually made.

19. At the risk of being repetitive the judge accepted that he was  dealing
    with a married couple, he accepted that the adult son was part  of  the
    family life of all three adults involved.  The judge accepted that  his
    leaving would interfere with their private and family lives.  The judge
    found that the appellant had not shown that he can  speak  English  and
    found it highly likely that an application for entry clearance would be
    successful.  She acknowledged that the appellant's wife does  not  wish
    to return to India and although she did not say very much about it  she
    was clearly very unimpressed with the appellant's  contention  that  he
    could not return because of fear of former family members.   She  found
    that the appellant claimed to be able to speak Hindi  fluently  and  he
    could return to an area away from his former wife's  relatives.   There
    is not much more to be said  on  this  point.   It  was  not  developed
    greatly in argument and India is generally a safe country where  people
    can hide and if necessary turn to the state for protection.  The  judge
    referred to the "strong public interest  in  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls", she described the balance  as  "very  fine"  but
    found that  it  was  in  favour  of  dismissing  the  appeal.   Really,
    everything that needed to be acknowledged is acknowledged.  I can  find
    nothing that ought to  have  been  mentioned  that  was  not  at  least
    mentioned.  The judge's mind was where  it  ought  to  have  been,  the
    correct test was followed and  the  conclusion  was  reached  that  the
    appellant does not like.

20. I find that no material has been established and I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



Jonathan Perkins


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 7 April 2021                   |

