
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14422/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                           MR MOHAMMAD NURUN NABI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Commonwealth
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Khan (the 'FtT'), promulgated  on  8  March  2019,  by
    which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal on 24 May 2016 of his human rights claim.  That decision had in
    turn refused the appellant's application for leave to remain  based  on
    10 years' lawful residence under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.


 2. The core point taken against the appellant by the respondent related to
    a belief that the appellant had participated in deception  when  making
    an earlier application as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) in November 2012;  in
    concert with others, he had set  up  a  sham  company,  and  had  funds
    transferred into relevant business accounts, which were then returned a
    short period after his application.   His  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain was therefore refused under  paragraph  322(2)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, specifically that he had made false  representations
    in his Tier 1 application.

The FtT's decision

 3. The FtT made an analysis of the evidence, running from  [31]  to  [41].
    The FtT was  not  impressed  by  various  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    evidence, finding that there was clearly  dishonesty  involved  in  the
    appellant's 'intentions  and  actions'.   While  others  who  had  been
    prosecuted in relation  to  the  deception  had  been  acquitted  at  a
    criminal trial, the burden of proof in relation to criminal proceedings
    was higher.

 4. Having considered the evidence as a  whole,  the  FtT  found  that  the
    respondent had been entitled to refuse the appellant's application  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a result  of  his  dishonesty.   The  FtT
    concluded that refusal of leave to  remain  was  proportionate,  noting
    sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002, particularly where the appellant's immigration  status  had  been
    precarious.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on 22 March 2019  which  are  as
    follows:

      1. Ground (1): the FtT had applied the wrong standard  and  burden  of
         proof, referring  at  [41]  to  where  the  respondent  had  raised
         evidence of quality 'to raise suspicions', the burden  then  passes
         to the appellant to provide an innocent explanation.  That was  not
         consistent with the authority of R (Giri) v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR  4418
         All ER;

      2. Ground (2): the FtT had failed to consider  whether  the  appellant
         had genuinely failed to misunderstand the rules, which had been the
         basis on which others had been acquitted at  their  criminal  trial
         and on which the Upper Tribunal in a different case  had  upheld  a
         First-tier Tribunal determination allowing an appellant's appeal;

      3. Ground (3): the FtT had failed to properly scrutinise the  evidence
         about whether the appellant had paid monies to a  claimed  investor
         following his application, when in fact no evidence to support that
         central allegation had been provided by the respondent;

      4. Ground (4): the FtT had failed to  proof-read  the  decision  which
         included typographical errors and had produced a draft;

      5.  Ground  (5):  it  was  possible  that  the  respondent's  decision
         attracted a right of appeal  broader  than  human  rights,  as  the
         decision 'may be affected' by regulation 9(1)(b) of the Immigration
         Act 2014 (Commencement No.3, Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions)
         Order 2014/2771, although this issue was  not  said  to  have  been
         raised by the appellant in his appeal to the FtT.

 6. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin,  sitting  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    initially refused permissions but renewed  permission  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 30 October 2019.  He regarded the grounds
    as identifying arguable points of challenge and did not limit the grant
    of permission in its scope.

The hearing before me

 7. Mr Biggs withdrew grounds (4) and (5).  On behalf of the respondent, Mr
    Walker expressly conceded that the FtT had erred in law, in relation to
    the legal and evidential burden which had been  applied  (ground  (1)),
    which then infected his findings in relation to ground  (2).   The  FtT
    had referred at [9] of his decision:

         "The  appropriate  standard  of  proof   is   whether   there   are
         'substantial grounds for believing the evidence'.   The  burden  of
         proof of dishonesty is on the respondent.  The  civil  standard  of
         proof applies but evidence of weight is required to discharge  this
         burden.  If the respondent establishes that  there  are  reasonable
         grounds for suspicion of dishonesty or prima facie evidence of  it,
         the burden shifts to the appellant to show  there  is  a  plausible
         innocent explanation for the conduct complained of."

 8. The FtT's conclusions, based on that legal test, were at [41]:

         "The fact that Mr Pervez has been acquitted in his criminal  trials
         where different standard  of  proof  is  required.   The  important
         aspect here is whether the appellant used dishonesty, if so has the
         respondent raised evidence of quality to raise suspicions, and  has
         the appellant provided an innocent explanation, I find he has not."

 9. I accept Mr Biggs' submission, as conceded by Mr Walker, that the legal
    test outlined by the FtT fell into error in two respects:   first,  was
    to conclude that the raising of suspicions was sufficient  to  put  the
    evidential burden on the appellant.  Second, and in  my  view  of  more
    importance, was the fact that the FtT conflated a legal and  evidential
    burden of proof, so that what the FtT had erred in concluding was  that
    where there were suspicions,  the  legal  burden,  as  opposed  to  the
    evidential one, shifted onto the appellant.  That was clearly incorrect
    and material to the FtT's decision.

10. I do not reach any conclusions in  relation  to  ground  (3),  ie.  the
    extent to which the FtT had failed to assess the evidence (or  lack  of
    evidence) that the appellant had ever transferred money to a co-accused
    investor, as the errors in grounds (1) and (2) go to the heart  of  the
    FtT's findings, sufficient to make the FtT's  decision  unsafe  in  its
    entirety.  I therefore set aside the FtT's decision, which will need to
    be remade.

11. In terms of a remaking, the representatives agreed that  as  the  FtT's
    assessment of the appellant's credibility was flawed, this went to  the
    core of the decision, so that the decision needs to be  remade  in  its
    entirety.  As substantial evidence will need to be  considered,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the remaking to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted appeal shall not be heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A
Khan or Upper Tribunal Judge Martin.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  16 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


