
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14021/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019                            |On 31 January 2019            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr Kingsley Phillips
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ferguson of Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  in  this  case  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  the
    respondent is Mr Phillips.  However for the purposes of  this  decision
    and reasons I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, where the appellant was Mr Phillips.

 2. Mr Phillips was born on 5 February  1982  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, dated 3 October 2017, to  refuse  his  application  for  entry
    clearance to join his spouse, the sponsor, [HB], whom he had married on
    27 December 2012.  In a decision promulgated on 23 October 2018,  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal P S Aujla allowed the appellant's appeal  on
    human rights grounds, Article 8.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals with permission.  Mr Jarvis resiled
    from a number of the grounds.  However the grounds he continued to rely
    on were as follows:

    Ground 1

    The judge failed to consider all the relevant additional factors in the
    balancing exercise, namely the appellant's active attempt to  frustrate
    arrest or detention by UK Visas and Immigration or police, in that  the
    appellant had claimed he was a British citizen  when  arrested  by  the
    police.  The judge did not mention this in the assessment and therefore
    the assessment was flawed;

    Ground 2

    It was argued  that  the  judge  erred,  at  [27]  in  reliance  of  PS
    (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC)
    in that the judge wrongly placed the appellant in the  category  of  an
    immigration offender who voluntarily left the United Kingdom  in  order
    to regularise his stay, whereas the appellant had been removed from the
    UK at public expense.

Error of Law Discussion and Conclusions

Ground 1

 4. Mr Jarvis referred to the fact that a  supplementary  bundle  had  been
    produced at the First-tier Tribunal hearing which  indicated  that  the
    appellant had told the police on one of the occasions he was  arrested,
    that  he  was  a  British  citizen,  and  this  is  relevant   to   the
    consideration of aggravating factors.  The  judge  had  not  considered
    this.  Mr Jarvis argued that lying to the  police  about  identity,  as
    well as nationality, is an aggravating  factor.   It  was  Mr  Jarvis's
    submission that the losing party did not understand why they had  lost,
    including it was not clear why for example  driving  without  insurance
    was not considered to be an aggravating factor.

 5. Ms Ferguson noted that the judge had correctly accepted that  paragraph
    320(3) was not made out and this had not been challenged by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  Although  Ms  Ferguson  considered  the  judge  had
    perhaps not specifically addressed in writing each factor he  had  made
    overall findings and correctly directed himself, at [30]  to  [31],  to
    the  balancing  exercise  and  ultimately   reached   a   decision   on
    proportionality open to him.  It was her submission that it was open to
    the judge to say that the factors were not aggravating for the  reasons
    given.  I agree.

 6. In what was a careful decision the judge sets out the background to the
    appeal and the respondent's case, that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    produce a  valid  national  passport  or  other  document  establishing
    identity and nationality  (now  not  in  issue)  and  that  taking  the
    appellant's immigration history into  account  there  were  aggravating
    factors.  The judge heard oral evidence and specifically noted  at  [9]
    that he had taken into account the respondent's explanatory  statement,
    the respondent's additional bundle RB2, which included a screenshot  of
    his record at the Home Office  (this  contains  the  recording  of  the
    appellant being encountered on 7 April 2011 when he was arrested during
    a joint operation and "had initially stated he was a Brit-Cit but  then
    admitted to being a Nigerian national").

 7. The judge went on to note the  documents  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  The judge properly directed himself (and there has been  no
    challenge to those directions) in relation to the correct  approach  in
    entry clearance  cases  and  that  the  burden  was  on  the  appellant
    initially to establish that the decision amounted to an interference of
    private/family life and then for  the  respondent  to  show  that  such
    decision was justified.

 8. The judge also addressed Sections 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge again correctly directed  himself  that
    the burden of proof was on the respondent in relation to  the  refusals
    on the general grounds under  paragraphs  320(3)  and  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Although the judge incorrectly directed himself  as
    to the relevant point of time to be considered, no point was  taken  on
    this and none arises as nothing turns on that date.

 9. The judge confirmed that the appellant had applied on 2 August 2017 for
    entry clearance to join his spouse.  He stated on the application  that
    his name was Kingsley Phillips born on  5  February  1982  and  he  had
    previously been  known  by  the  name  Kingsley  Phillips  Nwosu.   The
    documents from his previous application for entry clearance  identified
    him with his former name with a different date  of  birth,  5  February
    1983.  The appellant stated that he had changed his name on 17 December
    2012.  Within the last ten years he had made an application  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom, on 11 September 2012.  He was removed from  the
    United Kingdom on 14 September 2012 as an overstayer.

10. Whilst in the United Kingdom  he  was  convicted  of  driving  a  motor
    vehicle without insurance in 2010.  The appellant was  married  to  the
    sponsor, with no children.  The sponsor had first arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 4 August 1989 and also held Sierra Leonean  nationality,  as
    well as British nationality.  The couple had married in Nigeria  on  27
    December 2012.

11. Whilst the respondent had accepted that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements of Appendix FM the application was refused on the  general
    grounds for refusal.  The judge records, at [16] to [18],  the  reasons
    that the respondent had given for maintaining the refusal under  320(3)
    and 320(11) and the judge noted the encounters of the appellant by  the
    police in 2006, 2007, 2008 (on two occasions) and 2009 and the name  he
    gave, Kingsley Dwayne Phillips born on 5 February 1980.  In 2012 at the
    time of removal he provided the name Kingsley Philips Nwosu born  on  5
    February 1983.  The respondent was satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    remained illegally in the United Kingdom after the expiry of his  visit
    visa and during that period different identities had been used. He  now
    stated that his name was Kingsley Phillips born on 5 February 1982  and
    the respondent was satisfied that this conduct was consistent with what
    is described as having contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the
    intentions of the Immigration Rules and the application  was  therefore
    refused under paragraph 320(11).

12. The judge further recorded the respondent's submissions at  [20]  which
    expanded on the refusal letter and included  the  submission  that  the
    appellant had even claimed to be a British citizen on occasion and  had
    been arrested on various occasions  and  given  false  information,  in
    addition to having overstayed for seven years after coming in 2005 on a
    multi-entry visa.  It was the presenting officer's submission that  the
    appellant's  conduct  was  intentional,  in  order  to  frustrate   the
    intentions of the Immigration Rules.

13. In dealing with paragraph 320(11) (which Mr Jarvis  properly  accepted,
    contrary to the initial grounds of appeal, the judge  was  entitled  to
    take into consideration in conducting any Article 8 balance) the  judge
    set out the respondent's guidance dated 14 November 2013 in relation to
    320(11) and what are aggravating circumstances.

14. Paragraph 320(11) provides as follows:

         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused

             '(11)    where the applicant has  previously  contrived  in  a
                  significant way to frustrate the intentions of  the  Rules
                  by:

                  (i)  overstaying; or

                  (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

                  (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

                  (iv)  using  deception  in  an   application   for   entry
                      clearance, leave to enter or remain or  in  order  to
                      obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a
                      third party required in support  of  the  application
                      (whether successful or not); and

                  There  are  other  aggravating   circumstances   such   as
                  absconding,  not  meeting  temporary   admission/reporting
                  restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity
                  or  multiple  identities,  switching  nationality,  making
                  frivolous  applications  or   not   complying   with   the
                  redocumentation process'".

15. It was not disputed that the appellant was an overstayer and the  judge
    took this into consideration.  The judge, in addition  to  setting  out
    the respondent's guidance, also set out the guidance  in  the  headnote
    from PS paragraph 320(11) discretion care needed India [2010] UKUT  440
    (IAC) (which I address in ground 2 below).

16. The judge correctly directed himself, and again there was no  challenge
    to that direction, at [28] that the refusal  of  the  appellant's  case
    under paragraph 320(11) could only be upheld if there were  aggravating
    circumstances accompanying the appellant's overstaying  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

17. The judge correctly directed himself that the fact  the  appellant  had
    used various identities was an aggravating circumstance and this is one
    of the non-exhaustive factors set out in  the  guidance  cited  by  the
    judge at [26]. Although Mr Jarvis criticised the judge's conclusions in
    relation to the appellant having  been  convicted  of  the  offence  of
    driving without insurance (and I note that this was not in the  grounds
    on which permission was granted) the judge gave  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that it did not amount  to  such  an  aggravating  factor  that
    should contribute towards the refusal of the application; I  note  that
    such an offence is not contained in the list  of  possible  aggravating
    factors (although again I accept it is not exhaustive).

18. The findings of the judge were available to  him.   Although  much  was
    made of the fact that the judge states, at the end of  [29],  that  "no
    evidence was presented on behalf of the respondent for any  aggravating
    factors apart from those  matters  listed  in  the  decision",  whereas
    evidence was presented at the Tribunal of the fact that  the  appellant
    had claimed to be British, the judge was well  aware  of  this,  having
    referred to it at [20] of the  decision.   It  is  clear  from  a  fair
    reading of the decision that this is contained in the  judge's  overall
    consideration of the aggravating factor of using  different  identities
    which was the context in which the appellant stated, initially, that he
    was British.

19. Mr Jarvis did not dispute that although the appellant initially  stated
    he was British it is recorded in the Home Office screenshot information
    database, when he was stopped in April 2011, that  the  appellant  then
    admitted to being a Nigerian national. It is clear that this must  have
    also been at the time he was stopped because the record goes on to cite
    a further interview later the same day.  It is  difficult  to  see  how
    this therefore could come within the definition under the  guidance  of
    "switching of nationality".  There was no material error in  the  judge
    not specifically citing this issue.  Ground 1 is not made out.

Ground 2

20. The grounds criticise the judge's  approach  to  PS  paragraph  320(11)
    discretion care needed India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC) on  the  basis  that
    the judge wrongly placed the appellant in a category of an  immigration
    offender who voluntarily left the UK in order to regularise  his  stay,
    whereas the appellant is not such an individual, having  been  removed.
    However that is not what the judge  did.   I  am  satisfied  that  this
    ground is no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's  reasoned
    findings which were evidence based.  The judge was entitled to rely  on
    the guidance in PS which provides as follows in the head note:

         "In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11)  of  HC  395,  as
         amended, to refuse an application for entry  clearance  in  a  case
         where the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry clearance  in
         paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C), the  decision
         maker  must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing  the  aggravating
         circumstances said to justify refusal and must have regard  to  the
         public interest in  encouraging  those  unlawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom to  leave  and  seek  to  regularise  their  status  by  an
         application for entry clearance".

21. It is entirely incorrect to state that the judge got this wrong because
    the appellant was removed, rather than making a voluntary departure
    (and I note in passing that Ms Ferguson indicated that the appellant
    was intending to make a voluntary departure but was removed prior to he
    had the opportunity to do so,  although there are no findings or
    evidence in this regard before the First-tier Tribunal); what PS is
    saying, is that decision makers must have regard to the general public
    interest in encouraging those unlawfully here to leave.  It is not
    saying that it is only in cases where an individual has left
    voluntarily that such care must be taken.  Rather that such care in
    assessing aggravating circumstances must be taken in all such cases
    because of the general public interest in encouraging all of those
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise their
    status.  This is illuminated by what was said in the body of the
    decision at 14:

         "...

         If the aggravating circumstances are not truly aggravating there is
         in this context a serious risk that those in the position of  Mr  S
         will simply continue to remain in the United Kingdom unlawfully and
         will not seek to regularise their status as he has  sought  to  do.
         The effect then is likely to be counterproductive  to  the  general
         purposes of the relevant Rules and to the maintenance of a coherent
         system of immigration".

22. There is nothing in that decision and more importantly, the  principle,
    which cannot be applied to the appellant, notwithstanding that  he  was
    removed, rather than making a voluntary departure, for whatever reason.



23. Even if that were not the case I am not satisfied that any error in the
    judge's balancing exercise would be disclosed in the  circumstances  of
    the facts of the appellant's case, including that he had  been  outside
    the UK for more than six years trying to gain entry clearance  to  join
    his wife, a factor that the judge was aware of, and that  he  had  been
    trying to regularise his status.  This is not a case  where  the  judge
    did not adequately assess the public  interest  but  properly  directed
    himself and came to reasoned conclusions.

24. I do not agree with Mr Jarvis that the Entry Clearance Officer does not
    know why they have lost; on the contrary the judge gave  clear  reasons
    that the interests of the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  in  this  case
    outweigh the public interest in immigration control and  therefore  the
    maintenance of the discretionary refusal  ground  was  disproportionate
    and unsustainable.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appeal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is
    dismissed.

    No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


