
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14518/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remoted video means) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th July 2021                             |01 October 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     JSJ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill of Counsel, instructed by Ennon & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using  Teams.  There
    were no audio or visual difficulties during the course of the  hearing.
    A face to face hearing was not held to  take  precautions  against  the
    spread of Covid-19 and as all issues  could  be  determined  by  remote
    means.  The file contained some of the papers in hard  copy,  with  the
    Appellant's bundle and core bundle being available electronically.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davey promulgated on 22 October 2020, in which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim in the context of deportation dated 16 August 2019 was dismissed.



 3. The Appellant is a national of Grenada, born  on  10  March  1985,  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of 14 on 20 August  1999  with
    six months leave to enter.   He  was  subsequently  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in line with his mother on 12  May  2007  following  an
    application made on long residence grounds.

 4. On 3 July 2003, the Appellant was convicted of  possessing  a  Class  B
    drug for which he was fined and ordered to pay costs.

 5. On 26 April  2006,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  driving  whilst
    disqualified, using a vehicle whilst uninsured, taking a motor  vehicle
    without consent and possession of a Class C drug.   The  Appellant  was
    given a community order, unpaid  work  requirement,  order  for  costs,
    disqualification and his driving licence was endorsed.

 6. On 19 December 2006 the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  driving  whilst
    disqualified and of using a vehicle whilst uninsured; for which he  was
    given a suspended prison sentence of 16 weeks, a curfew requirement, an
    order for costs and he was disqualified from driving for 12 months with
    his licence being endorsed.

 7. On 5 April 2007, the Appellant was convicted of possession with  intent
    to supply a Class C drug for which he was given a community  order  and
    unpaid work requirement.

 8. On 3 May 2007, the Appellant was convicted on two counts of  possession
    of a Class A drug and of a Class C drug,  for  which  he  was  given  a
    community order, unpaid work and costs.

 9. On 7 August 2007, the Appellant was convicted of possession of a  Class
    C drug for which he was ordered to pay a fine and costs.

10. On 15 August  2007,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  for  breach  of  a
    community order following from his conviction on 3 May 2007.

11. On 3 October 2007, the Appellant was again convicted for breach of  the
    community order following from his conviction on 3 May 2017.

12. On 22 September 2008, the Appellant was convicted of  possession  of  a
    Class A drug and a Class C drug, for which he was fined and ordered  to
    pay costs.  On the same  date  the  Appellant  was  also  convicted  of
    driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence  and  for  using  a
    vehicle  whilst  uninsured;   with   no   separate   penalties   beyond
    disqualification and having his driving licence endorsed.

13. On 30 March 2009, the Appellant was convicted of possession of a  Class
    B drug for which he was fined �100.

14. On 10 December 2009, the Appellant was convicted  of  driving  a  motor
    vehicle taken  without  consent;  using  a  vehicle  whilst  uninsured;
    driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence and possession of a
    Class B drug.  The Appellant was fined, ordered  to  pay  costs  and  a
    victim surcharge and had his driving licence endorsed.

15. On 24 March 2010, the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  failing  to  take
    reasonable steps to ensure the  needs  of  an  animal  (2  counts),  of
    failing to take steps to prevent unnecessary suffering of an animal and
    possessing without exemption a Pit Bull Terrier, Japanese Tosa or other
    designated fighting dog.

16. On 26 March 2010, the Appellant was convicted of possession with intent
    to supply a Class C drug for which he  was  sentenced  to  six  months'
    imprisonment, with a further conviction of possession of a Class C drug
    for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  one  month  imprisonment   to   run
    concurrently.

17. The Appellant was notified of his liability to deportation on 28  April
    2010 and invited to submit representations as to why he should  not  be
    deported.  The  Respondent  notified  the  Appellant  reasons  for  his
    deportation on 24 June  2010.   The  Appellant's  appeal  against  that
    decision was successful in a decision promulgated on 2 November 2010.

18.  On  16  September  2010,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  wounding
    (committed whilst on bail) for which he was sentenced  to  a  suspended
    sentence of 10 months' imprisonment and subject to a supervision order.

19. On 29 September 2011, the Appellant was convicted of  possession  of  a
    controlled Class B drug, for which he was fined and ordered  to  pay  a
    victim surcharge and costs.

20. On 17 September 2013, the Appellant was convicted of  possession  of  a
    controlled Class B drug, for which he was fined and ordered  to  pay  a
    victim surcharge and costs.

21. On 6 December 2013, the Appellant was  convicted  of  failing  to  take
    reasonable steps to ensure the needs of an animal, further to which  he
    was disqualified from owning or keeping a pet and ordered to pay costs.

22. On 23 January 2014, the Appellant was  convicted  of  possession  of  a
    controlled Class B drug, for which he was made subject to  a  community
    order and a curfew requirement and ordered to pay costs  and  a  victim
    surcharge.

23. On 21 September 2015, the Appellant was convicted of  possession  of  a
    controlled Class B drug and also two counts of possession of a Class  A
    drug (committed whilst on bail); for which the Appellant  was  held  on
    remand and then subject to a community order,  curfew  requirement  and
    various financial penalties.   On  the  same  date  the  Appellant  was
    disqualified from driving for a period of 28 days for  driving  without
    due care and attention.

24. On 26 January 2016, the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
    possession of a class A drug (cocaine and MDMA) and of driving  without
    due care and attention; for which  he  was  given  a  suspended  prison
    sentence of four weeks, an unpaid work requirement, financial penalties
    and disqualified from driving for 15 months.

25. On 13 December 2018, the Appellant was convicted at Harrow Crown  Court
    of possession with intent to supply a Class A drug (cocaine), for which
    he was sentenced to 40 months' imprisonment;  with  a  concurrent  five
    months' imprisonment for possession of a Class C drug.

26. The Appellant was  again  notified  of  his  liability  to  deportation
    following these latest offences, with submissions made on his behalf on
    8 January 2019.  In these submissions,  the  Appellant  relied  on  his
    relationship with his partner and two children, born in 2007 and  2013;
    all of whom are British citizens.  It is the decision of the Respondent
    to refuse the Appellant's human rights claim against deportation  dated
    16 August 2019 which is the subject to of his appeal.

27. The Respondent refused the application on  16  August  2019  (making  a
    Deportation Order on the same date) on  the  basis  that  although  the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  his  partner  and  two  children   was
    accepted; it would not be unduly harsh for them to relocate to  Grenada
    with him, nor for them to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  if  he  were
    deported.  Further, the  Applicant  did  not  meet  the  exceptions  to
    deportation on private life grounds because he had not integrated in to
    the United Kingdom and there would be no very significant obstacles  to
    his reintegration on return to Grenada.  Finally,  the  Respondent  did
    not accept  that  there  were  any  very  compelling  circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation  taking  into  account  the
    Appellant's criminal history, his family relationships  (including  the
    medical evidence and fact that the family did not live  together),  the
    Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom as a child and his ability to
    integrate on return.  The Respondent  also  referred  to  the  previous
    First-tier Tribunal decision in 2010.

28. Judge Davey dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22
    October 2020 on  all  grounds.   In  essence,  the  Appellant's  family
    relationships were accepted and although it  was  found  to  be  unduly
    harsh for any of the family members to relocate with the  Appellant  to
    Grenada; it would not be unduly harsh for them to remain in the  United
    Kingdom without him.  Adverse credibility findings  were  made  against
    the Appellant and little weight was given to the Appellant's  partner's
    or mother's  evidence  with  the  decision  highlighting  the  lack  of
    evidence available on specific issues.  Overall, the Tribunal  did  not
    find that the Appellant met any of the exceptions to  deportation,  nor
    were  there  very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.

The appeal

29. The Appellant appeals on six grounds as follows:

      i) that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing  to
         apply the Court of Appeal's decision in HA (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ  1176  which  is  not
         inconsistent with the Supreme Court  decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53;

     ii) that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing  to
         have regard to the impact of the Appellant's  imprisonment  on  his
         daughter's education where there was  specific  evidence  from  her
         school about her being late every day during this time;

    iii) that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing  to
         give any reasons for finding that the Appellant's  partner  'played
         up' her evidence;

     iv) that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing  to
         consider  the  delay  in  consideration  of  the  application   for
         indefinite leave to remain, but for which the Appellant would  have
         been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for more than half  of
         his life and he would have been lawfully resident at  the  time  he
         commenced his relationship;

      v) that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  fact  as  to  the
         period in which the Appellant had not reoffended, which amounted to
         a period of 18 months following his arrest on 3 June 2017 from when
         he was in employment up until he was imprisoned;

     vi) that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing  to
         have regard to all relevant matters when considering whether  there
         were very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public  interest
         in  deportation,  in  particular  the  Maslov  criteria,  that  the
         Appellant was a settled migrant, his relationship with  his  mother
         and despite the relative seriousness of his offending, that he  was
         sentenced at the bottom end of the range for sentence.

30. At the oral hearing, Ms Revill adopted  and  relied  upon  the  written
    grounds of appeal and the Applicant's reply to the Respondent's rule 24
    notice.  In relation to the first ground of appeal,  it  was  submitted
    that it was impossible to tell what  test  the  Tribunal  applied  when
    considering whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the  Appellant's
    children to remain in the United Kingdom without him  -  it  not  being
    clear that KO (Nigeria) has been applied, let alone as  interpreted  in
    HA (Iraq), given that the latter was  discounted  by  the  Tribunal  as
    being relevant only to an individual child rather than  containing  any
    principles of general application.  Ms  Revill  accepted  that  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal had stated that the test set out in KO (Nigeria) as
    applied in HA (Iraq) had been expressly stated, then there would be  no
    error of law in the decision as in substance nothing  in  the  decision
    suggests that the  wrong  test  has  been  applied.   However,  it  was
    submitted that there was a clear error in the decision in failing to do
    so in the context of this appeal given the  nature  of  what  was  said
    about HA (Iraq).

31. In relation to the second ground of  appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stated at paragraph 26 of the decision that there was  no  evidence  of
    any adverse impact on the Appellant's younger child during  his  period
    of imprisonment.  However, there  was  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    partner about being on her own which led to  difficulties  getting  the
    older child to school leading to the younger child always  or  normally
    being late to school, which had an adverse impact on her  behaviour  at
    school  and  educational  progress.   This  evidence  was  capable   of
    indicating a tangible adverse impact on the child's  development  which
    should have been considered by the Tribunal.  Ms Revill submitted  that
    in the rule 24 response, the Respondent sought to dispute the  evidence
    but the Appellant's partner was not cross-examined on this  point.   Ms
    Revill accepted that there was a conflict in the evidence as to whether
    the child was late to school every day or  27  times  in  the  academic
    year; which was unexplained, but emphasised the point that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal simply did not consider any of this at all.

32. In relation to the third ground of appeal, whilst it was accepted  that
    it may have been open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's partner 'played up' her evidence, it was an  error  of  law
    for no reasons to be given for that finding in the decision.

33. In relation to the fourth ground of appeal, Ms  Revill  emphasised  the
    cumulative assessment  required  of  the  factors  identified  even  in
    circumstances where individually  they  may  not  be  sufficient.   The
    Appellant relies on the relevance of the delay in the consideration  of
    his application for indefinite leave to remain in reliance on the Court
    of Appeal's decision in CI (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 even though it  was  accepted  that  in
    that case that but for failing to meet that one exception  in  relation
    to CI's immigration history, he would otherwise have  met  the  private
    life exception to  deportation  and  in  the  present  appeal,  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant  could  not  demonstrate  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration.

34. In relation to the fifth ground of appeal, it was submitted that  there
    was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  any  criminal
    offending before the Appellant was imprisoned most recently, in the  18
    months between being granted bail and being sentenced.  This period  of
    good conduct was relevant to the overall assessment to be undertaken by
    the First-tier Tribunal, but in the decision there is reference only to
    the period after his release on licence as well as an inference of  the
    Appellant using drugs and being involved in criminality whilst  working
    for his mother; but there was no evidence of any offending  whilst  the
    Appellant was on bail.

35. As to the final ground of appeal, Ms Revill listed a number of  matters
    in the Appellant's favour which were not addressed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or taken into account in the assessment.  These  included  the
    fact that the Appellant was a settled migrant; that he  enjoyed  family
    life with his mother (even though accepted as not being family life  to
    engage Article 8(1) of the European Convention on  Human  Rights);  and
    the relative seriousness of the Appellant's  criminal  offence  (whilst
    there is no dispute that it was a serious offence as reflected  in  the
    sentence imposed, it was at the lower end of the sentencing scale).  On
    the latter, Ms Revill submitted that  the  type  of  offence  a  person
    commits is not relevant to the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
    deportation and only the length of sentence can be taken  into  account
    as all other matters have been considered by the sentencing Judge.

36. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Everett relied on the rule 24  response
    and made additional oral submissions.  The first ground of  appeal  was
    said to be without merit in  the  absence  of  any  indication  in  the
    decision that the wrong  test  had  been  applied  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on his children and  this
    was not a case where the First-tier Tribunal had fallen into  the  trap
    identified by the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq).

37. The second  ground  of  appeal  argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    overlooked certain evidence, however, there was a  lack  of  supporting
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  a  self-evident  point
    that getting a child to school on time is a practical  difficulty  that
    could be overcome and there was nothing to suggest that it was a parent
    specifically that had to take the child to school.  In any event,  this
    would not materially affect the outcome of the appeal as there must  be
    a solution to that practical difficulty or assistance available.

38. Whilst Ms Everett expressed some sympathy  with  the  third  ground  of
    appeal, she submitted it was not made out as adequate reasons had  been
    given as to the assessment of the evidence in the context of this claim
    and in particular the lack of corroborative evidence.

39. In circumstances where the Appellant would not  face  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration on return to Grenada,  the  Respondent's
    position was that whether or not the Appellant had spent more than half
    of his life lawfully in the United Kingdom was immaterial and therefore
    there was no error of law on the fourth ground of appeal.

40. The evidence in relation to the  Appellant's  offending,  drug  use  or
    criminality before the First-tier Tribunal was not entirely clear.   It
    would seem that he had not been arrested or convicted for  any  further
    offences but unclear whether he has been involved  in  drugs  or  other
    illegal activity.  In any event, whether the Appellant had not offended
    in this particular  period  prior  to  his  imprisonment  was,  it  was
    submitted, unlikely  to  tip  the  balance  in  his  favour  given  his
    extensive criminal history.

41. Ms Everett submitted in relation to the final ground of appeal that  it
    is widely accepted and considered by the courts that drugs offences are
    particularly serious, bringing a particular form of  misery  and  wider
    adverse impact on society.  In relation to the Appellant's relationship
    with his mother, her evidence was considered by the First-tier Tribunal
    in paragraph 38 of the decision and it is unclear how it  is  said  her
    evidence was not understood.  The Appellant's offending was during  the
    period in which he was living with his mother.  Finally, in relation to
    the Maslov criteria, whilst there is a  typographical  mistake  in  the
    decision as to length of time the Appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom, his immigration history was set out  elsewhere  correctly  and
    even cumulatively, it is difficult to see  how  all  of  these  factors
    could have materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first ground of appeal is based on form  over  substance  and  what
    appears to be a mis-reading of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   Ms
    Revill was unable to identify any points of substance in  the  decision
    which either expressly or by inference gave  any  indication  that  the
    wrong test for  whether  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
    Appellant's children was in fact applied by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    There are no such indicators to be found anywhere in the decision.   In
    submissions, Ms Revill  expressly  confirmed  that  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had expressly set out the test or had stated that the test was
    that in KO (Nigeria) as applied in HA (Iraq), that there  would  be  no
    error of law on this point.  This amounts to a criticism of form rather
    than identifying any arguable error of law.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal set out the relevant  test  to  be  applied  in
    paragraph 31 as follows:

         "31. In considering this matter I therefore turn to the  case  law,
         particularly KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and HA (Iraq) [2020]  EWCA
         Civ 1176.  I start from the premise that the decision in KO is  the
         law as it is stated to be and that the later views expressed in the
         Court of  Appeal,  which  have  not  apparently  been  accepted  in
         themselves by the Supreme Court, are the  interpretation  currently
         put upon the consideration of what is unduly harsh and to draw away
         from setting in stone or in some determinative way the factors that
         may be considered.  Rather it seemed to be that the decision in  HA
         (Iraq) essentially concentrated on the individual children,  rather
         than the generality of best interests of children, the children  of
         a foreign criminal.  It was pointed  out  that  inevitably  in  the
         nature of deportation if it occurred that it will have  significant
         consequences for a deportee's family."

 3. Contrary to the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  this
    paragraph does not in any way discount the application  of  HA  (Iraq),
    fail to apply it or suggest that it is confined to its facts as opposed
    to being of any wider application.  Expressly, the paragraph  sets  out
    exactly what Ms Revill submitted should have been done when  it  states
    in terms that the law is as stated in  KO  (Nigeria),  with  the  views
    expressed in HA (Iraq) being  the  interpretation  currently  put  upon
    consideration of what is unduly harsh.  There is no error of law in the
    way that the current authority or test is expressed,  with  the  First-
    tier Tribunal emphasising that what is required is an assessment of the
    individual children rather than any general position  as  to  the  best
    interests of children whose parent is facing deportation.  The decision
    as a whole goes on to do so and the First-tier Tribunal has not  fallen
    in to the trap identified  in  HA  (Iraq)  of  making  any  comparative
    assessment with the generality  of  the  best  interests  of  children,
    instead, it focuses in detail on the Appellant's children.

 4.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the  impact   of   the   Appellant's
    imprisonment and in particular whether it failed to have regard to  the
    impact on his daughter's education due to  her  being  late  to  school
    during this period.  The sole evidence relied upon by the Appellant  in
    this ground of appeal is a letter from his daughter's school  dated  29
    October 2019 which included the following:

         "This year, [the Appellant's daughter]  has  been  struggling  with
         school and it is becoming increasingly  difficult  to  get  her  to
         follow her regular routines.  She has been  late  for  school  ever
         day.  (I understand it is extremely difficult for mum to  get  [the
         Appellant's daughter] to school on time and get her  older  brother
         on his  bus  at  the  same  time).   When  late,  [the  Appellant's
         daughter] is missing important  parts  of  the  morning  and  vital
         learning.  This includes reading, her daily  routine  log  and  her
         sensory group.  When missing these elements of her day, she becomes
         unsettled and difficult to manage.  It is so important  she  is  at
         school on time to attend to these sessions for her to  achieve  the
         outcomes set in her Educational Health Care Plan (EHCP)."

 5. This evidence had clearly been considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    given the references in paragraphs 33 and 34 to the practical  problems
    arising from the Appellant's imprisonment,  who  had  previously  taken
    some part in getting the children to and from school and to the lack of
    evidence as to how problems in terms of daily arrangements  being  made
    could be addressed if needed.  These references could only  be  to  the
    evidence above given that no other specific issues had been  identified
    in the course of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper
    Tribunal.  As identified by the First-tier Tribunal, this was an  issue
    of practicality and the evidence did not suggest  that  there  was  any
    impact  from  the  Appellant  specifically  not  being   available   or
    personally assisting with the school runs; just that it  was  difficult
    for the Appellant's partner practically to get both children to  school
    herself without some other assistance.  There  is  nothing  to  suggest
    that  alternative  arrangements  were  considered  or  would   not   be
    appropriate.

 6. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal decision did not expressly refer to this
    evidence from the school in paragraphs 14, or 20 to 26 of the decision;
    it did set out in detail the difficulty of  the  lack  of  evidence  on
    certain matters and the type and quality of  evidence  relied  upon  in
    relation to the children.  The First-tier Tribunal expressly noted  the
    lack of medical evidence or assessment of the impact of the Appellant's
    imprisonment or likely impact of his deportation on the  children.   In
    particular, in paragraph 21 the First-tier Tribunal refers to the  lack
    of any evidence from the school as to the impact of deportation on  the
    children's development, education or  emotional  circumstances  and  no
    assessment in relation to the Appellant's son of any  potential  impact
    on his development if the  Appellant  were  deported.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal also gave detailed consideration to the  witness  evidence  on
    this point and noted that it was lacking in detail  as  to  the  likely
    impact on the children.

 7. It is also of note  that  whilst  the  letter  dated  29  October  2019
    referred to the Appellant's daughter being late every day, no reference
    period for that was given and it is clear from her  school  report  for
    the previous academic year that she was late a total of 27 times in the
    year (which whilst not insignificant, was very  far  from  every  day).
    The Appellant was in prison from December 2018 and therefore  for  over
    two thirds of that academic year, without it seems the  same  practical
    impact on the children or his daughter in particular.

 8. In all of these circumstances, I do not find that that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in finding that there was a lack of evidence of any harm
    to the Appellant's children during his imprisonment.  Whilst there  was
    clearly a recognised impact on them an  the  family  generally  and  in
    terms of the practical daily arrangements, the evidence went no further
    than this.  In any event, there  is  no  challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings as to the lack of evidence of the likely impact  of
    the  Appellant's  deportation  on  the  children  (see  in   particular
    paragraph 28 of the decision) and the particular difficulty  identified
    in the evidence from the school is dealt with at paragraphs 33  and  34
    of the decision with the conclusion that such matters were not of  such
    weight to be determinative (in the absence of any  other  evidence)  in
    the Appellant's favour as to whether deportation would be unduly  harsh
    on his children remaining in the United Kingdom.   For  these  reasons,
    particularly reading the decision as whole, there is no material  error
    of law on the second ground of appeal.

 9. The third ground of appeal concerns the First-tier Tribunal's  adequacy
    of reasons for finding that the Appellant's  partner  'played  up'  her
    evidence in paragraph 38 of the decision, which included the following:
    "I did not find,  other  than  the  understandable  concern  that  [the
    Appellant's partner] now  has,  that  she  was  a  particularly  useful
    witness on the generality of difficulties that  she  faced  and  rather
    those matters it seemed to me were somewhat played up  because  of  her
    genuine concern about the impact  for  her  and  the  children  of  the
    Appellant's removal."

10. This finding in  paragraph  38  does  not  as  such  make  any  adverse
    credibility finding against the Appellant's partner  and  simply  draws
    together the matters raised repeatedly in previous  paragraphs  in  the
    decision as to the lack of detail the  Appellant's  partner's  evidence
    and the almost complete lack of any supporting evidence or  assessment.
    When read as a whole, adequate reasons  are  given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  for  the  overall  assessment  of  the  usefulness   of   the
    Appellant's partner's evidence which did not need to be repeated  again
    in the concluding remarks on this in paragraph 38.  In any event, it is
    very difficult to see how any lack of reasoning  on  this  point  could
    have had any material bearing on the outcome of the appeal; the reasons
    for which are clearly conveyed to the Appellant in the decision read as
    a whole.

11.  The  fourth  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the period between 2001 and 2007 before the Appellant was
    granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in
    particular whether the delay in leave being granted  should  have  been
    taken into account given that, but for the delay, the  Appellant  could
    have satisfied the requirement to have been lawfully  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for more  than  half  of  his  life  (therefore  meeting
    paragraph 399A(a) of the Immigration Rules and  section  117C(4)(a)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002;  one  of  the  three
    requirements of the private life exception to deportation).   There  is
    no dispute that in any event, the Appellant could not meet the  private
    life exception to deportation given the unchallenged findings  that  he
    would not face very significant obstacles to reintegration on return to
    Grenada.  However, the Appellant relies on this  point,  together  with
    the weight to be attached to his relationship which, if  granted  leave
    sooner would have been given more weight (as it  would  have  commenced
    when he was here lawfully), in relation to the  overall  assessment  of
    whether there were  very  exceptional  circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.

12. The Appellant specifically relies on the Court of Appeal's decision  in
    CI  (Nigeria)  as  to  matters  which  are  relevant.    However,   the
    circumstances in that case are materially different to the present  one
    given that in CI (Nigeria) the Appellant would have met  the  exception
    to deportation on private life grounds but for the length of his lawful
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom which was determined  by  matters
    beyond his control as a child.  In the present  case,  it  is  accepted
    that the Appellant could not meet this exception and therefore  on  any
    view, the potential weight that could be applied to any delay would  be
    much less than the potential relevance of such a factor on the facts in
    CI (Nigeria).

13. The First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 35 found that the  late  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain in 2007 was  not  material  to  the  overall
    assessment undertaken and little weight was given to  this  factor;  in
    particular because the delay had no bearing at all on  the  Appellant's
    conduct in the United Kingdom.  The lack of lawful status here or delay
    in  decision  making  had  no  claimed  relevance  to  the  Appellant's
    offending.

14. The First-tier Tribunal did therefore consider the issue of  delay  but
    simply attached little weight to it.  Although there is no  further  or
    express consideration in the final balancing exercise undertaken by the
    First-tier Tribunal of whether the delay in granting  indefinite  leave
    to remain to the Appellant up to 2007 should add to the factors in  the
    Appellant's favour or reduce the weight to be attached  to  the  public
    interest in deportation and it is difficult to  see  how  it  could  do
    either in any material or substantive way.  This is particularly so  in
    circumstances where the Appellant could  not  in  any  event  meet  the
    private  life  exception  to   deportation;   where   the   Appellant's
    immigration history and length of residence in the  United  Kingdom  is
    expressly set out (albeit with one typographical error in  relation  to
    this) and where the focus in the appeal was on the Appellant's children
    rather than on his relationship with his partner (and no  reduction  in
    the weight to be attached to that appears to  have  been  made  on  the
    basis that the relationship commenced at a time when the Appellant  had
    no leave to remain, even though it should have been in accordance  with
    section 117B(4)(b) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002).

15. In these circumstances, there is no material error of law on the fourth
    ground of appeal.  The weight to be attached to a particular matter  is
    primarily for the First-tier Tribunal; it was not irrational to  attach
    little weight to this aspect of the claim and even if it was  an  error
    of law for the First-tier Tribunal not to attach greater weight to  it;
    the relevance of this part of the claim within the appeal as a whole is
    at best very marginal and could not have made any  material  difference
    to the outcome.

16. On the fifth ground of appeal, the First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in
    fact as to the period in which the Appellant had not reoffended.  There
    was no finding that he had reoffended  whilst  on  bail  following  his
    arrest, nor that he had only not reoffended since August 2020.  In  the
    bail period, the First-tier Tribunal only found that he was at the same
    time still pursuing his use and involvement with drugs  or  criminality
    generally (paragraph 39 of the decision).  There is  no  evidence  that
    the Appellant was not still involved with and taking drugs during  this
    period (to the contrary, the sentencing remarks in 2018  refer  to  the
    Appellant's cannabis habit) and  that  involves  criminality  generally
    whether or not the Appellant was convicted of any offence  during  this
    period.  That finding was open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  make  on
    the evidence before it and it does not amount to an error of fact as to
    the period in which the Appellant had not re-offended.  This  paragraph
    addresses a slightly different issue.

17. The First-tier Tribunal referred to being unable to form  a  view  that
    the Appellant had changed his ways since his  release  from  prison  in
    August 2020 given the shortage of time  since  then  and  the  previous
    opportunities to change not being taken.  Again,  this  is  a  slightly
    different point  to  the  period  over  which  the  Appellant  has  not
    reoffended.  The findings at paragraph 36 are not indicative  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal only  took  this  period  since  August  2020  into
    account as a short period  without  reoffending,  particularly  in  the
    context of the decision setting out in detail the Appellant's  criminal
    history and circumstances, including assessment of the period  of  bail
    between June 2017 and December 2018.

18. In light of the Appellant's significant history of criminal  offending,
    including offences committed whilst on bail, breach of community orders
    and  continued  offending  following  his  successful  appeal   against
    deportation in 2010; it  is  difficult  to  see  in  any  event  how  a
    relatively short period without reoffending whilst on bail  since  June
    2017 even combined with the period following  release  from  prison  in
    August 2020 could be given anything other than  little  weight  in  the
    Appellant's favour in the final  balancing  exercise.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal expresses this in paragraph 41 when it is  said  that  account
    has been taken of when the last offences were actually  committed,  but
    this took  the  Appellant's  claim  little  further  in  light  of  the
    identified  criminality  and  conduct  of  the  Appellant.   For  these
    reasons, there is no material error of  law  on  the  fifth  ground  of
    appeal.

19. The final ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    have  regard  to  all  relevant  matters  when  conducting  the   final
    assessment of whether  there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.  There is no doubt in this
    case that there is a very strong  public  interest  in  deporting  this
    particular Appellant  given  his  extensive  criminal  record  and  the
    seriousness of the index offence - even if sentencing was at the  lower
    end of the scale, there is no dispute it was a serious offence and even
    if no account is taken of the particular seriousness of drugs  offences
    and their adverse impact on society.

20. The only matter identified by the Appellant within this final ground of
    appeal  that  was  not  expressly  considered  within  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was the fact that the index offence resulted  in  a
    sentence at the lower end of the  sentencing  guidelines.   The  Maslov
    criteria were in substance all considered,  including  the  nature  and
    seriousness of  the  offences  committed;  the  Appellant's  length  of
    residence in  the  United  Kingdom  (including  the  period  of  lawful
    residence following the grant of indefinite leave to remain  in  2007);
    the relatively short period of time since the last offence and  conduct
    during it; and the Appellant's relative ties in the United Kingdom  and
    Grenada.  These in particular included his  family  relationships  with
    his partner and children, as well as his relationship with  his  mother
    and the Appellant's age on arrival in the  United  Kingdom.   Following
    consideration of all of these matters, it was clearly open to the First-
    tier  Tribunal  to  conclude  that  there  were  no  very   exceptional
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation.  Even  if
    the First-tier Tribunal expressly considered the relative  duration  of
    sentence at the lower end of the scale, that does not detract from  the
    index offence being a serious one which followed a significant  history
    of offences and in the overall scheme, the point is a  very  minor  and
    marginal one which could not, even cumulatively with all other factors,
    have rationally led to any other conclusion by the First-tier Tribunal.
     For these reasons, there is no material error  of  law  on  the  final
    ground of appeal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   G  Jackson                            Date          21st  September
    2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

