
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14316/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Remotely)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 26 May 2021                      |On 16 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                       Mrs Saraswathy venkatakrishnan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Raza, counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro, promulgated on 3  February  2020.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal on 8 February 2021.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no  obvious  reason
    for one now and no such application was made.

Background

 3. The appellant, now aged 76, entered the United Kingdom as a visitor  on
    several occasions between 2005 and 2015. She  last  entered  on  2  May
    2015. Prior to her leave to enter expiring, the appellant sought  leave
    to remain in the UK on  human  rights  grounds.  That  application  was
    refused on 14 February 2016 and certified as clearly unfounded. Further
    submissions were refused on 9 August 2017 and 18 December 2017.

 4. On 26 October 2018, the appellant made a human  rights  application  on
    private life grounds. That application was refused on  12  August  2019
    and is the decision which is subject to this appeal. The  Secretary  of
    State refused the appellant's human rights claim  because  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant's age and medical  conditions  amounted  to
    very significant obstacles to her reintegration in India. It was  noted
    that she had resided in India until  the  age  of  70,  that  her  late
    husband had left her land and property and that India had a health-care
    system which the appellant had previously used.  It  was  not  accepted
    that the appellant's circumstances merited an exception being  made  in
    her case.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  appellant's  adult
    daughter gave evidence. There was also new medical evidence before  the
    judge of the appellant having episodes of memory impairment. The  judge
    accepted that the appellant's physical condition had deteriorated since
    she last entered the UK and that she would need personal care in  India
    but did not accept that there were very significant  obstacles  to  her
    reintegration. The judge found that  there  were  close  relatives  and
    neighbours who could assist the  appellant  and  that  the  appellant's
    daughter had the financial means to pay for assistance.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal argued that the  First-tier
    Tribunal conflated the previous and current legal tests under paragraph
    276ADE(1) (vi); that the findings as to  the  appellant's  family  ties
    were not properly reasoned and did not address  the  written  and  oral
    evidence of the sponsor as to why  family  support  in  India  was  not
    available. It was also argued that the Tribunal's conclusions as to the
    reasons for the appellant's dependency on her daughter were against the
    weight of the evidence; that the judge erred in attaching little weight
    to family life under 117B (4) and failed  to  take  into  consideration
    that the sponsor's British son was studying in the United Kingdom.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 13
    August 2020 on the basis that the grounds of appeal were unarguable.

 8. The appellant was granted permission to apply for  judicial  review  of
    the decision of Judge Sheridan  on  17  November  2020  by  Mr  Justice
    Mostyn. That decision included the following observation:

         [8]  "I have concluded that the claimant should have  been  granted
             permission to appeal because the judgment of the primary judge
             is so confused as to the relevant  legal  test  being  applied
             that the claimant could not be said to  have  understood  with
             sufficient clarity why she had lost."

         [10] "The judgment of the primary judge is completely  confused  as
             to which  test  was  being  applied...  in  paragraph  19  the
             citation of the authority in Bossadi  strongly  suggests  that
             the old test was being applied. In paragraphs 20-21 it appears
             that the new test is being applied; yet in paragraph 22 it  is
             tolerably clear that the old one is in play."

         [12] In my opinion it was arguable that  the  judgment  was  flawed
             beyond repair..."

 9. The decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to  appeal  was
    quashed by order of Master Gidden dated  23  November  2020.  Following
    which  the  Vice  President  granted  permission  to  appeal,   without
    observations.

10. The respondent's  Rule  24  response  indicated  that  the  appeal  was
    opposed.

The hearing

11. Mr Raza's submissions relied heavily on the observations of Mr  Justice
    Mostyn. He argued that there was no need for the First-tier Tribunal to
    refer to the previous iteration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  While  the
    issue of ties was relevant it was not the focus of the current test  of
    very significant obstacles. Mr Raza submitted that owing to the judge's
    focus on the appellant's ties, there was a failure to consider material
    matters including the extent of assistance provided by the sponsor  and
    the lack of family support available in India. Furthermore,  the  judge
    had  entered  into  the  realm  of  speculation  in  finding  that  the
    appellant's siblings and neighbours could assist her when there was  no
    evidence to this effect before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Avery argued that there was not, in reality, much different  between
    the original test which was based on an assessment of ties and the very
    significant obstacles test. He  accepted  that  the  current  test  was
    broader,  applying  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,  in  that  a  broad
    evaluative assessment was required. It was accepted on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the judge addressed the new  test  and  took  that  into
    account. While the focus was  too  much  on  the  old  test  the  judge
    understood the context of the appellant's case in that she  noted  that
    the appellant's physical condition had deteriorated and that  she  will
    require care  in  India.  The  observations  the  judge  made  at  [29]
    regarding the support available to the appellant were open to  her.  Mr
    Avery submitted that the judge made no material error of law.

13. In response, Mr Raza argued that there  was  a  significant  difference
    between the previous and current tests. There had been no need for  the
    judge to refer to Bossadi (paragraph 286ADE; suitability, ties)  [2015]
    UKUT 42 (IAC) which refers to the "no ties" test. While  the  issue  of
    ties was relevant, it was a single aspect  of  the  current  test.  The
    reference to no ties was made on multiple occasions.  While  the  judge
    referred to the current test, it added to the confusion.

14. Mr Raza submitted that the judge's findings were focused on  the  issue
    of ties such as family life in India and the prevalence of  neighbours.
    The said findings being made without  reasoning  and  contrary  to  the
    evidence in the sponsor's witness statement.

15. At the end of the hearing, I concluded that the judge made  a  material
    error of law in relation to her  assessment  of  the  very  significant
    obstacles test, in that she repeatedly  referred  to  and  applied  the
    previous "no ties" test. Furthermore, the judge's consideration of  the
    appellant's ties and support available in India did not accord with the
    evidence before her and  there  was  an  absence  of  reasons  for  her
    findings that support was available. Accordingly, the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

16. Mr Raza sought remittal to the First-tier Tribunal because there  would
    need to be further evidence adduced regarding the  appellant's  current
    circumstances and up to date evidence regarding her health  conditions.
    Mr Avery did not oppose that outcome. There was also  a  further  issue
    which  was  not  adequately  addressed  by  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    previously, that being the ability of the appellant  to  replicate  the
    personal care which she is receiving from her daughter  in  the  United
    Kingdom, in India. I accordingly remitted the  matter  for  a  de  novo
    hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

17. To reiterate what is said above, the First-tier Tribunal  confused  the
    correct approach  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  with  a  focus  on  the
    predecessor test of "no ties"  and  the  findings  made  by  the  judge
    focused on  the  issue  of  ties  rather  than  current  test  of  very
    significant obstacles. While the judge referred to the correct test  at
    [18]  (although  she  wrongly  identified  the  appellant  as  being  a
    Pakistani national) and appropriately directed herself by reference  to
    Kamara at [20], she erred in referring to Bossadi at [19]  and  focused
    on the appellant's ties at [22], [26] and [29]. As  a  result  of  that
    misdirection, the judge failed to consider material  matters  including
    the specific nature of the assistance provided to the appellant by  her
    daughter; whether that care could be  replicated  in  India;  that  the
    appellant's elder brothers had their own health concerns and there  had
    been a  breakdown  in  communication  between  the  appellant  and  her
    relatives in India. The judge further  speculated  that  the  appellant
    would have "good neighbours" without there being any evidence going  to
    that issue.

18. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her human rights appeal at the
    First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of  such
    consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                             Date: 27 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
