
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14542/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th January 2018                       |On 19th January 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD FAIZAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant was not legally  represented;  his  sponsor  did  not
         attend. There was no request for an adjournment and the  notice  of
         hearing had been sent to the last notified address. I proceeded  in
         the absence of the sponsor.


      2. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
         against the refusal of his human rights claim which was based  upon
         his marriage to Ms Dede Bohri Mista who is resident and settled  in
         the UK. The application had been refused on the  grounds  that  the
         marriage was not genuine and subsisting, they  did  not  intend  to
         live together permanently and  they  did  not  meet  the  financial
         requirements. The judge found that Ms Bohri Mista's evidence as  to
         the commencement, continuance and nature of  the  relationship  was
         not credible. He found that she was not employed as she claimed and
         the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. He found that the decision to refuse entry clearance was not
         a disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  family  life
         (which was non-existent) or his  private  life.  He  dismissed  the
         appeal.


      3. Permission was granted, surprisingly, on the grounds  that  it  was
         arguable the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
         decision; that the judge had misconstrued the test  for  whether  a
         marriage was genuine and subsisting  by  incorporating  a  test  of
         whether it was a marriage  of  convenience  and  that  the  judge's
         approach to credibility infected the findings on financial means.


      4. The decision of the judge  was  robust.  He  took  account  of  the
         appellant's appalling immigration history and the variation in  the
         sponsor's evidence when  inconsistencies  and  contradictions  were
         identified. Although the judge concluded the marriage  was  one  of
         convenience he made findings, supported by reasons, that the couple
         had no intention  of  living  together.  His  findings  as  to  the
         sponsor's claimed second job,  or  rather  the  lack  of  it,  were
         sustainable given the sponsor's lack of documentary  evidence,  her
         contradictory evidence as to when and where she worked and her lack
         of English.


      5. There had been no challenge before the First-tier Tribunal  to  the
         appellant's immigration history which included a sham marriage to a
         Romanian,   an   unmeritorious   asylum   application   which   was
         subsequently withdrawn, that he had  been  working  illegally,  had
         failed to study during the currency of a student permit but worked,
         claimed falsely to be caring for an EEA national and  that  he  had
         only told his sponsor  of  this  when  his  application  for  entry
         clearance had been refused and he had appealed. He  considered  the
         sponsor's lack of English and that she did not speak Urdu or Arabic
         (his  languages)  and  that  the  evidence  on   how   the   couple
         communicated was sparse in the extreme.  The  findings  on  finance
         were open to the judge on the  evidence  before  him  and  he  gave
         adequate reasons for rejecting the existence of the claimed  second
         job.


      6. The finding by the judge that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
         immigration  rules  and  that  his  human  rights  claim  fails  is
         unassailable.


      7. There is no identifiable error of law.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands; the appeal is dismissed.


     Date 17th January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
