
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14518/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 November 2018                           |On 4 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                             Davies Ngure Kamau
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Kalanda, Legal Representative, JK Immigration
                    Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on 13 April 1971.

 2. This appeal arises from the decision of the respondent on 24 October
    2017 to refuse the appellant's application for leave to remain in the
    UK on the basis of his private and family life.  He appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Kaler.  In a decision promulgated on 23 October 2018 the appeal
    was dismissed.  The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Factual Background

 3. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor in 1995 and claimed asylum
    using a false name.  His application was unsuccessful.

 4. The appellant lives with his partner and children (born on 5 October
    2013 and 5 May 2008), all of whom are British citizens. He has a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his children. Amongst other
    things, he takes them to and from school and assists them with homework
    and other matters.

 5. The appellant has committed and been convicted of a number of criminal
    offences, including a driving offence with nine months imprisonment in
    2001, possession of criminal property resulting in 28 weeks
    imprisonment in 2006, and breach of a non-molestation order resulting
    in one day of imprisonment in 2011.

 6. In his application made on 27 October 2016 for leave to remain on the
    basis of his family life, the appellant only disclosed the last
    conviction.

Decision of the Respondent

 7. The respondent rejected the appellant's application under the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that he did not meet the suitability
    requirements under Section S-LTR, given his criminal history and
    failure to disclose this on the application.

 8. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim outside the Rules on the
    basis, amongst other things, that separation from his British national
    children (who can remain in the UK with their mother) can be justified
    given the criminal convictions and that, alternatively, the children
    could, if the family so wish, relocate to Kenya where they could
    partake in Kenya's functioning education system.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge found, firstly, that the appellant had, in his 2016
    application for leave to remain, deliberately failed to disclose
    earlier convictions.

10. The judge also found that the appellant had not established that he had
    been present in the UK between April 2001 and July 2006.  The judge
    stated at paragraph 14 that 20 years residence had not been
    established, and that this had been accepted by the appellant's
    representative.

11. The judge also found that it was undisputed that the appellant has a
    close relationship with his partner and children and that he cares for
    his children.

12. Although at paragraphs 4 and 14 of the decision the judge referred to
    the appellant entering the UK in 1995, at paragraph 18 the judge stated
    that the appellant has been in the UK without leave since 2005 and at
    paragraph 27 she referred to the appellant being in the UK without
    leave, "save for a short period in 2005."

13. The judge considered whether the appellant satisfied the criteria of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules concluded that he did not,
    as he had not lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years and
    would not face very significant obstacles to reintegration in Kenya.

14. The judge then considered the appeal outside the Immigration Rules.  He
    directed himself to consider Section 117B(6) of the Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the best interests of the
    appellant's children.

15. The judge set out his core findings in respect of Article 8 at
    paragraphs 37 to 39, where he stated:

         "37. I consider the cumulative effect of this Appellant's
             persistent offending, his deception in using false names to
             make an asylum application to the Home Office, his failure to
             disclose all his convictions and his remaining in the UK
             without leave for so may (sic) years.  This Appellant fails
             the suitability requirements to be granted leave.  He is not a
             suitable person to be entitled to a grant to remain here.  The
             children's best interests have been taken into account as a
             primary, but not the only factor.  The decision to refuse the
             Appellant a grant of leave is proportionate.

         38.  The parents of thee children both spent their formative years
             in Kenya and have maintained ties there.  They could, if the
             (sic) wish, relocate to Kenya where there are good schools.
             The Appellant's partner has family there and they can be
             assisted in re-establishing their lives there.  The
             Appellant's partner has some medical issues but these are not
             serious and the (sic) she has been discharged from hospital.

         39.  Despite the fact that it is in the best interests of the
             children that their father be part of their continuing family
             life, I conclude that there are countervailing reasons that
             prevail.  The children have the benefit of one loving parent
             who is a British Citizen.  It would not be unreasonable for
             this family to enjoy family life in Kenya if that is their
             wish."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

16. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred in law by finding
    that the appellant entered the UK as a visitor in 2005 when in fact he
    entered in 1995; by stating that the appellant had a short period of
    leave in 2005, when in fact he did not have leave to remain; and by
    stating that the appellant had re-entered the UK in November 1999, when
    the appellant had not left the UK since 1995.

17. At the error of law hearing, Ms Kalanda elaborated upon the grounds of
    appeal.  She submitted that the decision should not stand because it is
    based on a mistake of fact concerning the date when the appellant
    entered the UK that the judge had assessed article 8 ECHR under the
    misapprehension that the appellant had been in the UK for around 13,
    rather than 23, years.

18. She also argued (although it is not in the grounds of appeal) that the
    evidence did not support the judge's finding that the appellant had not
    established he was in the UK between 2001 and 2006.  She described this
    as an "assumption".  She stated that the appellant faces difficulty
    proving his length of residence as he is unable to obtain his GP
    records without his passport, which is held by the Home Office.  She
    asserted that the appellant should not be held responsible for this.

19. Mr Whitwell submitted that the reason the appellant appears to have
    difficulty establishing his length of residence is that he has used
    different aliases.  He noted that the appellant had accepted that he
    made an asylum claim using a false name.

20. Mr Whitwell accepted that the judge had incorrectly referred to the
    appellant entering the UK in 2005 (and having leave at this time) but
    argued that this is not material to the assessment under Article 8,
    given the criminal history which is not challenged.

Analysis

21. The judge made several mis-statements of fact in the decision.  She
    referred to the appellant being in the UK since 2005, when the evidence
    indicates that he entered the UK in 1995.  She referred to the
    appellant having a short period of leave in 2005, when there was no
    such leave at that time. And she stated that the appellant re-entered
    the UK in 1999, when this does not appear to have been the case.




22. However, although the decision can be criticised for being sloppy, read
    as a whole it is apparent that the judge appreciated - and more
    importantly, carried out her assessment of the appellant's private and
    family life claim on the basis - that the appellant entered the UK in
    1995.  At paragraphs 4 and 14, for example, she referred to the
    appellant entering the UK in 1995; and at paragraph 11(i) she mentioned
    that the appellant entered the UK at the age of 24, which is consistent
    with him entering in 1995. It is also clear from the decision that the
    judge did not believe that the appellant first entered the UK in 2005,
    as at paragraph 12 she referred to four criminal offences occurring in
    2001.


23. When reading the decision as a whole I am satisfied that the judge
    approached the analysis from the starting point that the appellant
    entered the UK in 1995, and therefore in my view the grounds of appeal
    cannot succeed.


24. However, even if I am wrong and the judge erred by undertaking the
    assessment of the appellant's case on the basis that he entered the UK
    in 2005, rather than 1995, the error was not material.


25. Firstly, such an error would not change the position as to whether the
    appellant satisfied the 20 year residence period under paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules as it is clear that the appellant
    falls for refusal under the suitability criteria (sections S-LTR.2.2(b)
    and S-LTR.1.6) given the unchallenged finding that he deliberately did
    not disclose five convictions on his application and that he has
    committed six criminal offences, three of which resulted in
    imprisonment. Moreover, the judge found that the appellant had not
    established residence between 2001 and 2006. In the absence of evidence
    to establish residence during this period, this finding was open to the
    judge.




26. Secondly, given the substantial weight the judge was required to give
    to the public interest in the appellant's removal (as a consequence of
    both his criminal convictions and his failing to disclose the
    convictions on the application for leave to remain), I am in no doubt
    that the judge would have reached the same conclusion as to the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal irrespective of whether she
    believed he entered the UK in 1995 or in 2005.


27. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
    error of law and stands.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 3 December 2018               |

