
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14556/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th June 2019                    |On 21st June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                   mr Z C
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     NO LEGAL REPRESENTATION
For the Respondent:    MS J ISHERWOOD (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Robertson) (FtT) promulgated
    on 22.3.2019 in which the appellant's human rights claim was dismissed.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of South  Africa  (SA),  born  on  1.2.2000,
    aged 19 years old.  He entered the UK with visitor visa valid  for  two
    years.  He entered the UK on 26th June 2016 and then  returned  to  SA.
    He re entered the UK on 2.4.2017  and  then  returned  to  SA.   He  re
    entered the UK on 6.12.2017.  He  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on grounds of family life with  his  mother  who  had  ILR.  The
    appellant claimed that he had  suffered  from  physical  and  emotional
    abuse from his father.  The  appellant  was  diagnosed  with  Attention
    deficit disorder (ADD) and produced a psychological report.

3.   The respondent refused the application with reference to  Appendix  FM.
    The respondent rejected  the  family  life  application  based  on  the
    Eligibility requirements, stating that the  sponsor  had  no  leave  to
    remain. [This was incorrect as it was accepted  that  she  had  ILR  as
    stated  in  the  refusal  letter  under   exceptional   circumstances.]
    Paragraph 276 ADE was considered and rejected as the appellant  at  the
    time of the application made on 18.12.2017 was under 18  years.   There
    was no proper consideration of paragraph E ECC 1.6 of  Appendix  FM  in
    the refusal letter. The appellant was under 18 years at the date of the
    application.  There were no unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the
    appellant such that  Article  8  was  breached.   The  appellant  could
    relocate to a different area in SA away from his father or  his  mother
    could return to SA.  The appellant was now aged 18 years at the date of
    decision.

4.   The appellant was not legally represented at the FtT hearing and  there
    was no Home office presenting officer in attendance.  The FtT proceeded
    to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness because of his  age  and
    the evidence as to possible abuse [16].  The FtT found that  there  was
    family life and Article 8 was engaged.  The FtT considered the evidence
    of  abuse  [20  (a-i)]  which  included  oral  and  written   evidence,
    photographs and a psychologist's report.

5.   The FtT found no compelling or compassionate  circumstances  [21].  The
    FtT found "even taking the evidence at its highest and  accepting  that
    there has been some sort of physical abuse, the full extent of which is
    unknown ...". The FtT found  no  evidence  of  significant  trauma,  no
    evidence  that  psychological  support  was  unavailable  in  SA,   the
    appellant did not have to live with his father, there was  no  evidence
    that other family members would not agree to look after the  appellant,
    there was evidence of legal advice sought as to the best  interests  of
    the child in SA [21].  The FtT concluded that paragraph 297 Immigration
    Rules was not satisfied, nor any provision under  paragraph  276ADE  in
    terms of very significant obstacles to  reintegration  [23].   The  FtT
    considered  where  the   best   interests   of   the   appellant   lay,
    notwithstanding that he was over 18 years at the date of  hearing  [24]
    and concluded that it was "marginally" in his interests  to  remain  in
    the UK with his mother.  The FtT observed that he had not finished  his
    education in SA.  The FtT considered section  117B  factors  and  found
    that his private life was built up when his status was  precarious  [25
    (v)].  The decision to refuse  was  proportionate  and  in  the  public
    interest in terms of immigration control.

Grounds of appeal

6.   In grounds of appeal drafted by the sponsor, the appellant argued  that
    it was unclear whether the FtT  had  all  the  documents  and  evidence
    supplied for the hearing.  It was unclear if the FtT had  the  original
    bundle and the additional material.  The FtT was provided with the full
    report from the psychologist.  Copies of text  messages  were  supplied
    but these were in Afrikaans and translated by  the  sponsor.   The  FtT
    indicated that the translation was not independent but that  she  would
    consider if the translations could be admitted as reliable evidence but
    failed to inform the appellant of the decision to admit  that  evidence
    or not.  The appellant sought to rely on this evidence as it  contained
    an admission from his father that he had assaulted him "You were  given
    a hiding ..." Other evidence including the offer of  an  apprenticeship
    was not referred to as included in the bundle before the FtT.  The  FtT
    failed to place sufficient weight on the psychologist's assessment  and
    place too much weight on her own assessment of  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing [16].  The FtT placed too much significance on  the  fact  that
    there was only one (unclear) photograph showing the  appellant  with  a
    bruised face and failed to properly consider the explanation for  this.
    The FtT found it implausible that the  sponsor  would  not  have  known
    about the abuse before the second incident (particularly if  there  was
    bruising) because "her mother" knew about the first incident from  "her
    sister".  The FtT erred factually because the evidence  was  that  this
    was  the  appellant's  paternal  grandmother  and  aunt.    The   FtT's
    assessment of the appellant's emotional state and  well  being  in  the
    psychological report was unfair and unclear [20  (ii)  (c)].   The  FtT
    failed to consider all the evidence in assessing  if  there  were  very
    significant  obstacles  to  reintegration,  in   particular   teachers,
    domestic violence charity, legal personnel, social services and  family
    members, none of whom wished to get involved.  The FtT was wrong not to
    place weight on the 17 months during which the appellant had  lived  in
    the UK and during which  his  physical  and  emotional  wellbeing  have
    significantly improved [25 (v)].

Permission to appeal

7.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted by FTJ S  H
    Smith on 1.5.2019 on all grounds.  FTJ Smith had  regard  to  the  fact
    that the grounds of appeal were prepared  by  the  sponsor,  but  found
    there to be a single arguably material error in law, as follows.

8.   The FTJ ought to have appreciated that it was not the sponsor's  mother
    to whom the first  incident  had  been  reported  but  the  appellant's
    paternal grandmother.  Accordingly the credibility findings  concerning
    the extent of the abuse suffered by the  appellant  and  the  sponsor's
    inaction were arguably tainted.  The extent of the abuse was a material
    issue even though the FtT accepted that some abuse had  occurred.  This
    was relevant to the findings as to  the  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances under paragraph 297(i)(f).

Error of law hearing

9.   At the outset I explained to the sponsor and the appellant  the  nature
    of the proceedings before the UT and that the focus was on error of law
    by the First-tier Tribunal. I explained the procedure and the  possible
    outcomes. Ms Isherwood had also helpfully  provided  the  sponsor  with
    some explanation as to the proceedings and procedure.  At  the  end  of
    the hearing I reserved my decision.



Submissions

10.  At the hearing before me Ms  Daubney,  the  sponsor,  expanded  on  the
    detailed grounds of appeal. She emphasised that she had lived in the UK
    for 10 years and had built her life here.

11.  In response Ms Isherwood confirmed  that  all  grounds  were  arguable.
    She confirmed that all the emails, WhatsApp messages had been  included
    in the bundle for the FtT.  Ms Isherwood submitted that the  FtT  erred
    factually but that the error was not material, given that the  FtT  had
    taken into account that there had been abuse and considered that at its
    highest. The FtT considered all the options open to  the  appellant  on
    return to SA including that the sponsor could return with him.

Discussion and conclusion

12.  In terms of the documentary evidence I was satisfied that the  FtT  had
    before it all the relevant material and that  included  the  translated
    messages which had been taken into account [20 (c)].  The FtT  was  not
    required to specifically set out each and every document relied on.   I
    had regard to the fact that the appellant was not  legally  represented
    at the FtT nor before me, in particular in  terms  of  any  grounds  of
    appeal raised.

13.  As to the factual mistake [20 (b)] I find  that  this  was  a  material
    error of law. The FtT found that  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  in
    support of the abuse and took into account the sponsor's apparent  lack
    of knowledge of the abuse believing (wrongly) that it  was  her  mother
    who knew  about  the  first  incident.    Such  findings  were  clearly
    relevant to the FtT's credibility findings overall.  Although  the  FtT
    did not find that the account of abuse was not credible, it found it to
    be  lacking.  The  FtT  premised  consideration   of   compelling   and
    compassionate family  factors  on  a  finding  that  "even  taking  the
    evidence at its highest and accepting that there has been some sort  of
    physical abuse, the full extent of which is  unknown  ...".  Thereafter
    the FtT gave reasons in  rejecting  the  establishment  of  compelling/
    compassionate circumstances at [21(i) - (v)].

14.  In addition although not specifically raise in in grounds of appeal,  I
    am concerned that the FtT's approach was somewhat muddled in  terms  of
    Appendix FM and Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules  [17-20].  The  FtT
    considers first the Appendix E.ECC 1.6 (c) referring to  paragraph  297
    Immigration Rules [23].   Then the FtT  considers  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    (iv). The FtT fails at that stage to properly  consider  if  Article  8
    outside  of  the  rules  is  justified  having  regard  to   compelling
    circumstances and thereafter fails to  go  through  the  step  by  step
    approach  in  Razgar.   The  FtT   launches   into   consideration   of
    proportionality in terms of private life only [25]. The FtT  failed  to
    adequately assess all the relevant factors in  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's family life and best interests.  The FtT took into  account
    that the appellant was only just 19 years of age. He was a minor at the
    date of application. Yet the FtT failed to have regard to the fact that
    he had yet to finish his education and that he  was  vulnerable  having
    been diagnosed with ADD.  The  FtT  placed  no  proper  weight  on  the
    assessment of the psychologist in terms of any  emotional  abuse.   The
    FtT took the view that the appellant had not apparently  displayed  (at
    the hearing) nor was found by  the  psychologist  to  have  experienced
    trauma, aside from "residual difficulties".  I am  satisfied  that  the
    FtT erred  by  placing  too  much  weight  on  peripheral  matters  and
    insufficient weight on relevant and material matters in  terms  of  the
    existence of  serious  and  compelling  circumstances,  which  in  turn
    impacted on the assessment under Article 8.

15.  There is material error of law disclosed in the  decision  which  shall
    be set aside.  The findings are preserved and I go  on  to  remake  the
    decision. At no stage in the decision did the FtT expressly  find  that
    the account was not credible. There is no need for further  hearing  or
    submissions.

Re making the decision

16.   I  find  that  the  evidence  of  the  first  incident  of  abuse  was
    communicated to  the  appellant's  paternal  grandmother  who  took  no
    action.  The sponsor did not know about  the  abuse  until  the  second
    incident.  There was ample evidence before the FtT as to  the  fact  of
    physical and emotional abuse  not  only  from  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor but it included a photograph contained in a  pamphlet  entitled
    "Justice for Z" created by the appellant's friends in an  endeavour  to
    support him.  There  was  evidence  of  communications  with  teachers,
    lawyers and social workers and there was evidence from the  appellant's
    father admitting to giving him a "hiding"  which  he  glossed  over  as
    "chastisement" that  was  "deserved"  by  the  appellant.   The  expert
    evidence of the psychologist report was  strong  evidence  in  support.
    The FtT's approach to the treatment of the appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness was flawed as having decided to make  that  decision,  the  FtT
    then observed that the appellant  had  failed  to  show  any  signs  of
    distress during the hearing and in  so  doing  failed  to  take  proper
    account of the opinion in the  expert  report  as  to  the  appellant's
    emotional state and behaviour and the impact of his ADD.

17.  Taking into  account  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtT  I  am
    satisfied that  there  are  established  serious  and  compelling  (and
    compassionate) circumstances such the appellant's exclusion from the UK
    is undesirable.  The appellant is a young man who  is  also  vulnerable
    because of his diagnosis  of  ADD.  He  has  experienced  physical  and
    emotional abuse from his father and has made attempts to  get  help  in
    SA.  The sponsor's evidence  in  her  witness  statement  included  her
    account of  having  been  physically  and  emotionally  abused  by  the
    appellant's father leading to her leaving him.  The appellant  has  now
    established a close relationship with his mother in  the  UK  where  he
    feels safe in a stable environment.  The  appellant  is  only  just  19
    years of age and is dependent on his mother financially and has yet  to
    complete his education.  He is not yet in a position to be  independent
    and would not yet be able to set himself up in an area  away  from  his
    father and potential further abuse.  The fact that as found by the  FtT
    he has not suffered "significant  trauma"  from  physical  abuse  is  a
    diminishing of the impact of domestic abuse on the  appellant  and  the
    fact that it was found that there is psychological help available in SA
    fails to take proper account of the appellant's age, vulnerability  and
    the emotional damage to him.  I place weight on  the  entirety  of  the
    psychological report.  The  appellant  needs  to  be  in  a  supportive
    environment with his mother.  The report stated that  "his  development
    and social-emotional needs appear to begin to be more  than  adequately
    met through his living with his mother and her partner ...  his  social
    and emotional - social  development  appears  to  be  somewhat  stinted
    because of the relative social isolation and tense atmosphere  at  home
    with his father." The report goes on "there seemed to be a major degree
    of vigilance, tension and anticipation that could not be fully captured
    in this assessment. There  may  be  a  tendency  to  deny,  dismiss  or
    minimise  psychological  difficulties  as  part  of  ZC's  patterns  of
    managing emotions and  relationships  through  detachment,  repression,
    avoidance and placation in order to avoid conflict, tension  or  upset.
    The true extent or long- term effects of how the events  have  impacted
    on ZC may become more prominent if he continues to feel safe and secure
    with the people around  him  (paragraph  7.1.1)."   The  appellant  has
    established  that  he  meets  E.ECC1.6(c)  /  paragraph  297   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  There was no issue raised by the respondent  as  to
    financial requirements.

18.  Article 8 ECHR is engaged because there  are  compelling  circumstances
    that justify its consideration outside of the rules,  as  evidenced  by
    the abuse to the appellant.  The appellant has established family  life
    with his mother in the UK.  There would be an  interference  with  that
    family life if he were to be returned to SA because he would no  longer
    have the support of his mother who has lived in the UK for 10 years and
    has ILR.  The interference is not lawful as the immigration  rules  are
    met with reference to E.ECC 1.6 (c) "there are serious  and  compelling
    family or other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable and suitable arrangements had been  made  for  the  child's
    care."   There was no issue taken  as  to  financial  requirements.  In
    terms of proportionality there is no public interest in  removal  where
    the immigration rules are met.   The appellant's best interests  are  a
    primary  consideration  and  he  remains  dependent   on   his   mother
    financially and emotionally and  his  needs  associated  with  his  ADD
    diagnosis are being met. His mother has ILR and is established  in  the
    UK with employment and has lived  here  for  a  significant  period  of
    residence, 10 years, such that it would not be proportionate to  expect
    her  to  return  to  SA  with  the   appellant   in   such   compelling
    circumstances. In applying section 117B the  appellant  speaks  English
    and he would not be a burden on the State as he  is  dependent  on  his
    mother with whom his family life was established over a period  in  the
    UK where he had lawful leave as a visitor. I find  no  public  interest
    that outweighs the interests of the appellant and his family in the UK.

Decision

19.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.




                               Signed   Date 18.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






ANONYMITY ORDER made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NO FEE AWARD - although I have allowed the appeal a  hearing  was  necessary
to consider all the issues.




                               Signed   Date 18.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


