
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14192/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2019                     |On 03 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ZK
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Faryl, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the appellant.

    1. In a decision sent on 25 January 2019  I  set  out  the  reasons  for
       deciding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 9
       October 2018, in which  it  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  respondent
       ('ZK'), contains an error of law such that it is set aside.  I  found
       that  the  FTT's  decision  was  inadequately  reasoned.   I  focused
       attention upon the FTT's failure to direct itself to  and  apply  the
       high threshold required by the "unduly harsh" test for  the  purposes
       of Exception 2, as  contained  in  s.  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').

    2. Although I did not expressly refer to  it,  the  FTT's  finding  that
       Exception  1  in  s.  117C(4)  of  the  2002  Act  applies,  is  also
       inadequately reasoned.  The FTT failed to explain why  the  obstacles
       to integration said to exist, can  properly  be  described  as  "very
       significant".  The FTT referred to the wrong test at  [31],  omitting
       the word "very".  The FTT  adopted  the  reasoning  in  the  skeleton
       argument submitted on behalf of ZK, without explaining why  this  was
       preferred over the detailed submissions in the SSHD's decision letter
       (see in particular page 8 of the decision) and those made  orally  by
       the SSHD's representative at the hearing.

    3. I now remake the decision.

    4. At the beginning of the hearing, the representatives agreed the legal
       issues to be determined and also accepted that the factual matrix  is
       mainly undisputed.  I first set out a summary of the legal framework.
         This  assists  in  illustrating  the   legal   issues   the   legal
       representatives agreed are to be determined by me.

Legal framework

    5. Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules are reflected within
       section 117C of the 2002 Act, which provides as follows:-

           "117C Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving
           foreign criminals

             1) The deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
                interest.

           (2)    The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
                of the criminal.

           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the  public  interest  requires   C's   deportation   unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

           (4)    Exception 1 applies where-

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported.

           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child
                would be unduly harsh.

           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,  the
                public interest requires deportation unless there  are  very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
                Exceptions 1 and 2.

           (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                taken into account where a court or tribunal is  considering
                a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to  the  extent
                that the reason for the decision was the offence or offences
                for which the criminal has been convicted."

    6. It is to be noted that the question in s. 117C(5) as to whether "the
       effect" of C's deportation would be "unduly harsh" is broken down
       into two parts in paragraph 399, so that it applies where:

           "(a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
           country to which the person is to be deported; and

           (b)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
           UK without the person who is to be deported."

    7. The correct approach to paragraph 399 and s. 117C(5) of the 2002 Act
       has recently been considered by the Supreme Court in KO Nigeria v
       SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.   In the only judgment, Lord Carnwath said this
       at [23]:

           "One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what
           would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
           deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view
           (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section)
           is a balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's
           offence, other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by the
           section itself by reference to length of sentence."

    8. Lord Carnwath also approved of the following guidance of the term
       "unduly harsh" at [27]:

           "Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh" in
           this context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J
           President and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015]
           INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15 April 2015. They
           referred to the "evaluative assessment" required of the
           tribunal:

                "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly
                harsh' does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,
                undesirable or merely difficult. Rather, it poses a
                considerably more elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this
                context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It is the
                antithesis of pleasant or comfortable. Furthermore, the
                addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
                standard still higher."

    9. It is therefore now clear from KO Nigeria that the assessment of
       "unduly harsh" does not require a balancing of the relative level of
       severity of the parent's offence.   The assessment solely requires a
       careful consideration of whether the elevated threshold is reached
       from the point of view of either the child or partner.  If that
       threshold is met, then deportation would be a breach of Article 8 of
       the ECHR and no further analysis is required.

   10. In NA (Pakistan) v Home Secretary [2016] EWCA Civ 662, [2017]  1  WLR
       207, Jackson  LJ,  giving  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,
       concluded that a medium offender such as ZK can rely upon s. 117C(5),
       but like other foreign criminals:

           "would need to be able to point to features of  his  case  of  a
           kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paragraphs  399  or
           399A of  the  2014  rules),  or  features  falling  outside  the
           circumstances  described   in   those   exceptions   and   those
           paragraphs, which made his claim based on article  8  especially
           strong".

   11. It follows that if Exceptions 1 and 2 do not apply,  I must go on to
       consider all matters in the round and whether viewed cumulatively,
       these are sufficient to give rise to very compelling circumstances -
       see the general approach in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and KE
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1382, together with SSHD v Garzon
       [2018] EWCA Civ 1225 at [26].

Issues

   12. As I have recorded above, the factual matrix to the appeal is largely
       agreed, and can be summarised as follows.  ZK was born in 1994 and is
       nearly 25.  He is a citizen of Pakistan, having arrived in the United
       Kingdom ('UK') in 2001 with his mother, when he  was  a  young  child
       (seven years old).  He was granted ILR in 2008. He has therefore been
       lawfully present in the UK for most of his life.

   13. ZK married his wife, MI, a British citizen in 2013.  MI was  born  in
       Pakistan in 1994 and is 25 years old.  She came to the  UK  with  her
       father and siblings in 2009 when she was about 15.  ZK and MI met  at
       college and were friends before getting married.

   14.  The couple have two British citizen children, aged four (A) and  two
       (B).   They all  live  with  ZK's  extended  family  (including  ZK's
       mother, brother, sister and nephew) in Manchester.  The FTT's factual
       findings that ZK is a loving father and husband and has  genuine  and
       subsisting  relationships  with  MI  and  their  two  children,   are
       preserved.

   15. ZK was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment, having pleaded guilty  to
       fraud by abuse of position and breach of conditional  discharge.   He
       was released in November 2018, having served  six  months.   All  the
       evidence from the probation service indicates that he presents a  low
       risk of reoffending.

   16. Given the extent of the matters accepted, the representatives  agreed
       that there are four broad issues in dispute.

        1) Would there be very significant obstacles  to  ZK's  integration
           into Pakistan for the purposes of Exception 1(c) of s.117C(4) of
           the 2002 Act? The SSHD accepts that ZK has been lawfully present
           in the UK for most of his life, and is socially  and  culturally
           integrated here.  If not;

        2) Would it be unduly harsh for the qualifying children and  MI  to
           live in Pakistan for the purposes of Exception 2 of  s.  117C(5)
           of the 2002 Act?  If yes:

        3) Would it be unduly harsh for the qualifying children and  MI  to
           remain in the UK without ZK for the purposes of Exception  2  of
           s. 117C(5) of the 2002 Act?  If not;

        4) Are there very compelling circumstances, over  and  above  those
           described in Exceptions 1 and 2, for the purposes of s.  117C(6)
           of the 2002 Act?

   17. For the avoidance of any doubt, both representatives agreed that  (2)
       remains a disputed issue and  the  suggestion  in  my  error  of  law
       decision at [11] that the SSHD accepted it would be unduly harsh  for
       the children to live in Pakistan is mistaken.   The  SSHD's  decision
       letter sets out detailed reasoning (pages 4-5) for his position  that
       MI and the children can live in Pakistan with ZK,  without  it  being
       unduly harsh.  I checked with  Ms  Faryl  that  she  was  content  to
       proceed on this basis and invited her to  take  instructions  if  she
       considered it  necessary.   She  confirmed  that  she  was  happy  to
       proceed.  I provided both representatives with a  copy  of  the  four
       issues in dispute and they both confirmed that they entirely accepted
       the delineation of the issues as set out above.

   18. If the answer to issues (1), (2) or (3) is positive that is  the  end
       of the matter, and the appeal must be allowed on Article  8  grounds.
       If all the answers are negative, then it will be necessary to  go  on
       to address (4).

Hearing

   19. ZK relied upon a helpful 280-page comprehensive bundle  of  evidence.
        This includes, inter alia: witness statements from himself, his wife
       and his extended family  members;  medical  evidence  concerning  the
       children and MI; and, evidence relevant to the  risk  of  reoffending
       from the probation service.  Prior to the hearing I read  the  bundle
       in full.

   20. I heard oral evidence from ZK and MI.  They were both  cross-examined
       by Mr McVeety.   Mr  McVeety  relied  upon  a  succinct  but  helpful
       position statement.  He invited me to find  that  each  of  the  four
       issues demand that a high threshold is met  and  the  evidence  comes
       nowhere close to meeting the requisite tests.  Ms Faryl relied upon a
       comprehensive and helpful skeleton argument, and submitted  that  the
       evidence was sufficient to meet each of the requisite tests.

   21. At the end of the submissions I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now
       provide with reasons

Findings

   22. In reaching my findings, I have applied the preserved factual
       findings made by the FTT, but updated these findings in the light of
       the further evidence available to me.

   23. I note that the FTT regarded MI as an entirely truthful witness.  I
       am satisfied that she provided mostly truthful evidence before me.
       She gave straightforward answers to each question but tended to
       exaggerate the nature and extent of A's need for medical attention.
       I deal with this in more detail below.  ZK provided mostly truthful
       evidence but sought to exaggerate the complete lack of any family
       members in Pakistan.  MI accepted that she has an aunt in Lahore that
       she visited when they went to Pakistan on honeymoon in 2013.  I
       accept that MI is not close to this aunt but the couple cannot be
       said to be completely devoid of family contacts in Pakistan.  That is
       not surprising given that the couple and both sets of their parents
       are Pakistan citizens, and MI only left Pakistan in 2009.

   24. ZK may not be able to read and write in Urdu but he can speak Urdu.
       He speaks English fluently.  He obtained seven GCSEs and a BTEC.  I
       am confident that within a short period of time he would be able to
       communicate so as to settle into Pakistani life.  He has grown up
       immersed in a busy household who share a common dual Pakistani
       heritage and will be able to navigate the different way of life in
       Pakistan.

   25. I have no doubt that ZK and MI have a very close and committed
       relationship and form part of a close and supportive family unit with
       their two children, as well as the extended family members, with whom
       they reside in Manchester.   ZK arrived in the UK when he was seven
       and has plainly lived in the UK for a lengthy period.  MI arrived
       when she was a teenager, having been born and brought up in Pakistan.
        The couple began a family when they were both young.  It is clear
       from the evidence that I have heard that the centre of ZK's life is
       his family, and vice versa.  It follows that the centre of his life
       is likely to be where his family is, particularly as his wife is
       currently pregnant.

   26. ZK's time in prison did not substantially shift the family dynamics.
       They remained in close contact with daily telephone calls and weekly
       visits.  I have also seen extensive correspondence between the couple
       during ZK's imprisonment.  I accept the evidence that although MI had
       extended family members to assist her, she and the children were
       profoundly affected by ZK's six months imprisonment.  That included
       MI seeking psychiatric help and counselling.  A psychiatric report
       dated 13 August 2018, prepared by Dr Hussain refers to this as a
       "period of major emotional crisis" in MI's life and she suffered from
       "free and floating anxiety state".  Her symptoms fulfilled the
       criteria of mixed anxiety and depressive disorder, such that
       antidepressants and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) were
       recommended.  In addition, A was adversely affected by her father's
       absence, which resulted in a delayed start time to her schooling by a
       year and missed hospital appointments for her eye problems.  Her
       father now takes her to school and collects her from school.  I
       accept that these difficulties largely subsided when MK returned to
       the family home, although difficulties remain given the inevitable
       uncertainty caused by these proceedings.  This is therefore a family
       that has demonstrated resilience.  Although it has been difficult,
       they have with the passage of time been able to cope with ZK's
       imprisonment.  I note from the psychiatric report that the couple
       have had to cope with difficult times in the past and have
       demonstrated an ability to move on successfully.  In 2014/5 there was
       a short-term breakdown in their relationship but this was resolved
       with support from social services.  Since then social services have
       not been involved and their relationship has strengthened.

   27. I do not accept that MI has any current serious medical condition.
       The letter from the GP dated 1 February 2019 refers to MI having
       attended self-help counselling.  MI confirmed that the reference to
       this continuing is a mistake because this stopped in October 2018.
       The GP refers to MI being stressed and taking medication to assist
       with sleeping.  The difficulties described by the psychiatrist in
       August 2019 no longer apply now.  In the directions I gave following
       the error of law hearing, I suggested an updated psychiatric report
       would be helpful if considered necessary.  It has not been necessary
       to do so because as the GP's letter explains the ongoing concerns are
       limited.  Counselling has come to an end.  MI is no longer on anti-
       depressants as she is pregnant.  CBT did not commence.  MI simply
       remains on sleeping tablets.

   28. I do not accept that either of the children have any serious medical
       condition.  I note that A has been attending hospital appointments
       for an eye condition and they both have ear problems.  MI gave
       evidence that A may have to undergo surgery next year but there was
       no medical evidence available to support this.  Rather, the medical
       evidence concerning the children mainly consists of appointment
       letters.  A letter from the eye hospital dated 23 January 2019
       described improvements including "right visual acuity has improved
       significantly since last visit".  ZI explained that A no longer had
       to wear eye patch but did have to place drops in her eyes.

   29. I now go on to address each of the four issues in dispute, and where
       appropriate consider the evidence in more detail.

Issue 1: Private life / s.117C(4)(c)

   30. The consideration of 399A and section 117C(4) involves three
       elements.    ZK came to the UK when he was seven.  He is now 24.  He
       was granted ILR in 2008 but was lawfully present with his mother
       whilst that application was pending.  In the circumstances he is
       entitled to be treated as having been lawfully present in the UK for
       most of his life.  ZK is clearly socially and culturally integrated
       into the UK given his education, employment and length of residence
       here.  I now turn to the third and only limb to Exception 1 that is
       in dispute - would there be very significant obstacles to ZK's
       integration to Pakistan?

   31. The authorities require a broad evaluative judgement that applies the
       plain meaning of the words in s.117C(4) (as replicated in 276ADE(1)
       and 399A of the Immigration Rules) - see SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA
       Civ 813 and Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932). The phrase "very
       significant" connotes an elevated threshold which will not be met by
       mere inconvenience or upheaval.  The idea of "integration" calls for
       a broad evaluative judgment to determine whether, inter alia, MK will
       be able to build up within a reasonable time human relationships to
       give substance to his private and family life.

   32. MK has argued that it shall be extremely difficult to adjust to life
       in Pakistan as he will return as a stranger to the country given the
       very young age he left.  I bear in mind the principles set out in
       Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47.

   33. I accept the SSHD's submission that MK shall be well placed to obtain
       employment.  He has gained school and college qualifications, and has
       employment experience. He may not be able to read and write in Urdu
       but his excellent English language skills will compensate for this.
       Undoubtedly the experience of being imprisoned was difficult for him
       but MK has demonstrated resilience in coping with enforced absence
       from his family.  Those traits and that experience can be applied to
       his advantage in Pakistan, a country that he is not a complete
       stranger to.  He may have only visited once since he left as a child
       but he is very familiar with Pakistani culture having grown up in a
       Pakistani-heritage large household in Manchester.  His wife and her
       family were born and brought up in Pakistan, albeit they are also
       British citizens.  I am satisfied that within a reasonable period of
       time, ZK will be able to enter employment in Pakistan and develop a
       private life there.

   34. I acknowledge that ZK is a part of a very committed family unit. For
       reasons I set out below it would not be unduly harsh for his wife and
       children to return to Pakistan with him.  To the extent that the
       considerations in Exception 2 inform my approach to Exception 1, it
       is relevant to take into account that any obstacles cannot properly
       be described as "very significant" solely because ZK will be leaving
       his wife and children behind.  They are British citizens and are
       entitled to remain in the UK.  It is entirely a matter of choice for
       them whether to go or stay.

   35. There is no reason why, initially at least, ZK should not be
       supported by his brother and sister in the UK, whilst he settles in.
       They are both in full-time employment.  MI also has family members in
       Lahore.  I accept she is not close to them and I acknowledge that
       MI's ties are not necessary ZK's ties, but there is no reason why
       they would not be prepared to help during the settling in period.

   36. To summarise, ZK is of Pakistani origin, he speaks Urdu and his
       English will serve him well, he is young and in good health and had
       been working in the UK, and that there is no reason why he could not
       work in Pakistan and in time establish a private life.  It would be
       open to his wife and children to join him there, should they wish to
       do so.  Having undertaken a broad evaluative judgment, I am not
       satisfied that the obstacles to ZK's integration in Pakistan can
       properly be described as "very significant".

Issue 2: unduly harsh for children / MI to go to Pakistan?

   37. The children's best interests are to be treated as a primary
       consideration.  I also attach significance to their British
       citizenship. Their best interests favour remaining in the UK with
       both parents.  That is the status quo.  However they are both very
       young and with the love and support of their parents will be able to
       cope with life in Pakistan.  Both parents were born and brought up
       within the Pakistani community, and will be well-placed to assist the
       children in making the necessary adjustments.

   38. I accept that A has been attending regular hospital appointments for
       her eye condition, a "convergent squint", but I have been taken to no
       country background evidence to support the contention that the
       medical attention she needs will be unavailable or unaffordable in
       Pakistan.  I also accept that both children have problems with their
       ears and attend hospital appointments for this.   No effort has been
       made to evidence with any degree of precision the likely medical
       treatment the children require and its availability in Pakistan, far
       less how much it would cost there.   I am satisfied that the children
       will be able to access the medical treatment they require in
       Pakistan.  Any expenses can be met with the assistance of the
       extended family members and their parents' employment.

   39. Although A's anxiety may have delayed her school start, this was
       attributed to the absence of ZK.  Similarly, MI's depression and
       anxiety as set out in the psychiatric report was linked to ZK's
       absence from their lives.  MI is still in the early stages of her
       pregnancy and there is no reason why she would be unable to access
       medical treatment in Pakistan.  The family will be able to live
       together in Pakistan.  ZK and MI could be assisted with short-term
       support from UK-based family members.  Most are in employment with
       full-time jobs.   There is therefore an absence of any significant
       medical or other evidence to support the claim that it would be
       unduly harsh for MI and the children to live in Pakistan.

   40. In case I am wrong about this, I have gone on to consider issue (3).

Issue 3 - unduly harsh for children and MK to remain in the UK without ZK?

   41.  Dr  Hussain  concluded  that  without  her  husband's   support   or
       antidepressants there may be the risk of worsening of symptoms to the
       extent that MI would not be able to look after her children  and  may
       need continuous support of  social  services.   This  assessment  was
       based on the circumstances that existed in August  2018.   I  do  not
       accept it  applies  at  present.   MI  coped  when  her  husband  was
       imprisoned without the need for the intervention of social  services.
       She undertook counselling but was able to cope.   MI has demonstrated
       a degree of  resilience  in  coping  without  her  husband.   It  was
       undoubtedly difficult for her but it was not unduly so.  I note  that
       MI works part-time.  It is claimed that she would not be able to cope
       with both employment and childcare without her  husband.   I  do  not
       accept this.  Many single parents are able to  do  both.   She  lives
       with the extended family and can turn to them  for  assistance,  even
       though some work full-time.

   42. Ms Faryl submitted that the family would be devastated and in  severe
       shock by the loss of ZK and this was sufficient to  meet  the  unduly
       harsh  test.   I  do  not  accept  this.   The  threshold  is   high.
       Devastation and shock are insufficient to meet the test, if there  is
       evidence, as here, that ZI and the children will be able to cope with
       time and with the support  of  their  extended  family  members.    I
       entirely accept that the children will  be  devastated  as  they  are
       particularly close to their father.  However, they will have the love
       and support of their mother and the extended family members.  I  have
       no doubt that it will be initially difficult for A and  B,  but  with
       the love and support around them, they  will  be  able  to  cope.   A
       refused to attend medical appointments and to go to school  when  her
       father was in prison.  She was only just 4 and did not understand why
       her father was absent.  She will shortly be 5 and if  MI  chooses  to
       remain in the UK with the children, she will need to explain what has
       happened and why.  Although this will be difficult and  shocking  for
       A, it does not meet the high threshold required by the  unduly  harsh
       test.  B is younger and is more likely to be able to  cope  with  the
       changed circumstances.  With time and support, MI  and  the  children
       will be able to make sense of and cope with the sudden  loss  of  ZK.
       I do not accept that  his  deportation  would  involve  a  degree  of
       harshness going beyond what would necessarily  be  involved  for  any
       child faced with deportation of a parent.

   43. The impact of ZK's deportation will be harsh upon ZI and the children
       and they will suffer emotionally.  This will clearly be  contrary  to
       the children's best interests but with time and support it cannot  be
       properly said that the effect on them or their mother will be  unduly
       harsh.

Issue 4 - very compelling circumstances

   44. This is a case in which there are significant factors in ZK's favour.
        These must however be viewed against all the circumstances of the
       case.  I have approached issue (4) by undertaking a "balance sheet"
       approach, but one that considers both sides of the balance sheet,
       when addressing each relevant issue.  For the avoidance of doubt I
       have taken into account all the matters set out above before reaching
       my conclusion.

   45. Firstly, ZK's offending is at the lowest end of the scale for medium
       offenders (12 months) and at the lower end of the seriousness
       spectrum - see SSHD v Barry [2018] EWCA Civ 790.  Nevertheless the
       index offence remains a serious one that included aggravating
       features: dishonesty and fraud against a vulnerable adult that ZK
       cared for.

   46. Second, ZK's risk of reoffending has been consistently assessed as
       low by the probation service.  He was imprisoned in a Category C
       prison, consistent with his low risk of reoffending.  His behaviour
       has been good since his arrest, including during his imprisonment and
       after his release.  Rehabilitation is important, but the Court of
       Appeal has consistently emphasised that the cases in which it can
       make a significant contribution to establishing the compelling
       reasons sufficient to outweigh the public interest in deportation are
       likely to be rare - see LG (Colombia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1225.
       ZK's immediate and extended family are protective factors to assist
       in the maintenance of the low risk of offending, albeit they were
       both present when ZK committed the index offence. ZK has demonstrated
       resilience in rebuilding his life.  He is clearly committed to and
       has a close relationship with his family.  These are indicators that
       demonstrate ZK's clear commitment to living a good and law-abiding
       life in the UK.  However, he was only released from prison relatively
       recently in November 2018.  Although ZK was working as a sales
       representative at the time of his arrest and was provided with a
       supporting letter from his employer, he has not been able to obtain
       employment since his release from prison.

   47. Third, ZK came to the UK during his childhood.  This is a factor of
       some significance in the light of the principles set out in Maslov
       (supra).  ZK regards himself to be British and may face difficulties
       in adapting to life in Pakistan.  However he has been brought up
       immersed in a dual Pakistani and British culture, having lived his
       entire life with family members born in Pakistan (save for his
       children and nephew).  Any culture shock in returning to Pakistan is
       likely to be no more than moderate.  If MI and the children return to
       Pakistan with him, the culture shock is likely to be even less.  I
       have already set out above that this will be difficult for them but
       not unduly harsh.  MI has a greater knowledge of and closer links to
       Pakistan having left more recently in 2009.  She would be able to
       assist ZK to navigate and adapt to a different way of life.

   48. Fourth, ZK, MI and the children are particularly close to the wider
       family, with whom they live.  They will undoubtedly miss living in a
       busy household.  In addition, ZK is particularly close to his nephew.
        ZK's brother described the nephew as treating ZK as a father, as his
       own father is separated from their sister (the nephew's mother).  MI
       explained that he calls ZK "daddy" and ZK's brother "uncle".  This is
       to be expected as this is what the other two children in the extended
       family household do.  I accept that it would be in the nephew's
       interests for the status quo to remain but with time and support, he
       will be able to adapt to the changed circumstances.  He is still a
       young child and will be able to turn to his other uncle for paternal
       guidance.

   49. Fifth, ZK married his wife at a time when he had ILR and she had a
       reasonable expectation that she would continue to live in the UK with
       her husband.  On the other hand, I have found that whilst it may be
       difficult for MI to return to Pakistan with her children, and it may
       be contrary to their best interests to do so but they will adapt, and
       it will not be unduly harsh.

   50. Finally, ZK speaks English very well and between his partner and his
       own earning potential the family is likely to be financially
       independent.  These matters are relevant to section 117B of the 2002
       Act and therefore militate in ZK's favour.

   51. Where a foreign offender receives a custodial sentence of at least 12
       months I am obliged to give appropriate weight to Parliament's and
       the Secretary of State's assessments of the strength of the general
       public interest in deportation and that, where paragraphs 399 and
       399A of the Rules do not apply, in general "only a claim which is
       very strong indeed ... will succeed" - see [50] of Hashem Ali.  In
       the end and notwithstanding the factors in ZK's favour, the present
       case is not, in my view, of that kind.  ZK appears to pose a low risk
       but his last conviction was not that long ago.  In any event the
       significance of rehabilitation is limited by the fact that the risk
       of reoffending is only one facet of the public interest.  I have
       considered ZK's arrival in the UK as a child.  It is noteworthy that
       I have found an absence of "very significant obstacles" to his
       integration into Pakistan.  Whilst his wife and children will find
       ZK's deportation difficult and it will be contrary to the children's
       best interests, it's effect does not meet the threshold required to
       be unduly harsh.  They, like the extended family members, will cope
       with time and support.

   52. When all the circumstances are viewed cumulatively, I conclude there
       were no "very compelling circumstances" outweighing the public
       interest in deportation.



Decision

   53. I remake the decision by dismissing ZK's appeal



Fee award

   54. I decline to make a fee award as I set aside the FTT decision  and  I
       have dismissed ZK's appeal.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
2 April 2019
