
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14048/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2021                      |On 10 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                Yueliang [H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Galliver-Andrew, instructed by Lisa's Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of  China,  born  on  22  September  2005.  He
   appeals, with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
   dismissing his human rights appeal.

2. The appellant applied, on 23 November 2017, for entry  clearance  to  the
   UK under Appendix FM of the immigration rules as the child of his mother,
   the sponsor, who had limited leave to remain. The respondent refused  the
   application on 9 March 2018 on the basis  that  it  was  noted  that  the
   appellant had a parent residing in China and had  failed  to  state  with
   whom he was currently residing. The respondent did not accept that it had
   been demonstrated that  the  sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
   appellant's  upbringing,  or  that  there  were  serious  or   compelling
   circumstances which made his exclusion  from  the  UK  undesirable.   The
   respondent also considered that the eligibility financial requirements of
   the immigration rules were not met  and  concluded  that  there  were  no
   exceptional circumstances leading to unjustifiably harsh consequences for
   the appellant for the purposes of Article 8.

3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Head on 20 March 2020. The  sponsor  gave  oral
   evidence before the judge  and  her  partner  attended  and  adopted  his
   statement. The evidence before the judge was that  the  sponsor  and  the
   appellant's father had divorced on 6 September 2010 and the  sponsor  had
   full custody of  the  appellant,  with  his  father  having  no  parental
   responsibility. It was claimed by the sponsor that  all  the  appellant's
   expenses were met by her and that she made all the decisions  about  him.
   The appellant lived with his grandparents. The sponsor had entered the UK
   illegally in May 2012 and had met her current partner with whom she had a
   daughter, born on 18 May 2015. Her partner was settled in the UK and  she
   had been granted limited leave to remain on the basis of her family  life
   with him, valid until 7 December 2021. She and her husband sent money  to
   China regularly for the  appellant's  maintenance,  clothing  and  school
   fees. The appellant's grandparents were getting old and their health  was
   deteriorating and circumstances had therefore changed.

4. It was accepted at the hearing that there was sufficient income  for  the
   appellant to meet the financial requirements of the immigration rules and
   the  relevant  issue  was  therefore  whether  the   sponsor   had   sole
   responsibility for his upbringing.  The  judge  noted  that  the  divorce
   agreement relied upon by the  sponsor  was  a  copy  only  and  that  the
   signature for the sponsor was not the same as that in  her  UK  residence
   permit. The judge therefore did not accept that the divorce agreement was
   a reliable document. She also had concerns about  the  lack  of  evidence
   about the nature of the appellant's contact  and  relationship  with  his
   father and she found that the level of  frequency  and  the  duration  of
   contact between the sponsor and the appellant did not reflect  the  level
   of contact she would expect of a parent with sole  responsibility  for  a
   child.  The  judge  also  had  concerns  about  the  dearth  of  evidence
   demonstrating that the sponsor paid for the appellant's school  fees  and
   for his upkeep and essential needs and she considered that  the  evidence
   did not support the claim that the sponsor was solely responsible for the
   appellant. She was unable  to  conclude,  from  the  evidence,  that  the
   appellant's father  had  abdicated  responsibility  for  him.  The  judge
   considered that there were no serious or compelling  circumstances  which
   made his exclusion from the UK undesirable but noted that such a case was
   not advanced in any event.  She  considered  that  the  appellant's  best
   interests lay in remaining in China and concluded that  the  respondent's
   decision was a proportionate one  and  did  not  breach  the  appellant's
   Article 8 rights. She accordingly dismissed the appeal.

5. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision on  the  following
   basis: that the judge made a finding of fact which had never been put  to
   the sponsor (in regard to her divorce agreement) and had failed to  apply
   the test in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]
   UKAIT 00049; and that the judge's assessment of the best interests of the
   child was flawed. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 16
   June 2020 by Designated Judge Shaerf.

6. The matter then came before me for a  remote  hearing  conducted  through
   Skype for Business.

Hearing and submissions

7. A preliminary issue arose in regard to  Mr  Melvin's  reliance  upon  his
   written submissions/ rule 24 reply filed  the  day  before  the  hearing.
   Prior to the hearing, there was  a  written  request  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant for the rule 24 response to be excluded as it was substantially
   out of time. However, at the hearing  Mr  Galliver-Andrew  accepted  that
   there was nothing controversial in the document, which was effectively  a
   skeleton argument submitted to assist the  Upper  Tribunal  and  which  I
   accepted as such.

8. The parties then made submissions before me.

9. Mr Galliver-Andrew submitted that Judge  Head  had  erred  by  giving  no
   weight to the sponsor's divorce agreement at page 99/100  of  the  appeal
   bundle because of the sponsor's signature,  yet  the  judge  was  not  an
   expert in graphology and in any event there was a similarity between  the
   first part of the signature and no account given to  the  fact  that  the
   sponsor had re-married and changed her last name. Further, the point  was
   not raised by the respondent and was  not  put  to  the  sponsor  at  the
   hearing to enable her to provide an  explanation.  That  was  a  material
   error by the judge because the adverse findings made subsequently  flowed
   from that and it therefore affected the  entire  decision.  It  was  also
   material because the divorce agreement  confirmed  the  appellant's  case
   that his father was not in the picture and that he had  no  contact  with
   him. The sponsor's evidence was that the appellant had  no  contact  with
   his father and it was not put to her at the hearing that that was not the
   case. Mr Galliver-Andrew submitted further that the judge  had  erred  by
   significantly speculating,  at  [35],  about  the  appropriate  level  of
   contact between a teenage boy and his mother. The matters referred to  by
   the judge at [37], namely the lack of  evidence  demonstrating  that  the
   sponsor paid the appellant's school fees, was never put  to  her  at  the
   hearing,  and  neither  were   the   concerns   about   the   appellant's
   grandparents' circumstances.

10. Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant's legal representatives ought  to
   have known what evidence to  produce  in  response  to  the  respondent's
   concerns in the refusal decision and in relation to sole  responsibility.
   As for the divorce agreement, even if the document was  genuine,  it  did
   not state that there was no contact between the appellant and his  father
   and the judge properly noted that there was an absence of  evidence  from
   the appellant in that regard. Even if the judge's findings on the divorce
   agreement were not sustainable, there was  still  a  dearth  of  evidence
   before her and she was entitled to make the findings that she did on that
   basis.

11. Mr Galliver-Andrew, in response, reiterated the  point  previously  made
   that the sponsor had had  adverse  findings  of  fact  made  against  her
   without being given the opportunity to respond. Mr  Galliver-Andrew  also
   referred to the significant period of time that  had  elapsed  since  the
   appellant had made his application, which was beyond his control.

Discussion and conclusions

12. Much is made in the  grounds  and  the  submissions  before  me  of  the
   judge's findings on the sponsor's divorce agreement at page 99 and 100 of
   the appeal bundle and the differences in the signature of the sponsor  in
   that document and in the residence permit at page 37.  Had that been  the
   sole basis of her adverse conclusions on 'sole  responsibility'  I  would
   agree that the  sustainability  of  the  judge's  decision  would  be  in
   question, given in particular that the judge was comparing a signature in
   different languages over a period of time in which the sponsor  may  have
   changed her name on re-marriage.

13. However, it was not the  case  that  the  judge  went  on  to  make  her
   findings on the basis that the sponsor and the  appellant's  father  were
   not divorced but rather she observed at  [33]  that  the  fact  that  the
   couple were divorced did not mean that  the  appellant's  father  had  no
   contact with him. Further, as Mr Melvin submitted, there were many  other
   findings made by the judge on the issue of 'sole responsibility'  in  any
   event. Accordingly I reject the submission that any error by the judge in
   relation to the signature on the divorce agreement, and  the  reliability
   of that document, was material to the overall decision.

14.  The  main  basis  for  the  judge's  adverse  conclusion  on  the  sole
   responsibility issue was a lack of  evidence  -  as  to  the  appellant's
   relationship with, and contact with his  father,  the  level  of  support
   provided to the appellant by the sponsor and the level of contact between
   them, and the role played  by  the  appellant's  grandparents.  The  only
   response to that by Mr Galliver-Andrew  was  effectively  an  attempt  to
   relieve the appellant of the burden of proof,  since  the  tenor  of  his
   submissions appeared to be that none of the concerns had been put to  the
   sponsor at the hearing, a matter he repeated throughout his  submissions.
   Yet, as Mr  Melvin  properly  submitted,  the  significant  gaps  in  the
   evidence were made clear in the ECO's refusal decision and were  repeated
   in the ECM review  in  view  of  the  absence  of  any  further  evidence
   submitted with the grounds of appeal. It was therefore for the  appellant
   to produce that evidence and address the  respondent's  concerns  at  the
   hearing through the sponsor's evidence and supporting documentation.  The
   appellant had the benefit of legal representation in preparation for, and
   at the hearing and there was therefore no explanation for  the  continued
   lack of evidence.

15. In response to that submission made by  Mr  Melvin,  Mr  Galliver-Andrew
   said that it was not for the legal representatives to  burden  the  court
   with unyielding and never-ending bundles of evidence. However, it clearly
   is the role of the appellant's representatives to  produce  a  bundle  of
   evidence which addresses the respondent's concerns. The evidence produced
   before Judge Head was significantly lacking. As she observed,  there  was
   no statement from the appellant himself,  nothing  from  the  appellant's
   grandparents with whom it was claimed he was living,  and  only  a  short
   statement from the sponsor and her partner in the UK,  neither  of  which
   made any mention of the appellant's father. The record of the proceedings
   shows that the sponsor was not examined in chief  by  Mr  Galliver-Andrew
   and that there was no re-examination following  cross-examination.  There
   was clearly every opportunity for the sponsor  to  clarify  the  relevant
   matters of concern,  but  that  opportunity  was  not  taken  up  by  her
   representatives and the judge was perfectly entitled to draw the  adverse
   conclusions that she did from that.

16. It was Mr Galliver-Andrew's  submission  that  it  was  clear  from  the
   evidence that the appellant's father was 'out of  the  picture'.  However
   when I asked him to refer me to that evidence he was unable to do so.  As
   already mentioned, the sponsor's statement did not provide such evidence.
   I do not agree with Mr Galliver-Andrew that such a conclusion was  to  be
   drawn from the divorce agreement, since that confirmed no more than  that
   the sponsor had custody of the appellant and  that  his  father  was  not
   responsible for his maintenance. That was the position in June  2010,  in
   any event, prior to the  sponsor  coming  to  the  UK.  Neither  did  the
   evidence make it clear that the appellant's  grandparents'  role  in  his
   life was limited in terms of care and support and responsibility -  there
   was simply no evidence in that respect other than a  brief  reference  by
   the sponsor in her statement to her parents getting  old  and  to  having
   health issues. I reject Mr Galliver-Andrew's submission that it  was  for
   the judge and the respondent to elicit such evidence from the sponsor and
   I reject the suggestion that the judge was otherwise required  simply  to
   accept the sponsor's unsupported and unparticularised claim to have  sole
   responsibility for the appellant. It was entirely open to  the  judge  to
   consider the lack  of  evidence  troubling  and  concerning  and  it  was
   entirely open to her to conclude that the limited  evidence  before  her,
   which included some WeChat messages  and  some  remittances  made  to  an
   unexplained third party, and brief oral evidence from  the  sponsor,  was
   insufficient to demonstrate that the sponsor was solely  responsible  for
   the appellant's upbringing.

17. Accordingly I find no merit in the grounds. The judge's  decision  is  a
   full and comprehensive one, including a careful  assessment  of  all  the
   evidence, an application of the correct legal test and clear  and  cogent
   reasoning. The judge was fully entitled to reach the adverse findings and
   conclusions that she did and she made no errors of law in her decision.

18. As for the  submission  made  by  Mr  Galliver-Andrew  about  the  delay
   between the appellant making his application and having his appeal heard,
   I fail to see how that is relevant to the question of whether  the  judge
   erred in law. In any event there plainly would have been no  need  for  a
   delay if the appellant had produced the relevant evidence to support  the
   application at any stage of the process.



DECISION

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 5 March 2021
