
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: HU/14949/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                at                Manchester,                Piccadilly
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   19th                   December                    2017
     On 3rd January 2018

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:

                               MR HASSAN AHMED
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Timson (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on the 3rd March 2017, in  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's Human Rights appeal.

   2. The full reasons for the decision are set out within the  decision  of
      Judge Thorn, and are a matter of record and are therefore not repeated
      in their entirety here, but I have fully taken account of the same  in
      reaching my decision.  Permission to appeal has been granted  in  this
      case by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on the 2nd  October  2017,
      who found that although the grounds of appeal were not  of  particular
      significance in identifying arguable errors of law he  found  that  it
      was apparent that the decision did disclose arguable  errors  of  law,
      and he went on to find that there were three arguable errors  in  law.
      Firstly, he said it was arguable  that  although  at  [27]  the  Judge
      concluded the Appellant did not establish that  there  would  be  very
      significant obstacles to his reintegration back  into  Bangladesh  and
      then had gone on to say that he would deal with that in  the  analysis
      of Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
      Chapman said that it was arguable that the Judge  had  not  recognised
      that the  consideration  of  whether  very  significant  obstacles  is
      different and a different test in the  assessment  of  proportionality
      when assessing his application under Section 19 of the Immigration Act
      2014.  Secondly, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman said that it  was
      arguable that there was an error in law in that the  Judgment  in  the
      Court of Appeal in the case of MM v The Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 had been overturned by the Supreme
      Court, a week prior to the hearing.  In the third arguable ground,  as
      stated by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman, it was said that it was
      arguable that the Judge had failed to give  any  or  any  adequate  or
      proper reasons for her findings at both paragraphs  42  and  paragraph
      57(vi) through to (xii) of the decision.

   3. I am also grateful to the oral submissions of  both  Counsel  which  I
      have fully taken account of and again which are  recorded  within  the
      record of proceedings.

   4. Although Mr Timson sought to argue that Judge  Thorne  had  failed  to
      give any or any adequate reasons for his finding that there would  not
      be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration   back   into
      Bangladesh at [27], that paragraph cannot be read  in  isolation,  and
      actually has to be read in conjunction with the findings made at  [57]
      of the decision.  In that regard, as the Judge clearly set  out  those
      findings which were relevant to whether or not  there  would  be  very
      significant obstacles, and were dealt with at [57]  and  included  the
      finding that the Appellant was financially independent, the  Appellant
      was young, well-educated, resourceful and in good health.  The  First-
      tier ~Tribunal Judge did not accept the Appellant  had  forgotten  all
      about his life in Bangladesh or that he forgot how to speak Bangla  or
      Sylheti or to not be able to learn it again were he  to  be  returned.
      In addition, the Judge found that the Appellant had  substantial  cash
      savings and had not proved on the balance of  probabilities  he  would
      not be able to find suitable employment or accommodation in Bangladesh
      and specifically stated that the Appellant had not proved that  living
      in Bangladesh would entail serious hardship  for  him  or  there  were
      significant obstacles to his reintegration into Bangladesh.

   5. Mr Timson sought to rely upon a letter from Dr Chaudhry regarding  the
      care that the Appellant's grandmother needed and the statement of  the
      Appellant himself at paragraph [9], in terms  of  the  care  that  his
      grandmother needed, and sought to argue that  there  was  family  life
      between them and the Judge had not considered the care needed  by  the
      grandmother, and then simply said that the evidence was unclear as  to
      what care and support he gave to his grandmother.  However,  in  fact,
      having considered the record of proceedings, it does not  appear  that
      in fact Mr Timson argued before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  his
      closing submissions, that there was family life and a  sufficiency  of
      dependency as to give rise to family life between  the  Appellant  and
      his grandmother.  The argument  but  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge was simply based on the basis of his private life.

   6. In respect of [57(vi)]  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
      evidence was unclear as to what care and support the Appellant gave to
      his grandmother.  Although Mr Timson sought to reply upon  the  letter
      from Dr Chaudry, in which it was said that she  is  elderly  and  does
      require quite a lot of help at home it would be  helpful  for  her  to
      have a family member to help with daily living  duties  and  that  she
      needs help  from  her  grandson  with  household  chores  and  general
      support, that in itself was not clear as to exactly  what  support  he
      gave her, the Appellant's own statement at [8] simply says that she is
      heavily dependent on him and he undertakes all the  household  duties.
      Again, that had not been specified as to what duties he  actually  did
      or what her health prevented her from doing.  However, in  any  event,
      as stated above, it was not specifically  sought  to  be  argued  that
      there was a family life between them such as to mean that his  removal
      would be in breach of his right to a family life with his grandmother.



   7. In respect of the findings at [57] between (i) and  (v)  the  findings
      there were perfectly open to the Judge on  the  evidence  before  him.
      Indeed, the Appellant had given evidence  in  English  and  the  Judge
      found that he  could  speak  English  and  could  financially  support
      himself in the UK, which finding was perfectly  open  to  him  on  the
      evidence.  The Judge also was quite correct  in  saying  there  was  a
      legitimate interest in maintaining an  effective  immigration  control
      and no rules have to be  applied  if  immigration  control  is  to  be
      workable, predictable and consistent.  He also was  entitled  to  find
      that the Appellant's private life was established at a time  when  his
      immigration status was precarious, given the fact at no time  did  the
      Appellant have indefinite leave to  remain.   Further  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find that he never had a legitimate  expectation  that  he
      would make the UK his home, despite having arrived here  aged  11  and
      then left by his mother in the care of  his  grandmother.   The  Judge
      quite properly considered the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the
      Respondent  had  exercised  her  discretion   in   relation   to   the
      discretionary leave in an unreasonable and lawful way and  gave  clear
      and adequate findings for his reasons in that regard at [57(v)].

   8. The Judge was perfectly entitled to find that there was no evidence to
      show that the uncles who live nearby could not provide  care  for  his
      grandmother or that such support  could  not  be  provided  by  Social
      Services and the NHS.  Those were findings open to him and there is no
      material error in that regard.  Further, in  respect  of  the  Judge's
      finding that he did not accept that the Appellant  had  forgotten  all
      about his life in Bangladesh or that he had  forgotten  how  to  speak
      Bangla or Sylheti or that he would not be able to learn it again  were
      he to return, that put in the context of the Judge's finding that  the
      Appellant is young, well-educated and resourceful and in  good  health
      and in circumstances where he had entered the UK at the age of 11, the
      Judge has explained how for an educated person that he would not  have
      forgotten all about his life in Bangladesh, or forgotten how to  speak
      his languages of Bangla or Sylheti, or as he was well-educated,  young
      and resourceful, that he would not be able to  learn  it  again.   The
      Judge's reasoning in  that  regard,  although  not  the  fullest,  are
      sufficient and adequate to allow the Appellant to understand why those
      findings were made.

   9.  Again, in respect of the findings that Judge Thorne made at  [(viii)]
      the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  find  suitable   employment   and
      accommodation in  Bangladesh,  the  Judge  stated  that  he  did  have
      substantial savings and also again that has to be considered in  light
      of the finding that he was Young, well-educated, resourceful, in  good
      health. In such circumstances, the Judge has adequately explained  why
      for someone who does have savings, and  is  young,  well-educated  and
      resourceful and  in  good  health  would  be  able  to  find  suitable
      employment and accommodation.  Although not the fullest of  reasoning,
      there is not a complete absence of reasoning,  and  I  find  that  the
      decision does give adequate and sufficient reasons  for  the  findings
      made by Judge Thorne from paragraphs (vi) through to (xii).

  10. Although Mr McVeety conceded that the decision was somewhat harsh  and
      that other Judges may have reached a different conclusion,  he  argued
      that the decision was open to Judge Thorne on the evidence before him.
       In that regard, I agree with  Mr  McVeety,  that  although  different
      Judges may have reached a different conclusion, it cannot be said that
      the decision being reached by Judge Thorne was not a decision open  to
      him on the  evidence,  particularly  when  making  findings  regarding
      whether or not the Appellant would face very significant obstacles  in
      reintegrating back into life  in  Bangladesh.   The  first  and  third
      ground of appeal as highlighted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
      therefore lack merit, upon close analysis of the case.  The  reasoning
      does not require additional words to be added in as  suggested  by  Mr
      Timson, and the reasons, albeit short and brief,  are  adequately  and
      sufficiently explained within the decision itself.

  11. In respect of the second  arguable  ground  of  appeal  identified  by
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman, in the case of MM v The Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  985  that  had  been
      overturned by the Supreme Court the week prior to the hearing  in  the
      case of R (On the Application of MM) Lebanon v The Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 10, as Mr  Timson  conceded,  that
      ground takes the matter no further, in that the point  actually  being
      made by Judge Thorne in respect of MM v The Secretary of State for the
      Home Department, that there was no intermediate test that  had  to  be
      applied before he went on to consider Article 8 outside of the  Rules.
      The decision of the Supreme Court did not change  that  position,  and
      indeed, it is a correct analysis and statement of the law  that  there
      is no intermediate test that has to be applied before a Judge goes  on
      to consider Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules. Indeed,  given
      the date of the decision in this case, the only applicable ground  was
      that the decision was in breach of the Appellant's Human Rights  under
      Article 8.  The old ground of appeal that  the  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law was no longer open to him therefore the  Judge
      did have to consider the case albeit "through the  lens"  or  "through
      the prism" of the Immigration Rules, and had  to  properly  go  on  to
      consider it outside of the Rules, which he did.

  12. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne does not disclose any
      material error of law, and the decision is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thorne  does  not  contain  any
material error of law and is maintained;

I make no Order in respect of anonymity, no such Order having been  made  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne  and  no  such  Order  having  been  sought
before me.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 19th December 2017


