
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/14110/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2017                           |On 28 June 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            leroy o'shane tavaris
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Norman, instructed by J M Wilson
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Leroy O'Shane Tavaris, was born 23 November 1989 and  is
    a male citizen of Jamaica.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Jessica Pacey) against a decision of  the  respondent  dated  23
    December 2015 that he should be deported from the United Kingdom  under
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The First-tier Tribunal in a
    decision promulgated on 18 August  2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant sought to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
    his relationship and contact with his two children, a daughter (R)  and
    a son  (L).   In  seeking  to  apply  the  relevant  provision  of  the
    Immigration Rules (paragraph 399A) it is clear that the judge was aware
    both of the existence of R but also L (who, as at the date of the Upper
    Tribunal hearing, is a little  over  a  year  old).   She  records  L's
    existence in her decision at [9] and refers again to  L  at  [11]  when
    beginning her consideration as to whether it would be unduly harsh  for
    the children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  the  appellant.
    Thereafter, L drops out of the  analysis  entirely  save  for  a  brief
    reference at [16].  Indeed, at [45], the judge wrote:

         "... here I advance the nature of the  appellant's  offending,  the
         fact that he has committed more than one offence and  the  sentence
         he has been given against his somewhat lukewarm case in respect  of
         R and, for the reasons I have set out above, find that  the  latter
         does not outweigh the public interest in deportation ...".

 3. Mr Mills, for the  respondent,  helpfully  conceded  that  the  judge's
    analysis was flawed by her failure to take account of the existence  of
    L and to apply the relevant provisions to him.  Mr Mills submitted that
    the decision should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a new  fact-finding  exercise  and  remaking  of  the
    decision.   I  agree   with   that   submission.    It   is,   perhaps,
    understandable that the judge has focused  on  the  elder  of  the  two
    children with whom the  appellant  has  enjoyed  a  longer  history  of
    contact but her failure to include in the analysis  the  child  L  must
    mean that the decision cannot stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  18  August
2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   The  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Jessica  Pacey)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 23 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

