
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14894/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 21st February and 18th July 2019           |On 2nd August 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    KMSK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bundock of Counsel, instructed by Rahman &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery and Mr  Tufan, Home Office Presenting
Officers.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Graves
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 16th October 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  15th  August  1969.   She
    applied to come to the UK to join her sister as  a  dependent  relative
    and it was the refusal of this claim which led to the appeal before the
    Immigration Judge.

 3. The judge accepted that the evidence which he had been given  from  the
    appellant's sister, the sponsor and her husband  was  credible  and  he
    said that he found them to be consistent and reliable witnesses.   They
    had opportunities to exaggerate or embellish the evidence but  did  not
    do so.

 4. The appellant is disabled, her disability having a  physical  component
    and a learning disability.  Until April 2017 she lived with her  mother
    who has since died.  She now lives  alone  in  a  house  owned  by  the
    sponsor and receives help from a person in a neighbouring  village  who
    comes to her on a daily basis.

 5. The judge dismissed the appeal, saying that it may  well  be  the  case
    that the appellant's needs  were  greater  than  the  medical  evidence
    suggested but he could not make a finding based on speculation.  He was
    not satisfied that she could meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 6. So far as Article 8 outside the Rules was  concerned,  had  there  been
    compelling and cogent evidence to establish that the nature or  quality
    of  the  appellant's  care  needs,  including  that  any  emotional  or
    psychological component could only really be met by her sister and that
    the impact upon the appellant of continued separation from  her  sister
    and her current circumstances had a  significantly  detrimental  impact
    upon her mental health and  wellbeing,  then  those  matters  may  have
    outweighed the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control.  However, that evidence was not before him  and  he  dismissed
    the appeal.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to take important evidence into account, in  particular  the
    sponsor's handwritten witness statement handed up at the hearing  which
    made it clear that the appellant's physical disability did make it very
    difficult for her to perform personal tasks including brushing her hair
    and doing her teeth.  The judge did not engage with the evidence in the
    statement that the appellant had very intense emotional needs since she
    felt and thought as a child and not an adult.

 8. There was also medical evidence before him in the  form  of  disability
    certificates issued by  the  government  of  Maharashtra  state  and  a
    certificate from a private doctor which the judge  appeared  to  doubt,
    without reason.  He  said  at  paragraph  30  "I  do  accept  that  the
    appellant requires some help with cooking if indeed she has a  learning
    disability" and at paragraph 37 "Her learning disability, if it can  be
    called that."

 9. Finally, he did not take into account the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    mother had died less than six months before the refusal decision.   She
    had lived with her mother her entire life and  her  mental  health  had
    been deteriorating since then.

10. Although Mr Avery defended the determination  and  submitted  that  the
    oral evidence before the judge did not indicate that the appellant  had
    any real difficulty with the present arrangements, I am persuaded  that
    in an otherwise thoughtful and detailed determination the judge did not
    engage with relevant evidence before him, in particular  the  sponsor's
    witness statement.  The witness  statement  makes  it  clear  that  the
    appellant does have difficulties in performing personal tasks, such  as
    combing her hair and  doing her teeth.  The sponsor's evidence has been
    accepted as credible in all respects.  In failing to take into  account
    material evidence the judge erred in law such that the  decision  needs
    to be remade.

11. Mr Bundock told me that the appellant  wishes  for  the  matter  to  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal principally due to the lengthy delays in
    the First-tier Tribunal in listing.  Accordingly, this matter will come
    before me at the next available date.

Decision

12. The judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.

Resumed Hearing

13. Ms Hure gave brief oral evidence and adopted the two witness statements
    which she had prepared for earlier hearings.  She also  confirmed  that
    the reports which had been prepared for the Tribunal from a  consultant
    clinical neuropsychologist Dr Halari which recorded  the  conversations
    she had had with her were true and accurate.

14. She said that she spoke to her sister two or three times a day and also
    had video WhatsApp calls with her every other day when the  person  who
    looked after her was able to help her to use a smartphone.  Whilst  the
    lady had not said that she was unwilling to continue to look after  her
    sister the sponsor herself felt that she was worried  about  continuing
    to do so. She kept asking about the progress of this appeal.

15. So far as the practical support which the appellant needs she said that
    she could not run her own bath, could not wash her hair, could wash the
    front of her body but not the back and could not comb or brush her hair
    or her teeth.  She could not wash her own clothes or iron  them  or  do
    her own shopping.

16. Ms Hure said that she had been in the UK  since  1991  and  whilst  her
    parents were alive she used to go back to  India  every  two  or  three
    years but now since they have died she goes more regularly every one to
    one and a half years.  Her sister was only 49 and she could live a long
    time.  It was a lifelong  commitment  because  of  the  extent  of  her
    disabilities.  The appellant lives five hours from Mumbai  in  a  small
    village.  She said that she could not adjust to a care home  in  Mumbai
    and if she came to the UK she could be looked after by her family which
    she needs to make her feel comfortable.

Submissions

17. Mr Tufan did not seek to argue that the appellant did not require long-
    term personal care to perform everyday tasks.  In  his  submission  the
    situation as it presently was could continue because currently help was
    available and was reasonably provided.  If not she could go to  a  care
    home in Mumbai.

18. He questioned  the  conclusions  in  the  report  from  the  consultant
    psychologist and noted that there were a number of positive findings in
    her report about the appellant's abilities, namely that her memory  was
    adequate and that she was educated to fifth grade level.

19. He queried how thepsychologist had reached some of her conclusions,  in
    particular why it would be extremely detrimental for her to  remain  in
    India when this situation has persisted for her whole life.  Whilst  he
    had no doubt that the sponsor had her best interests in mind and  could
    give her good quality care, he considered that there was no reason  why
    the  present  situation  could  not  continue.   There  were   a   very
    significant number of disabled people in India and nothing  to  suggest
    that this  particular  case  was  outside  the  broad  range  of  entry
    clearance cases where less weight should be given to family life.

20. Mr Bundock relied on his skeleton argument and submitted that the  crux
    of this case was the emotional and psychological  requirements  of  the
    appellant which could not be met by someone outside the family.   There
    was a very strong bond between the sisters.  He relied heavily  on  the
    report from Dr Halari who was a  very  experienced  consultant  at  the
    Maudsley Hospital with an impressive CV built over years of experience.
     She had interviewed the appellant for three quarters of an hour to  an
    hour on a video link and her conclusions should be given great weight.

21. In his submission the appellant met the requirements of the substantive
    Rule and therefore it would not be  proportionate  to  deny  her  entry
    clearance.  Alternatively if it was found that she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rule refusal would still be disproportionate.

Findings and Conclusions

22. At an earlier stage in these proceedings the respondent appeared to  be
    arguing that the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph E-
    ECDR.2.4, namely that she was  not  a  person  who  required  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks but Mr Tufan very sensibly  did
    not challenge the sponsor's evidence and accepted  that  the  appellant
    did indeed require that care.  As he said the  crux  of  the  issue  is
    whether the appellant is able to obtain the required level of  care  in
    India.

23. Paragraph E- ECDR 2.5 states  that the applicant must  be  unable  even
    with the practical and financial help of  the  sponsor  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in the country where they are living because  it
    is not available and there  is  no  person  in  that  country  who  can
    reasonably provide it.

24. The appellant has lived all of her life in India, born  there  on  15th
    August 1969.  She has  cerebral  palsy  which  results  in  significant
    intellectual and physical disability.  She was cared for  in  India  by
    her parents but her father died in 2004 and her mother  died  in  April
    2017.  Two months after  her  mother's  death  she  applied  for  entry
    clearance as the  adult  dependent  relative  of  her  British  citizen
    sister.  It is accepted that there are no other relatives in India  who
    are able to care for her.

25. At present the appellant is being cared for  by  a  family  friend  who
    gives her the practical care which she needs.

26. It was accepted by the original judge that there is family life between
    the appellant and her sister, a finding which has not  been  challenged
    by the Secretary of State.

27. At paragraph 37 the judge said

         "I find that the fact the appellant has family life with her sister
         to the standard in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  31.   This  is
         because on the particular facts of this case  I  find  there  is  a
         relationship of emotional and financial interdependency  that  goes
         beyond the normal ties of adult  siblings.   That  is  because  the
         appellant is financially dependent upon her sister in this  country
         and  additionally  while  her  main   relationship   of   emotional
         dependency is likely  to  have  been  with  her  mother  since  her
         mother's death she  is  now  more  isolated  and  more  emotionally
         dependent upon her sister.  Her learning disability if  it  can  be
         called that  is  likely  only  to  make  her  more  vulnerable  and
         therefore more dependent on her sister".

28. Article 8 is therefore engaged.

29. The issue is whether the refusal of entry clearance is proportionate in
    all the circumstances of this case.

30. The main evidence, aside from the sponsor's oral and  written  evidence
    comes from Dr Rozmin Halari who has an appointment as a senior lecturer
    at King's College London and worked as a consultant chartered  clinical
    neuropsychologist both in  the  NHS  and  in  the  independent  private
    sector.  She is also a consultant  clinical  neuropsychologist  at  the
    Maudsley  specialising  in  assessing  and  treating  psychiatric   and
    neuropsychological  and  development  disorders,  inter   alia   autism
    spectrum disorders, including Asperger's disorder  and  dementia.   She
    works  with  children,  adolescents  and  adults.   She  conducted   an
    interview with the appellant through a video WhatsApp call on 10th July
    2019.

31. So far as her intellectual ability is concerned Dr Halari said that  it
    was difficult to understand K's speech as it was slurred  and  she  was
    salivating constantly.  She became very emotional and tearful  and  her
    speech was not easily comprehensible, not being  able  to  provide  any
    meaningful conversation or dialogue in response to questions.  She  was
    not orientated to date, time or place and could not perform subtraction
    of 7 from 100 serially.  Dr Halari noted  that  there  was  significant
    cognitive impairment  with  a  score  of  8  demonstrating  significant
    impairment in verbal comprehension, articulation, retention and  recall
    of information.  She also suffered from moderate anxiety  and  moderate
    depression.

32. Dr Halari noted that K's mother died two years ago which had a negative
    emotional impact on her.  She had been very close  to  her  mother  and
    relied on her for companionship, practical and  emotional  support  and
    found it very difficult to cope and  function  on  a  day-to-day  basis
    without her.  Since her mother's death she has been reliant on  a  lady
    from the village to attend to her needs and to cook  for  her  although
    the lady was not able to care for K  in  the  long-term.   Her  overall
    presentation seemed to be deteriorating and she required emotional  and
    practical support.  Since her mother's  death  she  has  been  socially
    isolated, withdrawn and feeling low in her mood experiencing  fear  and
    anxiety when she is alone at night and during the monsoon season.

33. Dr Halari suggested  that  if  K  continued  to  live  a  life  without
    significant support she would be at risk of further mental and physical
    deterioration.  Her depressive symptomatology was likely  to  fluctuate
    depending on where she was staying.  She was  much  happier  and  in  a
    better mental state when she was in the company of her sister  but  she
    continues to worry about what her life would be like if she remained in
    India alone and these thoughts and emotions seem to be maintaining  her
    levels of depression, anxiety and poor physical health.

34. At paragraph 62 Dr Halari wrote

         "In my professional opinion and based on my clinical  experience  K
         would not be able to carry out day-to-day tasks for example if  she
         was in a care home or if she had in a live-in carer she  would  not
         be in any way physically, mentally or cognitively well enough to be
         able to care for herself or to perform  everyday  tasks.   K  is  a
         vulnerable lady who  would  require  the  practical  and  emotional
         support  from  her  sister  whom  she  heavily  relies  on.    More
         importantly her positive  mental  state  and  her  stable  physical
         health is dependent on her being around her  family.   K  does  not
         have any other family support in India".

35. At paragraph  67  Dr  Halari  said  that  K  was  extremely  scared  of
    strangers, not trusting them or feeling comfortable with the idea of  a
    care home.  She was likely to experience significant anxiety, confusion
    and panic.

36. At paragraph 69 she said

         "In my clinical opinion K is an extremely vulnerable individual who
         is  not  only  dependent  on  her  family  emotionally   but   also
         physically, cognitively and  practically.   Her  sister  makes  the
         relevant decisions for her in relation to her health and wellbeing.
          She would significantly deteriorate in  her  mental  and  physical
         health if she were to live alone or even with a live-in carer or in
         a home.  Her happiness and wellbeing is strongly  attached  to  the
         time she spends with her family who  reside  in  the  UK.   She  is
         likely to struggle to trust strangers and this will  cause  her  to
         become isolated socially and emotionally".

37. And finally at paragraph 71

         "If K were to remain in India it is highly likely to place  her  at
         risk of further mental cognitive and physical deterioration if  she
         had to live on her own without  her  family.   This  for  her  will
         signify further loss, loneliness and an inability to  cope  on  her
         own.  Her poor physical and mental health  difficulties  mean  that
         she  requires  constant  supervision  and  emotional  as  well   as
         practical support and an absence of this can place  K  at  risk  of
         significant physical and emotional harm".

38. I was referred to the case of R (Britcits v SSHD) [2017] EWCA  Civ  368
    which concerned the issue of whether the adult dependant Rule was ultra
    vires as being a rule which was impossible to satisfy.   The  Court  of
    Appeal found that it was not ultra vires.

39. At paragraph 59 Sir Terence Etherton MR said

         "Second as is apparent from the Rules and the guidance the focus is
         on whether the care required by the ADR applicant can be reasonably
         provided and to the required level in their home  country.   As  Mr
         Sheldon confirmed in his oral submissions the provision of care  in
         the home country must be reasonable both from  the  perspective  of
         the provider and the perspective of the applicant and the  standard
         of  such  care  must  be  what  is  required  for  that  particular
         applicant.  It is possible that  insufficient  attention  has  been
         paid in the past to these considerations which focus on  what  care
         is both necessary and reasonable for the applicant  to  receive  in
         their home country.  Those considerations include issues as to  the
         accessibility and geographical location of the  provision  of  care
         and standard of care.  They are capable of embracing emotional  and
         psychological requirements verified  by  expert  medical  evidence.
         What is reasonable is of course to be objectively assessed".

40. And at paragraph 76 he said

         "In particular rejection  on  the  basis  of  the  availability  of
         adequate care in the ADR's home country turns upon whether the care
         which is available is reasonable for the ADR to receive and of  the
         level required for that applicant.  Contrary to the submissions  of
         the claimant those  considerations  are  capable  with  appropriate
         evidence of embracing the  psychological  and  emotional  needs  of
         elderly parents".

41. Although the sponsor has been  in  the  UK  for  almost  30  years  the
    appellant was cared for by her mother until April 2017  when  she  died
    and it was only following her death that the  present  application  was
    made.  It is now accepted by the respondent that the appellant has very
    significant  disabilities  and  meets  the  requirements  of  the  Rule
    E/ECDR2.4, namely that she requires long-term personal care to  perform
    everyday tasks.

42. The respondent argues that she could go to a care home in Mumbai.

43. However I conclude that in this particular case that would  not  amount
    to a required level of care for Ms K.  She  has  always  lived  in  her
    village, being cared for by her parents.  Her physical needs  are  very
    high.  Whilst it is possible to conclude that her physical needs  could
    be met by staff in a care home, her emotional and  psychological  needs
    could not.  The sponsor is her only relative.  It is quite  clear  from
    Dr Halari's report that she is a very vulnerable  woman  whose  closest
    relationship is with her sister in the UK.   There  is  no  basis  upon
    which to challenge Dr Halari's expertise.

44. The sponsor has significant contact with her sister on  a  daily  basis
    and there is no reason whatsoever to doubt Dr Halari's conclusions that
    she provides the psychological and emotional support that the appellant
    needs and this could not reasonably be provided by placing  her  in  an
    institution.

45. Mr Tufan submitted that there is no reason why  the  present  situation
    could not continue.   However  the  sponsor's  evidence  has  not  been
    challenged at any stage in these proceedings.   She  did  not  seek  to
    embellish what she had said before which was that a lady in the village
    had been employed to provide her sister with  practical  support  since
    her mother died, but this was not a long-term arrangement and the carer
    herself was becoming anxious about how long she would  be  expected  to
    help the appellant.  In any event she is not  meeting  the  appellant's
    emotional and psychological needs.

46. The temporary care arrangements suffice for  the  practical  day-to-day
    care but is not a substitute for emotional and family support which  it
    can only come from her sister.

47. This application for entry clearance was prompted by the death  of  the
    appellant's mother.  She has been  looked  after  by  a  family  member
    almost all her life.  I conclude that her emotional  and  psychological
    needs cannot be  met  by  anyone  else  other  than  the  sponsor.  The
    appellant is a particularly vulnerable individual  with  no  family  in
    India. If she  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  E/ECDR2.5  it  is
    difficult to see who would.

48.  Accordingly,  to  refuse  her  entry  clearance   as   a   significant
    interference with the family life which she enjoys with her sister  and
    since the appellant meets the substantive requirements  of  the  Rules,
    refusal of entry clearance is  disproportionate.  There  are  no  other
    issues in this appeal.  The sponsor and her husband are able  to  fully
    accommodate and provide for the appellant.

Decision

49. The original judge erred in law.  Her decision has been set aside.   It
    is remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 24 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

