
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14709/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 12th March 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                  carl [w]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          In person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J
    Robertson, promulgated on 22 August  2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker on 22 November 2018.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. On 16 December 1993, the appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with
    leave to enter as a visitor. He married a British Citizen  (DC)  on  18
    February 1994. He extended his leave as a  working  holidaymaker  until
    around June 1996. An application made for further leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of marriage was refused during 1997 and  his  appeal  against
    that decision failed. Thereafter he  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without leave.

 4. The appellant was convicted of assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm
    on 24 March 1998; damaging property on 4  May  2000  and  8  counts  of
    supplying cocaine to undercover police officers on 7  April  2004.  For
    the last  offences,  which  took  place  in  2003,  the  appellant  was
    sentenced to 42 months' imprisonment and was subsequently  served  with
    notice of intention to deport.

 5. The appellant's challenge to the deportation  decision  failed  and  he
    became appeal rights exhausted on  13  July  2005.  According  to  Home
    Office records the deportation order was signed on 19 August  2005  but
    was never served on the appellant.

 6. On 27 October 2016, the appellant made representations, in response  to
    which the Secretary of State reviewed the question of his  deportation.
    Those representations principally relied on the appellant's family life
    with a partner, two children and his  private  life.  Furthermore,  his
    eldest child suffered from severe allergies.

 7. On 16 October 2017, the respondent refused the appellant's human rights
    application. The respondent considered that the findings of  the  judge
    who  dismissed  the  appellant's  previous  appeal  remained  relevant.
    Reliance was placed on paragraph 398a of the Immigration Rules owing to
    the length of the appellant's prison sentence. The respondent  did  not
    accept that the appellant's stepchildren  qualified  for  consideration
    under the exception to deportation in paragraph 399a of the  Rules.  It
    was  accepted  that  the   appellant   had   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationships with his minor British children but not that it would  be
    unduly harsh for them to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    appellant. The appellant's relationship with his partner  was  accepted
    to be genuine and subsisting however,  as  the  relationship  commenced
    when  the  appellant's  status  was  precarious  the  requirements   of
    paragraph 399b of the Rules were not met. The appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of the exceptions in 399A(a) and (c) of the Rules  and
    nor were there very compelling circumstances.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 8. At the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented. The judge reached similar conclusions to  the  Secretary
    of State, albeit the judge considered there to be a  lack  of  evidence
    that the appellant was socially and culturally integrated in the United
    Kingdom.

 9. The judge further commented that there was  no  objective  evidence  to
    suggest that medical care for the appellant's son was not available  in
    Barbados.

The grounds of appeal

10. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  lacked  grounds  but  was
    accompanied  by  a  letter  from  the  office  of  the  Barbados   High
    Commissioner dated 4 September 2018 which referred to medical  evidence
    regarding the level of care available in Barbados for  the  appellant's
    son and made additional points in support of his appeal.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 12 September 2018, however time for appealing was extended.

12. In renewing his application, the appellant argued that  no  deportation
    order had been served at any stage, that there was no consideration  of
    the cost or burden for his family to visit him  in  Barbados  and  that
    there was a failure to consider medical evidence as to the  absence  of
    suitable  medical  treatment  in  Barbados  for  the  appellant's  son.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  "arguable
    that the passage of time since the deportation  decision  was  made  in
    2005..., with no evidence of  the  respondent  seeking  to  remove  the
    appellant until he sought to regularise  his  stay  with  no  offending
    since 2004 have not been given sufficient weight."

13. The respondent's Rule  24  response,  received  on  10  December  2018,
    indicated that the appeal was opposed and  that  the  judge  had  given
    adequate reasons for finding that the delay in serving the  deportation
    order had not disadvantaged the appellant.

The hearing

14. The error of law hearing was initially adjourned because the  appellant
    was unable to compose  himself  sufficiently  to  make  submissions.  I
    adjourned the hearing owing to his presentation and in order for him to
    attempt to obtain representation

15. When this matter came before me on 7  March  2019,  the  appellant  was
    again unrepresented, however he was  accompanied  by  his  partner  and
    daughter and confirmed that he felt able to proceed.

16. I heard submissions from Ms Cunha initially  in  order  to  enable  the
    appellant to focus on the relevant issues. Thereafter the appellant and
    his partner made submissions and Ms Cunha replied. Little emerged  from
    either submissions, however the appellant  accepted  that  he  had  not
    raised the issue of the cost of travelling to Barbados before the First-
    tier Tribunal. Ms Cunha robustly defended the decision under challenge,
    argued that it was not unduly harsh for the appellant  to  be  removed,
    that there were no compelling circumstances and that  the  respondent's
    delay, rather than having a  negative  impact  on  the  appellant,  had
    enabled him to enjoy family life and see his family grow.

17. At the end of the hearing, I announced that I was  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made material errors of law and that  the  decision
    was set aside. The brief reasons I gave at the hearing, which I  expand
    upon below, were that there had been an inadequate consideration of the
    respondent's failure to take steps to serve the deportation  order  and
    to  remove  the  appellant;  that  there   had   been   an   inadequate
    consideration of the medical evidence including  the  severity  of  the
    conditions  of  the  appellant's  son  and  that  there  had  been   no
    consideration of the evidence from a former CEO of the Queen  Elizabeth
    Hospital in Barbados regarding the lack  of  qualified  specialists  in
    relation to treating life threatening allergies. The  latter  point  is
    relevant as to whether family life could be maintained by visits by the
    appellant's children to see him in Barbados.

Decision on error of law

18. By the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant had been living in the United Kingdom for nearly  twenty-five
    years; around fifteen years had elapsed since he last offended  and  he
    had been reporting regularly since his release from prison.  Throughout
    the time since his conviction, he had been residing with his partner at
    the same address which was known to the Home Office.  The  judge  dealt
    with this issue relatively brusquely at [23], stating  that  the  delay
    had not disadvantaged him. That conclusion made  no  reference  to  the
    appellant's  detailed  written  evidence  as  to  the   extraordinarily
    negative  effects  upon  him  and  his  partner  of  waiting  for   the
    deportation order to be signed over such a prolonged period.  That  the
    respondent did not consider  progressing  the  appellant's  deportation
    until after he made representations, ought to have been  considered  as
    to whether this reduced the public  interest  in  his  deportation.  In
    addition, this issue was relevant as to whether it was unduly harsh for
    the appellant to be removed to Barbados while his partner and  children
    remained in the  United  Kingdom.  At  [22],  the  judge  sums  up  the
    appellant's case since his last hearing in 2005 thus, "Other  than  the
    passage of time the Appellant's circumstances remain  the  same."  This
    view, which was far from accurate, appears to have coloured the judge's
    consideration of the appellant's case.

19. The judge refers to the appellant's son having a "health condition" and
    comments that the  medical  evidence  amounts  to  incomplete  letters.
    Having perused the file, there were three medical reports and all  were
    complete.  It  is  apparent  from  the  most  recent  report  that  the
    appellant's son has had serious problems managing his severe  allergies
    to many food products and asthma. There was a  reference  to  a  recent
    incident in school where there was a failure to follow  the  management
    plan when the child was accidentally exposed to  milk  and  experienced
    symptoms including breathing difficulties.  The medical  evidence  also
    refers to the  son  having  a  significant  anxiety  component  to  his
    behaviours, which were suggestive of being on the autistic spectrum. If
    the judge considered that the medical letters were incomplete, this may
    well be why his consideration of the contents was inadequate.

20. At [26] the judge says there is no objective evidence that medical care
    is not available for the appellant's son in Barbados. Such evidence was
    available in the letter from Winston Collymore who in addition to being
    the former CEO of Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Barbados, was the  national
    lead on the modernisation of polyclinics.

21. Mr Collymore has held many other senior  roles  in  healthcare  in  the
    United Kingdom and his evidence was deserving of some consideration. He
    describes the difference in healthcare between the United  Kingdom  and
    Barbados as vast, there being no qualified specialists in the  relevant
    field in the  latter.  The  letter  from  Mr  Collymore  went  entirely
    unaddressed by the judge.

22. Without the errors set out above, a  different  conclusion  could  have
    been reached. Therefore, the judge's decision is unsafe and must be set
    aside.

23. The appellant wishes to adduce up-to-date  medical  evidence  regarding
    his son's conditions as well as to seek legal  representation  for  the
    rehearing of his appeal. Furthermore, he was deprived of a fair hearing
    because  the  evidence  he  produced  previously  was  not  taken  into
    consideration. In these circumstances, the appeal it is appropriate  to
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

24. The appellant explained that it was easier for he  and  his  family  to
    travel to London than Birmingham and for that reason I transferred  the
    matter to be heard at Taylor House.




Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge J Robertson.


Signed                                  Date 24 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

