
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14160/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Video Link   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2020                 |On 13 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             Asma Faisal Yazdani
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by Whitefield
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Although Mr Tufan was here to represent the Secretary of State there
       is in this case a very detailed skeleton argument for the respondent
       provided by one of his colleagues and served on the Secretary of
       State and the Tribunal that Mr Tufan not I knew about before the
       hearing.  If I have failed to read something in the file I apologise
       to the parties but I do not think it is in my file even now.  The
       importance of that document is it makes a concession and it makes
       the concession in unequivocal terms that the appeal has been
       determined unsatisfactorily and has to be redetermined.

    2. The appeal concerns a person who is a citizen of Pakistan, who has
       lived in the United Kingdom for some time and has sought to remain
       on the basis of her private and family life, essentially the
       relationship with her adult children and grandchildren.  The
       fundamental difficulty in the case identified by Mr Malik in his
       grounds and conceded by the Secretary of State in the skeleton
       argument is there is what at the very least appears to be an
       inconsistency where the First-tier Tribunal accepts on one hand that
       "private and family life" has been established and then it goes on
       to conclude that this is not a case where private and family life
       within the meaning of Kugathas has been established and so, to use a
       slightly imperfect phrase, Article 8(1) is not engaged.

    3. To be plain, it is not clear to me exactly what the judge meant
       here.  At the very very least there is an undesirable use of similar
       phrases with different meanings which makes the Decision and Reasons
       hard to follow.  The Secretary of State has conceded that it is
       unsatisfactory and Mr Tufan did not seek to go behind that.  There
       is also a concession that there are no clear and proper findings
       about the best interests of the minor children involved.

    4. Mr Malik, understandably, says that the decision must be set aside.
       He asks for the case to be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.
       He is quite open about the reasons.  He says that the legislation
       provides for a rehearing; if there is not a rehearing then, in what
       he was flattering enough to suggest was an unlikely, unless I made a
       mistake of considerable significance it would not be possible to
       appeal the matter further and he wishes to preserve his client's
       appeal rights.  That is not necessarily a compelling argument but it
       is a perfectly proper argument and I respect him for his
       straightforwardness.

    5. Mr Tufan was disadvantaged by not being instructed adequately by the
       Secretary of State.  That is not in any way his fault but it is not
       the first time I have been assisted by a Presenting Officers who did
       not have the full file and so was not in a position to make any
       concessions or examination of the evidence or really informed
       submissions today. There has to be hearing on another occasion and,
       mindful of that, I am inclined to give more weight to Mr Malik's
       primary submissions than I might otherwise have done.

    6. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision by the agreement of
       the parties because it is unsatisfactory in the way I have indicated
       and I direct that the case be heard again in the First-tier
       Tribunal.  No findings are preserved.  The case is to be heard
       afresh.

Notice of Decision

     The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set
aside. The appeal will be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 7 October 2020                 |



