
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14047/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2020                           |On 20 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                  Osime [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai of Counsel, Lawmans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 15 October 1998.  He
    entered the UK with his mother in December 2002, aged 4.  On 3 August
    2018 he was convicted of robbery, attempted robbery and commission of
    acts with intent to pervert the course of public justice and sentenced
    to five years' detention in a young offender's institution.  He had
    previously committed robbery and other offences.  On 14 August 2019 the
    respondent issued a notice of decision to deport the appellant to
    Jamaica.

 2. In the respondent's decision it was stated that:

         "It is accepted that you are socially and culturally in the UK to
         some extent because of the length of your residence here.  As you
         have been in the UK since your arrival in 2002, you will have spent
         your youth and part of formative years in the UK.  You will have
         been entirely educated in the UK and are likely to have developed
         personal relationships during your residence here.  Evidence has
         been submitted to demonstrate that you have the support of
         relatives, friends and acquaintances with whom have developed and
         maintained personal relationships which constitute a part of your
         private life in the UK."

 3. The appellant's human rights claim was nonetheless refused because,
    inter alia, it was not accepted that there would be very significant
    obstacles to his integration into Jamaica or that there would not be
    adequate medical treatment in Jamaica for Asperger's syndrome and
    depression, which he had informed the respondent he suffers from.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lodge ("the judge").  In a
    decision promulgated on 15 November 2019 the judge dismissed the
    appeal.  The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge found, at paragraph 28, that:

         "Having regard to his demonstrable criminality over a considerable
         period of time, I cannot find he is 'socially and culturally'
         integrated into UK society."

 6. The judge accepted that the appellant has a number of health problems,
    including depression, and that he has Asperger's syndrome.  At
    paragraph 39 the judge stated:




          "The reality in this case boils down to whether the appellant's
         mental health problems mean that he meets the criteria of very
         compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions."




 7. In order to support his claim to suffer from significant mental health
    and other medical and developmental problems, the appellant relied on a
    psychological report prepared by child and educational psychologist
    John Hall dated 29 October 2019.  Mr Hall stated that the appellant has
    extremely low general intelligence and literary skills.  He stated at
    paragraph 122 of the report:

         "I considered the possibility that [the appellant] might be 'faking
         low' but this did not appear likely given the genuine effort he
         made on certain tasks and in particular his much better number
         skills score and the fact that he said he was good at this
         subject."




 8. Mr Hall's concluding remarks were that the appellant continues to self-
    harm and is in a very depressed state; and that in addition to autism
    he has been diagnosed with a number of mental health difficulties and
    has general and specific learning disabilities.

 9. The judge did not attach weight to Mr Hall's report.  He commented that
    there appeared to be an overreliance on the evidence of the appellant's
    mother who, the judge stated, "has very much an axe to grind in these
    matters". The judge stated that he was not persuaded on the basis of Mr
    Hall's report that the appellant is learning disabled. At paragraph 51
    the judge stated:

          "More significantly, Mr Hall is of the opinion that the appellant
         is not 'faking it' during the tests that he undertook.  He does not
         however, on the face of it, positively excluded that possibility".

10. The judge concluded at paragraph 58 that the appellant did not meet the
    test of "very compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions"
    and the appellant had not raised compelling circumstances which amount
    to a very strong Article 8 claim.

Grounds of Appeal

11. The first ground of appeal submits that it was procedurally unfair for
    the judge to find that the appellant is not socially and culturally
    integrated into the UK without putting the appellant on notice that
    this was an issue, given that this point had been conceded by the
    respondent.




12. The second ground argues that the judge erred by finding that the
    appellant was not culturally and socially integrated into the UK solely
    because of his criminality.


13. The third ground of appeal submits that the judge fell into error by
    treating as significant that Mr Hall had not "positively excluded" the
    possibility that the appellant was "faking" when it is clear that Mr
    Hall's opinion was that the appellant was not faking.


14. There are two further grounds of appeal but it is not necessary to
    consider these given that (for the reasons explained below) I have
    decided, on the basis of the first three grounds of appeal, to set
    aside the decision.

Analysis

15. It is well established that where a point is expressly conceded by one
    party it will usually be unfair to disregard the concession unless the
    tribunal indicates that it is minded to take that course and gives the
    other party an opportunity to make submissions on the point: Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v Balasingham Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA
    Civ 173.

16. The respondent conceded in the reasons for refusal letter that the
    appellant was socially and culturally integrated in the UK to some
    extent. See above at paragraph 2 where the relevant paragraph is cited.
    In the absence of either this concession being withdrawn by the
    respondent or the judge informing the parties that he intended to
    disregard the concession it was, in my view, procedurally unfair - and
    an error of law - for the judge to find against the appellant on this
    point.

17. The judge also fell into error in the approach taken to assessing
    whether the appellant had "socially and culturally" integrated into the
    UK. The only reason given by the judge for concluding that the
    appellant was not socially and culturally integrated was that he had
    engaged in criminality over a considerable period of time. However, as
    is made clear in CI (Nigeria) v The Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2027, absence of social and cultural
    integration cannot be determined solely by reference to a person's
    criminality and factors such as a person's upbringing, education and
    employment history must be considered. At para. 77 of CI (Nigeria) it
    is stated:

         The judge should simply have asked whether - having regard to his
         upbringing, education, employment history, history of criminal
         offending and imprisonment, relationships with family and friends,
         lifestyle and any other relevant factors - CI was at the time of
         the hearing socially and culturally integrated in the UK. The judge
         should not, as he appears to have done, have treated CI's offending
         and imprisonment as having severed his social and cultural ties
         with the UK through its very nature, irrespective of its actual
         effects on CI's relationships and affiliations - and then required
         him to demonstrate that integrative links had since been "re-
         formed".

18. Mr Lindsay argued that even if the judge erred by finding that the
    appellant was not socially and culturally integrated into the UK the
    error was not material because the appellant had been sentenced to 5
    years imprisonment and therefore he could not succeed by meeting the
    conditions of Exception 1 in s117C(4) of the Nationality Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

19. Section 117C provides that:


         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.


         (5)  ...


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2.

20. As highlighted by Mr Lindsay, the appellant committed an offence for
    which he was sentenced to imprisonment of over four years.
    Accordingly, Section 117C(6) applies and the appellant needed to show
    that there were "very compelling circumstances, over and above those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2".  Exception 2 concerns relationships
    with a partner and/or child, and is irrelevant in this case.  Exception
    1 requires consideration to be given, inter alia, to whether the
    appellant is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.



21. Although the appellant could not succeed by showing that he met the
    conditions of Exception 1, whether or not he met them was nonetheless
    relevant to the assessment of whether there were "very compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in the Exception". As
    explained in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at 37:

            "... [I]t will often be sensible first to see whether his case
         involves circumstances of the kind described in Exceptions 1 and 2,
         both because the circumstances so described set out particularly
         significant factors bearing upon respect for private life
         (Exception 1) and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because
         that may provide a helpful basis on which an assessment can be made
         whether there are 'very compelling circumstances, over and above
         those described in Exceptions 1 and 2' as is required under section
         117C(6). It will then be necessary to look to see whether any of
         the factors falling within the Exceptions 1 and 2 are of such
         force, whether by themselves or taken in conjunction with any other
         relevant factors not covered by the circumstances described in
         Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy the test in section 117C(6)."

22. Accordingly, the errors relating to whether the appellant is socially
    and culturally integrated into the UK are material because the
    appellant's social and cultural integration is relevant to the
    assessment required under section 117C(6).

23. A further material error arises from the judge's approach to the expert
    evidence of Mr Hall. It appears from paragraph 51 of the decision
    (cited above at paragraph 9) that one of the reasons the judge did not
    attach weight to Mr Hall's report was that Mr Hall did not positively
    exclude the possibility that the appellant was "faking" but instead
    merely expressed the opinion that he was not faking. However, it is
    difficult to see how any expert can ever "positively exclude [the]
    possibility" that a person is "faking" as in virtually all cases it
    remains a possibility, even if only a very small one. The judge gave
    several sustainable reasons for not attaching weight to Mr Hall's
    report but it was not reasonably open to the judge to give as a reason
    for not attaching weight to the report that Mr Hall gave a measured and
    balanced opinion (as set out above at paragraph 7) as to whether the
    appellant was "faking" rather than a positive exclusion of the
    possibility.

24. For the reasons set out above, I have decided to set aside the
    decision. In the light of the nature of the errors of law identified, I
    do not consider it appropriate to preserve any findings of fact. Given
    the extent of fact finding that will be required in order for the
    decision to be remade, having regard to paragraph 7.2(b) of the
    Practice Statements of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-
    tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, I consider this an appeal which
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Notice of Decision

 1. The appeal is allowed.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law and is set aside.

 3. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by
    a different judge.

|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|[pic]                                 |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 24 March 2020           |



