
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14842/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 3 October 2019                    |On 16 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                    R B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, instructed by RP Crawford & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellant  and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Somalia born  in  2002,  has  been  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle
    who dismissed her appeal against  a  refusal  of  entry  clearance  for
    family reunion under paragraph 319X of HC 395 on 10 October  2018  for
    reasons given in his decision dated 26 February 2019.

 2. The judge heard evidence from the appellant's sister (the sponsor)  who
    sponsored the application.  He noted the claim that their  parents  had
    died (her father in 2006 and her  mother  in  2014).   The  appellant's
    sister had been recognised as a refugee in the United Kingdom  and  her
    husband, with whom she had been living in Ethiopia,  had  been  granted
    leave to enter.  It was conceded that the maintenance and accommodation
    requirements of paragraph 319X could not be met, but it was argued that
    the effect of the Secretary of State's decision was that the  appellant
    would be abandoned as a vulnerable child living alone in Ethiopia.

 3. The judge's findings included reference to the sponsor's  circumstances
    in the United Kingdom where she relies on benefits as  well  as  income
    based  employment  and  support  allowance.   He  observed   that   the
    appellant's stepmother continues to live in Somalia, her father  having
    had two wives.  The concession that the appellant could  not  meet  the
    finance and accommodation requirements of the Rules was in the  context
    of the sponsor having three children, with whom she  lives  in  a  two-
    bedroom property.

 4. After setting out the provisions of paragraph 319X, the judge continued
    at [10(d)] of his decision:

         "10(d)   The sponsor relies on benefits.  She receives income-based
                employment and support allowance.  From her small income she
                sends  money  to   the   appellant   for   the   appellant's
                maintenance.  The appellant and her brother-in-law  live  in
                rented accommodation in Addis Ababa.  They have one room  in
                a multiple occupancy house.  There is a shared  kitchen  and
                shared bathroom there."

 5. After directing himself as to authorities  on  paragraph  352D  of  the
    Immigration Rules the judge concluded at [11(g)]:

         "11(g)   To meet the requirements of paragraph 309A  of  the  rules
                the appellant would have to establish that the sponsor lived
                with them for at least  12  months  immediately  before  the
                application.  The application was submitted  in  July  2017.
                The sponsor and the appellant have been apart  since  August
                2015.  The sponsor left Somalia in October 2015 and  arrived
                in the UK on 30 October 2015.   The  appellant  cannot  fall
                within the definition of "child" for  the  purposes  of  the
                immigration rules."

 6. In relation to Article 8 the judge observed at [16]:

         "16. Article 8 family life exists because the appellant and sponsor
             are siblings and the  appellant  is  only  16  years  of  age.
             Having made that finding, I run  [sic]  into  some  difficulty
             because of the lack of evidence of the quality of their family
             life.  There is evidence that the appellant and sponsor are in
             regular  contact.   There  is  evidence  that  the   appellant
             receives money each month from the sponsor.  There is  a  bond
             of affection  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor.   On  the
             evidence placed before me, that is the extent  of  the  family
             life."

 7. And further at [17] to [19] the judge observed:

         "17. The appellant has lived with her brother in law since December
             2016.  As a matter of choice, he is coming to  join  his  wife
             and children in the UK.  He might leave the appellant alone in
             Ethiopia, but the weight of reliable evidence  tells  me  that
             she lives in a house with other members of her clan, and  that
             there are community  self-help  groups  willing  to  help  the
             appellant in Ethiopia.  The appellant's medical conditions are
             managed by oral medication.  The  appellant  establishes  that
             she suffers  from  (inter  alia)  epilepsy,  but  no  reliable
             evidence is produced of  the  extent  or  the  effect  of  the
             symptoms of her illnesses.   I  am  asked  to  find  that  the
             appellant cannot care for herself independently, but there  is
             no reliable evidence from which I can make that finding.   The
             appellant described herself as a refugee in  Ethiopia;  it  is
             not argued that she is in a precarious position there.

         18.  The appellant has accommodation and maintenance  in  Ethiopia.
             She has access to the medical care that she needs in Ethiopia.
              Although the appellant and  sponsor  emphasise  the  loss  of
             their parents, the transcript of the sponsors asylum interview
             indicates that the appellant's father had two wives.  One  was
             the appellant's late mother.  The  other  is  the  appellant's
             stepmother  who  remains  in  Somalia.   It  was   that   same
             stepmother who arranged and funded the sponsor's flight to the
             UK.  That admincle  of evidence tells me that  there  is  help
             and support available to the appellant from her stepmother.

         19.  The appellant cannot speak  English  and  is  not  financially
             independent.   It  is  already  conceded  that  there  is  not
             adequate maintenance and accommodation for  the  appellant  in
             the UK.  S117B of the  2002  Act  tells  me  that  immigration
             control is in the  public  interest.   There  are  more  s117B
             factors mitigating against the appellant than in her favour."

 8.  After  directing  himself  in  relation  to  Mundeba  (s.55  and  para
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) the judge observed at [21]:

         "21. The appellant is in her mid-teens.  She has accommodation  and
             maintenance.   She  lives   amongst   her   own   clan.    The
             respondent's decision does not change the way that family life
             has been exercised since October 2015.  That family  life  can
             continue to be enjoyed is [sic] in the same way.  The  sponsor
             can continue to send money for  the  appellant's  maintenance.
             The sponsor can visit the appellant in Ethiopia, as she did in
             February 2017."

    Before concluding in [22]:

         "22. S.117B of the 2002 Act tells me that immigration control is in
             the public interest.  There is insufficient reliable  evidence
             before me of factors weighing  against  the  public  interest.
             Insofar as there may be article  8  family  life  between  the
             sponsor and the appellant, I must give greater weight  to  the
             public interest in immigration control.  Having done so I find
             that the decision is not a proportionate breach of  the  right
             to respect for family life."

 9. The grounds of challenge include argument that the judge had failed  to
    have regard to the best interests of the  child  and  had  irrationally
    reached conclusions regarding the  support  that  the  appellant  would
    receive once  her  brother-in-law  left.   The  judge  had  misdirected
    himself in relation to the balancing exercise.

10. In granting  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Scott-Baker  considered  it
    arguable the judge had failed to have regard to the best  interests  of
    the appellant.

11. After hearing submissions from Mr McTaggart, Mr McVeety conceded  error
    by the judge with particular reference to the medical evidence that was
    before him regarding the appellant's state of  health.   That  evidence
    takes the form of a report from St Michael Clinic  in  Addis  Ababa  in
    which the findings are as follows:

         "She presented with complaints of headache, loss of sleep, syncopal
         attack, shortness of breath, and abnormal movement of her  body  of
         long time duration.  The headache is unilateral and is preceded  by
         an aura and sensation of nausea.  She has chronic type of  abnormal
         movement (seizur) [sic].  It is followed by loss  of  consciousness
         and incontinence of  urine  and  biting  of  her  tongue.   She  is
         diagnosed to have Migrain, headaches, Epilepsy, IHD (Ischemic heart
         disease) and Syncopal attack, was on a  follow-up  and  was  taking
         Isosorbiddinitrate 25  mg  P.O.  daily,  Ergotamine  tab  2  daily,
         Phenobarbitone 100 mg P.O. daily, Diclofenac tabs  PRN  and  Multi-
         vitamin tablets TID from April 25, 2017  till  June  15,  2017  but
         showed no improvement.  She is advised to continue  her  medication
         regularly, and have follow up every month in  the  medical  centre.
         She needs MRI examination of the brain as well."

12. The basis of Mr McVeety's understandable concession was  a  failure  by
    the judge to deal adequately with this medical evidence and to consider
    its impact on the appellant's best interests.  It is difficult  to  tie
    the judge's conclusion that the appellant is able to manage her  health
    difficulties by oral medication with the report from the  physician  Dr
    Teklu  at  St  Michael's  Clinic  which  identifies  the   absence   of
    improvement in the appellant's health despite a  regime  of  medication
    between April 25 and June 15 2017.  It is clear  that  the  appellant's
    medical condition is more serious than that identified by the judge.

13. Returning to the grounds of challenge, the extent of the best interests
    considerations can be found in [21] of the judge's decision.  In effect
    the judge appeared to be saying that those best interests  lay  in  the
    appellant remaining in Addis Ababa.  It is also difficult to  reconcile
    that conclusion, if it is  correct,  with  the  force  of  the  medical
    evidence.   A  further  concern  arising  out  of  the  best  interests
    consideration relates to the judge's approach to  family  life  between
    the sponsor and the appellant.  The characteristics and dynamic of that
    relationship are  fully  described  in  paragraph  16  and  are  strong
    indicators of family life.  Nevertheless, in [22] when applying section
    117B of the 2002 Act the judge simply  observed  that  there  "may"  be
    Article 8 family life.

14. I am satisfied the judge materially erred by  failing  to  take  proper
    account of material evidence in reaching his findings and a failure  to
    come to a consistent finding in  respect  of  family  life.   Whilst  I
    consider that those errors fall short of  the  irrationality  challenge
    raised in the second ground, I am nevertheless satisfied  as  to  their
    materiality and that the decision is required to  be  set  aside  as  a
    consequence.

15. The third ground relates to error by the judge in  indicating  that  he
    must give greater weight to the public interest of immigration control.
     Although my initial view was that this  may  have  been  an  error  of
    expression, in the light of the other factors which I  have  identified
    above,  in  my  judgment  the  judge  took  a  wrong  approach  to  the
    proportionality exercise on application of the aspects of  Part  5A  of
    the 2002 Act.

16. As to the disposal of this case, Mr McVeety recognises the force of the
    medical evidence and the need for the appellant to be adequately  cared
    for.  This feeds into her best interests and where  they  lie.   In  my
    judgment those best interests properly lie in being with the sponsor in
    the United Kingdom.  Taking those interests as a primary  consideration
    and  in  the  light  of  the  unchallenged  medical  evidence  and  the
    unchallenged finding by the judge  of  family  life  with  the  sponsor
    coupled with vague  and  uncertain  evidence  as  to  the  support  and
    accommodation that the appellant would be able to turn  to  within  her
    clan, I am satisfied  that  interference  with  family  life  would  be
    disproportionate to the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control.

17. Mr McVeety explained that as this was an entry clearance  case  he  was
    unable to concede the appeal (but with  commendable  candour  confirmed
    that he could informally do so).  I am satisfied that  Mr  McVeety  was
    correct in his approach not only as to error but  also  his  stance  in
    connection with the substance of this appeal which I allow on Article 8
    grounds.


Signed                                  Date 11 October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson










