
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14653/2017
                                                               HU/14657/2017
                                                               HU/14658/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2019                   |On 15 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                         Fatma [C] (first appellant)
                          [H C] (second appellant)
                           [M C] (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Popal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellants have been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beg  who,  in  a  decision   and   reasons
    promulgated on 23  October  2018,  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeals
    against  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  to  refuse   their
    application for entry clearance to settle in the UK with their sponsor,
    Mr Turan [C].  Turan [C] is the husband of the first appellant and  the
    father of the second and third appellants.  The appellants are citizens
    of Turkey.

2.   On 25 October 2017 the ECO refused them entry clearance to the  UK  for
    settlement.  The ECO stated  that  the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
    eligibility requirements under the Rules because  the  first  appellant
    was previously married to her UK sponsor and later  divorced.   Her  UK
    sponsor subsequently married a British  citizen  to  obtain  indefinite
    leave to remain and has now divorced his partner  and  recommenced  his
    relationship with her.  The ECO stated that  this  has  caused  him  to
    doubt that the relationship with the sponsor is genuine and  subsisting
    or that the couple intend to live together permanently in the UK.   The
    ECO accepted that the financial requirements and the  English  language
    requirements under the Rules were met.

3.   The judge recorded  that  at  the  hearing  before  her  there  was  no
    representation on behalf of the respondent.   At  paragraph  3  of  her
    decision she said evidence was given by the sponsor, Mr Turan [C].   He
    relied upon his witness statement.  She then recorded  the  submissions
    made by Ms Popal on behalf of the appellants.

4.   Ms Popal submitted to me that the hearing before the judge  took  seven
    minutes.  The case was on a float list.  She got the sponsor  to  adopt
    his statement as his evidence-in-chief and then tendered him for cross-
    examination but  because  there  was  no  HOPO,  there  was  no  cross-
    examination of the sponsor.  She then made submissions and handed  over
    a copy of the skeleton argument to the judge.  She asked the  judge  if
    there was anything further she could help her with and the  judge  said
    nothing further.  That was the end of the hearing, which had started at
    two minutes past three and concluded by ten minutes past three.

5.   I  heard  submissions  from  Ms  Popal  and  Ms  Isherwood.   Following
    consideration of the submissions, I find that the  judge  made  serious
    errors of law in her decision.

6.   At paragraph 7 she considered the sponsor's evidence  as  contained  in
    paragraph 7 of his witness statement about his meeting and relationship
    with [DA], who became his  second  wife.   In  the  final  sentence  at
    paragraph 7 the judge said "It is common ground that in 2006  and  2007
    the sponsor had a limited command, if any, of English".   I  accept  Ms
    Popal's submission that it was not clear how  the  judge  reached  this
    conclusion.  The ECO had not made this assertion in his refusal letter.
    Ms Isherwood accepted that the judge's finding that there  was  "common
    ground" was an error of law.

7.   I also find that the judge made an error of law  at  paragraph  8  when
    she stated that the sponsor married Ms [A] in order to  gain  entry  to
    the United Kingdom in 2008.  I accept Ms Popal's submission that it was
    not open to the judge to make this finding because it was not a  matter
    that was raised by the ECO and therefore was not in dispute between the
    parties.  In any event, the burden of proof was on the ECO to find that
    his marriage to Ms [A] was a sham.  The only issue raised  by  the  ECO
    was whether the  relationship  between  the  first  appellant  and  the
    sponsor was genuine.  I find that the judge's finding that the  sponsor
    married Ms [A] in order to gain entry to the UK was a  material  error,
    which on its own, materially undermined the judge's decision.

8.   I further find that the judge's findings at paragraphs  6,  7,  10,  11
    and 12 were made without reasons.  Those findings were in  relation  to
    how the appellant met [DA] whilst he was in Turkey on an online chat in
    2006 in  the  same  year  as  his  son  [H]  was  born  and  how  their
    relationship developed after they met physically in Istanbul  in  2007.
    The sponsor's evidence was that his marriage to Ms [A] lasted for about
    five years; they divorced on 17 December  2013.   The  judge's  finding
    that this was a sham marriage was not accompanied by any reasons.

9.   It appears on  the  one  hand  that  the  judge  was  saying  that  the
    sponsor's relationship with Ms [A] was a sham  and  at  the  same  time
    saying that the sponsor's relationship with the first appellant was not
    genuine.  If she was saying that the divorce from the  first  appellant
    was contrived in order for the sponsor to gain entry to the UK to marry
    Ms [A], then her findings were  based  on  suspicion  rather  than  the
    evidence.

10.  Ms Isherwood  argued  that  in  reaching  her  decision  the  judge  at
    paragraph 8 considered that there were no photographs or other credible
    corroborative  evidence  to  support  the  sponsor's  claim  that   his
    relationship with Ms [A] was a genuine relationship and there was  lack
    of detail as to how his first marriage broke down.   I  find  that  the
    lack of photographs of the sponsor's relationship with Ms [A]  and  his
    marriage to Ms [A] formed part of the judge's finding that the marriage
    to Ms [A] was a sham marriage.  This was not an issue that  was  before
    the judge.  It was an issue raised by the judge herself in the  absence
    of a HOPO and without consultation with  the  appellants'  Counsel.   I
    find that the judge materially erred in law in raising an  issue  which
    was not raised by the ECO and reversing the standard of proof in making
    her findings.

11.  Ms Isherwood also said that  the  judge  found  at  paragraph  11  that
    although there was some evidence of financial support  by  the  sponsor
    for the appellant, the printout confirmations from Lloyds Bank were not
    all dated.  I find that this argument is irrelevant in the light of the
    judge's recording at the end of paragraph 1 that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer accepted that the financial requirements under the  Rules  were
    met.

12.  I find that the judge's errors are  material  such  that  her  decision
    cannot stand.

13.  The judge's decision is set aside in order to be remade.

14.  The appellants' appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 13 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
