
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU / 14029 / 2015
                                                         & HU / 14026 / 2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 26 July 2017                               |On 01 August 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between


|           |N H                                            |First Appellant|
|           |H I H                                          |               |
|           |(ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)                     |Second         |
|           |                                               |appellant      |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent     |


                                  Anonymity

Given that this decision refers to members of  the  appellants'  family  who
are minor children, I make an order under r.14(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the  disclosure  or  publication  of
any matter likely to lead members  of  the  public  to  identify  the  minor
children. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them.
This direction applies  to  both  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, of Counsel, instructed by Samuel Louis
                    Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background facts:


 1. The appellants have been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herlihy
    who dismissed their appeals against  the  respondent's  decision  of  2
    December 2015 to refuse their applications of 22 April 2015  for  leave
    to remain on the basis of their rights  to  their  family  and  private
    lives  under  Article  8  of  the  1950  European  Convention  for  the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

 2. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria. The first appellant,  born  on
    18 March 1976, is the mother  of  the  second  appellant,  born  on  25
    February 1998 (not 25 March 1998, as stated at para 34 of  the  judge's
    decision or in 1989 as stated at para 19 of the judge's decision).

 3. As at the date of the hearing before the judge  (20  March  2017),  the
    appellants' family life claims were based on their  relationships  with
    the following individuals:

    i.      A Mr A.H. (hereafter Mr H). He was present and settled  in  the
        United Kingdom and had permanent residence until 28 January 2015 on
        the basis of his marriage to an EEA national.

    ii.     A child, K, born on [ ] 2001 in  Lagos,  Nigeria.  She  is  the
        daughter of the first appellant and Mr H and sister to  the  second
        appellant. She came to the United Kingdom in 2004. As at  the  date
        of the hearing before the judge, she had leave as a dependant of an
        EEA national. This was granted in 2013 (para 38 of the decision).

    iii.    A child, T, born in the UK on [ ] 2005. She is the daughter  of
        the first appellant and Mr H and sister to the second appellant. As
        at the date of the hearing before the  judge,  she  was  a  British
        citizen, having been naturalised on the ground  that,  being  under
        the  age  of  18  years,  she  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
        continuously for at least 10 years. She had  never  had  any  leave
        (para 35 of the judge's decision).

    iv.     A child, R, born in Ireland on [ ] 2008. He is the son  of  the
        first appellant and Mr H and brother to the second appellant. As at
        the date of the hearing  before  the  judge,  he  had  leave  as  a
        dependant of an EEA national. This was granted in 2013 (para 38  of
        the decision).

 4. The first appellant and Mr H were the biological parents of the  second
    appellant, K, T and R. The first appellant's evidence was that she  and
    Mr H were married pursuant to a customary marriage. However, the  first
    appellant said that they were subsequently "divorced"  and  that  Mr  H
    married an EEA national. At  para  35,  the  judge  recorded  that  the
    evidence before the respondent was that the first appellant  and  Mr  H
    were living together with all four of their children.  It  was  claimed
    before the judge that the first appellant and Mr H were estranged.  The
    judge  rejected  this  evidence,  finding  (para  35)  that  the  first
    appellant and Mr H were living together with all four of their children
    and that K, T, R were in also in the care of the  first  appellant  and
    also Mr H.

Relevant immigration histories

 5. The appellants' evidence  before  the  judge  about  their  immigration
    history and that of members  of  their  family  was  inconsistent.  The
    following immigration history combines the  undisputed  facts  and  the
    judge's findings on the inconsistent evidence before her.

 6. The first appellant claimed to have first arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 31 December 2004. The judge found that it is likely that she entered
    the United Kingdom illegally (para  41)  with  her  daughter,  K.  They
    remained without leave. The child, T, was born during  this  period  of
    overstaying. In 2007, the first appellant returned to Nigeria leaving K
    and T in the United Kingdom in the care of Mr H (para 41 of the judge's
    decision).

 7. The judge found that the first and second appellants then travelled  to
    Ireland in 2008 (para 38  of  the  decision)  as  visitors.  The  first
    appellant was pregnant at the time  with  child  R,  who  was  born  in
    Ireland. The judge found that the appellants and the child, R,  arrived
    in the United Kingdom some time in 2009 (paras 32 and 41 of the judge's
    decision).

The grant of permission and the grounds

 8. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

    i.      There is no possibility of the entire family being returned  to
        Nigeria together as Mr H is lawfully resident in the  UK  with  the
        remaining three children. The family will  therefore  be  separated
        for an indeterminate  period.  This  was  evidence  of  exceptional
        circumstances. The judge's decision  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable,
        perverse and irrational.

    ii.     In the alternative, the factual matrix amounted  to  compelling
        circumstances.

    iii.    At para 44  of  her  decision,  the  judge  took  into  account
        irrelevant matters.  Given  that  Mr  H  and  the  remaining  three
        children were lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom,  they  were
        eligible to access the National Health Service.

    iv.     The judge's credibility findings were unreasonable  and  unduly
        harsh.  The  appellants  had  given  evidence  in   a   frank   and
        straightforward manner.

 9. Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes granted permission. He made no reference to
    the grounds. He stated that the grounds were not well-drafted but  that
    it was arguable that the appellants enjoyed family life at the date  of
    the decision with individuals who were at least settled in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of evidence that  the  judge  did  not  reject  as
    untrue and that, if that is the case, then it  was  arguable  that  the
    approach taken to s.117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") was flawed.

The judge's decision

10. In summary, the judge found as follows:

    i.      The first appellant could not bring herself within the ambit of
        Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules in  relation  to  leave  as  a
        partner or on the basis of her private life (para 26).

    ii.     The second appellant could not benefit from  s.117B(6)  of  the
        2002 Act (para 34).

    iii.    The evidence before her concerning the immigration  history  of
        the appellants and members of their family was not credible (paras,
        31, 32, 33 and 36)

    iv.     The evidence of the appellants that the first appellant and  Mr
        H were estranged was not credible (paras  33  and  35).  As  stated
        above, the judge found that it  was  very  likely  that  the  first
        appellant and Mr H were living  together  and  that  the  remaining
        children, that is, K, T and R, were also in the care of Mr H  (para
        35).

    v.      The judge said that she was struck by the very poor immigration
        history of the first appellant (para 31). At para 41, she said that
        the first appellant's presence in the  United  Kingdom  had  always
        been precarious and her immigration history an unedifying one, that
        she had made a conscious decision to develop  family  life  in  the
        United Kingdom knowing that she had no legitimate expectation  that
        she and her family could do so and  that  she  made   the  decision
        presumably with the support of Mr H to leave K and T  in the United
        Kingdom at a time when they had no lawful right to remain. At  para
        42, she said that the first appellant had gone to ground  and  made
        no attempt to regularise her stay, failing to do so even after Mr H
        and the other children had been granted EEA residency in 2013.

    vi.     The judge did not find the evidence of Mr H credible as to  how
        he acquired his EEA residency and she did not find it credible that
        the appellants were unable to provide the name  or  nationality  of
        the EEA national (para 36). She had earlier (at para 33)  expressed
        surprise that Mr H had not come to court to give  evidence  and  no
        evidence was submitted of his immigration history.

    vii.    The judge found that  the  first  appellant  had  not  given  a
        truthful account of her family connections in Nigeria. She found it
        likely that the first appellant probably had at some  stage  worked
        in Nigeria (para 37). At para 38, the judge said that it was likely
        that the entire family had more family ties to Nigeria than subsist
        in the United Kingdom where they had not disclosed the existence of
        any family.  At para 45, she found that the appellants  are  likely
        to be able to access support from friends and family in Nigeria.

    viii.   At para 38, the judge said that she was not satisfied that  the
        appellants were in any way divorced from the culture  and  familial
        links that they have to Nigeria, that "it was always open" to Mr  H
        and the remaining children to join the appellants in Nigeria,  that
        the remaining three children were only  granted  EEA  residency  in
        2013, that it was clear that the appellants had  lived  apart  from
        the remaining family members for lengthy periods in the past,  that
        she did  not  find  that  there  were  likely  to  be  any  serious
        difficulties on return to  Nigeria,  particularly  with  regard  to
        language as English was so widely spoken, that there was no  reason
        why the  second  appellant  would  not  be  able  to  continue  his
        education in Nigeria, that there was no evidence  that  educational
        provision would not be available for the other  children  and  that
        there was no evidence that any of the other children or the  second
        appellant had any education or health difficulties.

    ix.     The judge accepted that the appellants  had  developed  private
        lives in the United Kingdom but found that  the  first  appellant's
        private life was  largely in respect of her family and  the  second
        appellant's mainly limited to friends from school and college (para
        39).

    x.      The judge noted that  the  first  appellant  had  produced   no
        evidence  of  their  family's  financial  situation,   income   and
        resources or integration into the United Kingdom although there was
        some evidence  of  the  income  of  Mr  H  who  confirmed  that  he
        maintained the family (para 40).

      xi.   At para 44,  she  said  that  there  were  strong  reasons  for
        refusing the second appellant's leave to remain on the basis of  10
        year's residence notwithstanding the significant weight  that  must
        be given to the period of residence. She took into account the fact
        that the actions  of  the  second  appellant's  parents  had  shown
        complete and repeated disregard for immigration  control  and  that
        the appellants and the remaining children had been the consumer  of
        significant public  support  in  terms  of  maternity,  health  and
        educational provision.

    xii.    At para 45, the judge found, inter alia,  that  the  appellants
        would be returning as a family unit  with  the  benefit  of  skills
        acquired in the  United  Kingdom  to  a  country  where  the  first
        appellant and Mr H had spent all  their  formative  years  and  had
        lived for the majority of their  lives,  that  the  appellants  are
        likely to be able to access support  from  friends  and  family  in
        Nigeria, that family life could be continued in Nigeria,  and  that
        "it is open" to Mr H and the remaining children  to  join  them  in
        Nigeria so that the disruption to their family life will be minimal
        when balanced against the  need for effective immigration control.

    xiii.   The judge concluded that the decision to remove the  appellants
        would not be disproportionate (para 45).  They  had  not  disclosed
        sufficiently compelling and compassionate circumstances which would
        have justified the grant of discretionary leave by  the  respondent
        (para 46).

11. The above is merely a summary. It is important  to  have  in  mind  the
    judge's reasoning in full, which is set out at para 25 onwards  of  her
    decision and which I now quote.

            "25. The appellants cannot raise a ground  of  appeal  that  the
             decision was not in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules  as
             the decision was taken after 6 April 2015 and an appeal on this
             ground is no longer available.  However  consideration  of  the
             Immigration Rules and the extent to which the appellants do  or
             do not meet them  is  relevant  to  the  consideration  of  the
             proportionality of the decision under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
             The In R (Amin) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
             [2014] EWHC 2322 (Admin) it was held that paragraphs 276 ADE  -
             276 DH and  Appendix  FM  do  not  constitute  a  comprehensive
             Article 8 Code.  Thus it is recognised that a  claim  based  on
             Article  8  can,  in  principle,  succeed  either   under   the
             prescriptive Article 8 regimes within the Rules or outwith  the
             Rules, residually.  In MM (Lebanon) v Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 the Court of Appeal, in
             effect, disapproved the suggestion in R (Nagre) v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), at [29],
             that there is an intermediate hurdle to be  overcome  prior  to
             consideration of Article 8 claims outwith the Rules.


         26.     It is not disputed that the [first appellant] cannot  bring
             herself within the ambit of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
             Rules in relation to leave to remain as a partner  or  on  the
             basis of her private life.  However, it is claimed that at the
             date of the hearing the [second appellant] has now been in the
             United Kingdom for over 7 years  and  that  it  would  not  be
             reasonable to expect him to leave the  United  Kingdom  albeit
             that he is now an adult.  The Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department's own guidance states that the longer the child has
             been in the United Kingdom the more the balance will swing  in
             terms of it being unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom and strong  reasons  will  be  required  in
             order to refuse a case with continuous residence of more  than
             7 years. It is the Respondent's  decision  that  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect the appellants to return to  Nigeria  and
             that they remaining family members could  join  them  if  they
             chose to do so.


         27.     Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002 as amended by Section 19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
             provides (6) in the case of a person  who  is  not  liable  to
             deportation, the public interest does not require the person's
             removal where-


                 (a)   the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.


         28.     Accordingly the fact that a child has  been  here  7  years
             must  be  given   significant   weight   when   applying   the
             reasonableness  test  and  that  there  must   be   a   strong
             expectation that the child's best interests will be to  remain
             in the United Kingdom with his parents as  part  of  a  family
             unit which  will  rank  as  a  primary  consideration  in  the
             proportionality assessment.


         29.     In considering this case, I have had regard to a number  of
             leading decisions, the most important of which is the  Supreme
             Court judgment in ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC 4,  subsequent
             decisions  of  AJ  (India)  and  others  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA
             Civ 1191,  together  with  a  number  of  Tribunal  decisions
             including LD (Article 8 - best interests  of  child)  Zimbabwe
             [2010] UKUT 00278 (IAC), E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests  of
             child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) and MK (best  interests
             of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC).  It has clearly  been
             established that the interests  of  the  child  is  a  primary
             consideration in immigration cases and that the welfare of the
             child is an integral part of the Article  8  assessment.   The
             primary interest of the child falls to  be  considered  within
             the context of the particular family circumstances as well  as
             consideration of the need to maintain immigration control.   I
             also note that the Tribunal held in EM and others  (Returnees)
             Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) at paragraph 308:


                       "Even where neither the children nor the parents  has
                 the status  of  a  British  citizen,  the  welfare  of  the
                 children  is  a  primary  consideration  in  administrative
                 action affecting their future and accordingly  the  balance
                 of competing interests under Article 8  must  reflect  this
                 factor as a consideration of the first  order,  albeit  not
                 the only one (see LD... and ZH (Tanzania)...)."


         30.     In E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011]
             UKUT 00315 (IAC) the head note to the decision states:


                 "(i)  The correct starting point in considering the welfare
                 and best interests of a young child would be that it is  in
                 the best interests of a child to live with and  be  brought
                 up by his or her parents, subject to any very strong contra-
                 indication.  Where it is in the best interests of  a  child
                 to live with and be brought up by his or her parents,  then
                 the child's removal with his parents does not  involve  any
                 separation of family life.


                 (ii)  Absent other factors, the  reason  why  a  period  of
                 substantial residence as  a  child  may  become  a  weighty
                 consideration in the balance of competing considerations is
                 that in the  course  of  such  time  roots  are  put  down,
                 personal identities are developed, friendships  are  formed
                 and links are made with the community  outside  the  family
                 unit.  The degree to which these elements of  private  life
                 are forged and therefore the weight  to  be  given  to  the
                 passage of time will depend upon the facts in each case.


                 (iii) During a child's very early years, he or she will  be
                 primarily  focused  on  self  and  the  caring  parents  or
                 guardian.  Long residence once the child is likely to  have
                 formed ties outside the family is likely  to  have  greater
                 impact on his or her well-being.


                 (iv)  Those who have their  families  with  them  during  a
                 period of study in the UK must do so in the  light  of  the
                 expectation of return.


                 (v)   The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  was
                 not ruling that the ability of a  young  child  to  readily
                 adapt to life in a new country was  an  irrelevant  factor,
                 rather that the adaptability of the child in each case must
                 be assessed and is not a conclusive  consideration  on  its
                 own."


         31.     In considering the appeal before me I am struck by the very
             poor immigration history of the [first appellant].   It  would
             appear that the [first appellant] was  an  over-stayer  [sic],
             having claimed to have initially entered the United Kingdom on
             the 31st December 2004.  By this  time  she  already  had  two
             children, [the second appellant] who  she  said  she  left  in
             Nigeria in the care of a neighbour and her daughter  [K]  whom
             she says accompanied her to the United Kingdom and at the time
             was aged three.  The [first appellant's] daughter [T] was born
             in the United Kingdom on 14 November 2005 during the period of
             the [first appellant's] unlawful stay in  the  United  Kingdom
             following her entry in 2004.


         32.     The [first appellant] has claimed in her witness  statement
             that she and [the second appellant] re-entered the UK in  July
             2007 aged 9, however this is clearly an incorrect claim as  in
             her oral evidence  she  admitted  that  she  and  [the  second
             appellant] had entered Ireland in 2008 where she had  remained
             for over a year, at the time of her entry she was pregnant and
             expecting her son [R], who was born in  Ireland  on  the  29th
             January 2008. [The second appellant's] own evidence  was  that
             he had attended school in Ireland for about a year and this is
             consistent with the [first  appellant's]  oral  evidence  that
             she, [the second  appellant]  and  [R]  entered  the  UK  from
             Ireland sometime in  2009.   The  earliest  evidence  for  the
             [second appellant's] presence in the  UK  is  the  certificate
             from [X Y School] claiming that he attended  the  school  from
             March 2009 to July 2009.   Accordingly  at  the  date  of  the
             application [the second appellant] had not been in the UK  for
             7 years.


         33.     I can place no  weight  on  the  statement  of  the  [first
             appellant's] husband, [Mr H],  and  [the  second  appellant's]
             father  when  he  claims  in  paragraph  2  that  [the  second
             appellant] arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2007 as  this
             is not borne out by the evidence  of  the  [first  appellant],
             [the second  appellant]  or  the  objective  evidence.   I  am
             surprised the [first appellant's] husband did not come to give
             evidence and it is now claimed that the [first appellant]  and
             her husband are estranged, (although he spends a  considerable
             amount of time at the home).  I  am  surprised  there  was  no
             evidence submitted of the immigration history  of  the  [first
             appellant's] partner and the history of their relationship.


         34.     [The second appellant] turned 18 on the 25th March  2016  I
             therefore find that at the date of the  decision  he  had  not
             lived in the UK for 7 years as a minor and that at the date of
             the hearing he was already an adult having now reached the age
             of 19.  I do not find that [the second appellant] can  benefit
             from Section 117B (vi).


         35.     In considering the appeal before me and the best  interests
             of the [first appellant's] remaining children I note that  one
             child is a British citizen on the basis of having been born in
             the United Kingdom in 2005 when the [first appellant] and  her
             husband were both over-stayers [sic]  and  living  in  the  UK
             illegally.  The [first appellant's] daughter [T] has  acquired
             British citizenship by virtue of her having lived 10 years  in
             the United Kingdom having been born here, although  she  never
             had any leave.  The  remaining  two  children  have  leave  as
             dependants  of  their  father  who  himself  was  granted  EEA
             permanent residence on the basis of his  marriage  to  an  EEA
             national.  The evidence before the  respondent  was  that  the
             [first appellant] and her partner were  living  together  with
             their 4 children including [the  second  appellant].   I  find
             there is no objective evidence to support  the  claim  by  the
             [first appellant] and [the second appellant] that their father
             has become estranged from the family and I find it very likely
             that the [first appellant] and her partner are living together
             and that the remaining three children are also in the care  of
             the [first appellant's] husband.


         36.     I have not found the [first appellant] to  be  an  entirely
             credible witness with regard to the history of her immigration
             status and that of her husband as to how he acquired  his  EEA
             residency as it would appear that there are periods  when  the
             [first appellant] and her husband are in a relationship having
             had 4 children together but at the same  time  it  is  claimed
             that he is in a subsisting relationship and is married  to  an
             EEA national. Also I do not find it is not credible [sic] that
             the [first appellant] and [the second appellant]  were  unable
             to give any evidence  about  the  EEA  national  who  was  the
             stepmother of the remaining  children.  They  were  unable  to
             provide her name or nationality and I do not find it  credible
             that the [first appellant] did not know  this  information  if
             her children were living with their father and his EEA spouse.




         37.     I am not satisfied that the [first appellant] has  given  a
             truthful account of her family connections in Nigeria.  It  is
             clear from [the second appellant's] evidence that  his  father
             had his own watch shop in Nigeria and he has  also  spoken  of
             his mother's sisters and grandparents in Nigeria.  It is clear
             that the [first appellant] attended  school  and  remained  in
             Nigeria until coming to the UK in 2004 at the age of 27 and  I
             find it likely that she probably had at some stage  worked  in
             Nigeria.


         38.     I  accept  that  [the  second  appellant]  and  the  [first
             appellant] have not lived in Nigeria since 2008 when they left
             to go to Ireland.  However, I am not satisfied that  they  are
             in any way divorced from the culture and familial  links  that
             they have to Nigeria as they have been living with the  [first
             appellant's] partner and [the second appellant's]  father  and
             their other children/siblings.  I see no reason why the [first
             appellant] and [the second appellant] cannot return to Nigeria
             where [the second appellant]  undertook  his  initial  primary
             education and where the [first  appellant]  was  educated  and
             spent her formative life.  It is always  open  to  the  [first
             appellant's] husband and the father of [the second  appellant]
             and their remaining children to join them with the rest of the
             family in Nigeria. The  remaining  three  children  were  only
             granted EEA residency in 2013 and it is clear that the  [first
             appellant] and [the second appellant] have  lived  apart  from
             the remaining family members for lengthy periods in the  past.
              I do not find that on return to Nigeria there are  likely  to
             be  any  serious  difficulties  particularly  with  regard  to
             language as English is so widely spoken and I  see  no  reason
             why [the second appellant] would not be able to  continue  his
             education in Nigeria.  Although removal to Nigeria would cause
             some disruption in  his  education,  there  is  no  reason  to
             suppose that he cannot achieve his potential.   There  was  no
             evidence that educational provision would not be available for
             the other children in Nigeria if the decision was made by  the
             family that they would all return as one unit.  There  was  no
             evidence in respect of any of the  younger  children  or  [the
             second appellant]  that  they  had  any  education  or  health
             difficulties and it is likely that the entire family will have
             more family ties to Nigeria than subsist in the United Kingdom
             where they have not disclosed the existence of any family.


         39.      Undoubtedly  the  [first  appellant]   and   [the   second
             appellant] will have developed private lives within the United
             Kingdom as have the remaining family members but there was  no
             evidence with regard to those links and the  extent  of  their
             links within the community outside of the family.  I find that
             links that [the second appellant] has developed are likely  to
             be mainly limited to friends from school and college and  with
             regard to the [first appellant], largely  in  respect  of  her
             family.


         40.     In assessing the public interest under Article 8(2) I  have
             kept  in  mind  the  provisions  of  Section   117B   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  by
             Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.  The [first appellant]
             developed her family and private life in the United Kingdom at
             a time when she knew that the development and  continuance  of
             the same was dependent upon meeting the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  The public  interest  provisions  are  now
             contained  in  primary  legislation  and  are  mandatory   and
             Parliament has determined it is in the public  interest  while
             being in the United Kingdom that the person who seeks entry is
             financially independent because they will not be a  burden  on
             taxpayers.  The [first  appellant]  produced  no  evidence  of
             their financial situation, income and resources or integration
             into the United Kingdom although there  was  evidence  of  the
             income from the [first appellant's] husband who confirms  that
             he maintains the family.


         41.     I find that the [first appellant's] presence in the  United
             Kingdom has always been precarious from the  outset  and  that
             her immigration history is an unedifying one in  that  she  is
             likely to have entered the United Kingdom  illegally  in  2004
             (she produced no evidence of lawful entry) with  her  daughter
             [K] and remained without leave until 2007 when she claims  she
             returned to Nigeria alone leaving her daughter behind  in  the
             care of her husband. During her period of overstaying she  had
             another  daughter  [T]  born  in  November  2005.  The  [first
             appellant] and her husband knew that from 2004 that  they  had
             no lawful right to remain in the United Kingdom  but  remained
             to  pursue  their  family  and  private  life.   The   [second
             appellant] was born in Nigeria and brought  illegally  to  the
             United Kingdom from Ireland by the [first appellant]  in  2009
             with the support of her husband (who she  says  paid  for  the
             costs of their travel from Nigeria to Ireland), accompanied by
             [R] who had been born in Ireland so that a conscious  decision
             was made by [the first appellant] to develop a family life  in
             the  United  Kingdom  knowing  that  she  had  no   legitimate
             expectation that she and her family could  do  so.   She  also
             made the decision, presumably with the support of her  husband
             to leave her two children [K] and [T] in the United Kingdom at
             a time when they had no lawful right to remain.


         42.     I  have  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  the  [first
             appellant] sought to  develop  her  private  and  family  life
             within  the  United  Kingdom  in  the   knowledge   that   her
             immigration status and that  of  [the  second  appellant]  was
             precarious and unlawful. It is  clear  that  that  the  [first
             appellant] appears to be someone who had gone  to  ground  and
             made no attempt to regularise her stay; failing to do so  even
             after  husband  and  other  children  had  been  granted   EEA
             residency in 2013. The appellants could have had no legitimate
             expectation of being allowed to remain and integrate.


         43.     In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874
             it was held that despite finding, in a family's appeal against
             a decision to remove them, that  the  best  interests  of  the
             children lay in  continuing  their  education  in  the  United
             Kingdom  with  both  parents  also  remaining  in  the  United
             Kingdom, the Tribunal had been entitled to find that the  need
             to maintain immigration control outweighed the children's best
             interests.


         44.     I have also considered  the  decision  in  MA  (Pakistan  &
             Others) 2016 EWCA Civ 705 which expressly stated that once the
             7 year residence requirement is satisfied there  needs  to  be
             strong reasons for refusing leave.   I  find  that  there  are
             strong reasons for refusing the [second  appellant]  leave  to
             remain on the basis of 10 year's residence notwithstanding the
             significant weight  that  must  be  given  to  the  period  of
             residence. I accept that the leave  to  remain  in  breach  of
             immigration control was not made by [the second appellant]  as
             he was a minor at the time and that he must not be blamed  for
             the actions of his parents.  However, none of  the  appellants
             are  British  citizens  and  the   action   of   [the   second
             appellant's] parents has [sic]  shown  complete  and  repeated
             disregard for immigration control.   The  appellants  and  her
             remaining children  have  been  the  consumer  of  significant
             public support in terms of maternity, health  and  educational
             provisions,  all  of  which  have  been  incurred   when   the
             appellants had absolutely no  entitlement  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom and these are relevant factors when considering
             the public interest and the proportionality exercise.


         45.     I find that the appellants will  be  returning  to  Nigeria
             together as a family unit  and  with  the  benefit  of  skills
             acquired in the United Kingdom, to a country where the  [first
             appellant] and her husband spent all their formative years and
             have lived for the majority of their lives and I find that the
             appellants are likely  to  be  able  to  access  support  from
             friends and family in Nigeria.   I find the decision to remove
             the appellants to Nigeria is not disproportionate  given  that
             family life can be continued by them in Nigeria and that it is
             open to the [first appellant's] husband and remaining children
             to join them in Nigeria so that the  disruption  to  the  same
             will be minimal when balanced against the need  for  effective
             immigration control.


         46.      Having  considered  all  the  factors  as   part   of   my
             consideration of the appellants' Article 8 claims, I find that
             the appellants have not disclosed sufficiently compelling  and
             compassionate circumstances which  would  have  justified  the
             respondent in the grant of discretionary leave.


         47.     In the light of the above  conclusions,  I  find  that  the
             decisions appealed against would not cause the United  Kingdom
             to be in breach of the law or its obligations under the  ECHR.
             I dismiss the human rights appeals.

      (My emphasis)

Assessment

12. As at the date of the  appellants'  application  for  leave  (22  April
    2015), the second appellant was aged 17 years but had not lived in  the
    United Kingdom continuously for a  period  of  at  least  7  years.  He
    therefore did not qualify under the terms  of  para  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules which requires the minimum period of residence  of  7
    years to be satisfied as  at  the  date  of  the  application.  Section
    117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  taken  together  with  the  definition  of
    "qualifying child" in s.117D(1) does not require the minimum  residence
    period of 7 years to be satisfied as at the date of the application; it
    can be satisfied as at the date of the hearing. However, by the date of
    the hearing before the judge, the second appellant had turned 18  years
    of age and therefore did not  satisfy  the  definition  of  "qualifying
    child" in s.117D(1) on that basis, as the judge (correctly)  stated  at
    para 34 of her decision.

13. The judge noted that child T was a British citizen and  considered  the
    best interests of K, R and T at paras 35 and 43.

14. At para 38, the judge said, inter alia, that:

            "It is always open to [Mr H] and [K,  T  and  R]  to  join  [the
        appellants] with the rest of the family in Nigeria. [K,  T  and  R]
        were only granted EEA residency in 2013 and it is clear  that  [the
        appellants] have lived apart from the remaining family members  for
        lengthy periods in the past...."

      and at para 45,she said, inter alia:

             "...  it  is  open  to  the  [first  appellant's]  husband  and
        remaining children to join them in Nigeria ..."

15. At the hearing, Ms Nnamani and Mr Tarlow agreed that it was implicit in
    the judge's reasoning that the judge had accepted that  the  appellants
    enjoyed family life with Mr H and their remaining three  children.  The
    parties then addressed me on the issues I raised, which  are  described
    in the following paragraph. I record that Ms Nnamani did not address me
    on the grounds as lodged.

16. I asked the parties to address me on the following  issues  which  were
    not raised in the appellants'  grounds  or  in  the  decision  granting
    permission:

    i.      Whether the judge had implicitly considered whether it would be
        reasonable for T to leave the United Kingdom, given  that  she  had
        referred  to  s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  and   the   issue   of
        reasonableness and whether it could  be  inferred  from  the  words
        "open to" at paras 38 and 45 that the judge had made a  finding  of
        reasonableness in relation to T or whether the judge  had  in  fact
        applied the wrong test.

            Ms Nnamani submitted that the judge had not  considered  whether
        it would be reasonable for T to leave the United Kingdom  and  that
        saying that it would be "open" to a child to join family members in
        Nigeria was not the same as saying that it would be reasonable  for
        the child to leave the United Kingdom. Mr Tarlow submitted that, if
        the judge's decision is considered as a whole, it is implicit  that
        she had considered whether it would be reasonable for  T  to  leave
        the United Kingdom and that it is implicit from the words:  "it  is
        always open" that the judge found that it would be reasonable for T
        to leave the United Kingdom.

      ii.   Whether the judge had considered whether it would be  reasonable
        for K, as a qualifying child, to leave the United Kingdom.

            Mr  Tarlow  accepted  that  the  judge  should  have  considered
        whether it would be reasonable for K to leave  the  United  Kingdom
        and that she did not do so. However, he submitted that,  given  the
        judge's implicit finding that it would be reasonable for T to leave
        the United Kingdom and the very limited evidence  that  was  before
        the judge, any oversight was not material.  The  judge  could  only
        have concluded that it was reasonable for K  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom if she had considered the issue.

17. I have carefully considered the judge's decision. Whilst  I  accept  Ms
    Nnamani's submission that, at para 44, the judge  was  considering  the
    position of the second appellant, I have concluded that, in saying that
    it was "open" to the remaining  children  to  join  the  appellants  in
    Nigeria, the judge was in effect finding that it would be reasonable to
    expect the three remaining children (i.e. T, K  and  R)  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. She cannot have meant anything else, in  my  judgement.
    The judge had specifically reminded herself of the wording of s.117B(6)
    and demonstrated that she was aware that the question she had to decide
    is whether it was reasonable for a child to whom s.117B(6)  applies  to
    leave the United Kingdom. It is clear that she was aware that T  was  a
    British citizen. She made a specific finding that K came to the  UK  in
    2004. She was aware that K had EEA residency granted in 2013.  She  was
    also aware that the best interests of a child need to be considered  as
    a paramount consideration.

18. I have therefore concluded that the only proper inference is  that,  in
    stating that it was "open" to the three remaining children to join  the
    appellants in Nigeria, the judge was making a finding that it would  be
    reasonable for all three of the remaining children - i.e. T, K and R  -
    to leave the United Kingdom. Indeed, her finding  that  it  was  always
    "open" to the remaining  three  children  to  join  the  appellants  in
    Nigeria would make no sense otherwise, as it is  tantamount  to  saying
    that this experienced judge was saying that it was open to the children
    to leave the United Kingdom even if it was not reasonable for  them  to
    so.

19. The judge plainly took into account all  relevant  considerations  that
    applied to all of the children in reaching her finding,  which  (in  my
    judgment) she made implicitly, that it would be reasonable for T and  K
    to leave the United Kingdom. She was also aware of the fact that, if  a
    child had been continuously resident in the United Kingdom for 7  years
    or more, there had to be strong reasons for refusing leave  (para  44).
    The judge made a specific finding that  the  entire  family  have  more
    family ties to Nigeria than subsist in the United  Kingdom  (para  38).
    The  judge  also  said  there  was  no  evidence  that  "the  remaining
    children", i.e.  including  T  and  K,  had  any  education  or  health
    difficulties and that there was no evidence that educational  provision
    would not be available "the other children", i.e.  including  T  and  K
    (para 38).

20. It is plain that the judge took into account the  fact  that  T  was  a
    British citizen and that she was aware of K's length of residence.

21. True it is that one would ordinarily expect a judge to engage with  the
    evidence submitted concerning the private life ties of the  child  when
    considering whether it would be reasonable for the child to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and whether this would be in the best interests of  each
    child. However, the evidence before the judge  concerning  the  private
    life ties of T and K was extremely limited, as follows:

    i.      In relation to T, Ms Nnamani drew my attention to the following
    evidence:

            a.   A copy of her birth certificate (E12 of  the  respondent's
    bundle).

            b.   A letter from her primary school dated 9 October 2005  (D1
             of the respondent's bundle)   which  simply  confirmed  that  T
             attended the school.

            c.   A  letter  from  the  local  council  which  confirms  T's
             residence at her home (page E1 of the respondent's bundle).

            d.   A school report for summer 2016 and one for  summer  2014,
             at pages 28-31 of the appellants' bundle.

      ii.   In relation to K, Ms Nnamani drew my attention to the  following
    evidence:

            a.   A letter dated 13 October 2015 from  the  academy  attended
             by K, at page D2 of the respondent's bundle. This conforms that
             she was enrolled on their register in September 2012  and  that
             she is currently in year 10.

            b.   Copies  of  her  passport,  at  pages  E1  and  E2  of  the
    respondent's bundle.

            c.    A  letter  from  the  local  council  which  confirms  K's
             residence at her home (page E1 of the respondent's bundle).

            d.   Attendance record for the period from 1 September  2016  to
             19 September 2016 at page 25 of the appellants' bundle.

            e.   Her year 10 results at page 26 of the appellants' bundle.

22. I pause here to note that the the evidence concerning K's circumstances
    that was before the judge was  even  more  limited  than  the  evidence
    concerning T.

23. It was not suggested before me that there was anything  in  T's  school
    reports that required specific consideration in reaching a decision  as
    to whether it was reasonable for T to leave the United Kingdom. It  was
    not suggested that there was anything in T's school  reports  that  was
    not  adequately  covered  by  the  judge's  finding  that   educational
    provision was available and that there were no difficulties experienced
    by T in her education. Accordingly, I have concluded that the fact that
    the judge did not mention T's school reports does not mean that she did
    not take them into account when reaching her finding, implicitly  made,
    that it would be reasonable for T to leave the  United  Kingdom.  There
    was no evidence before the judge of any private life  ties  established
    by T beyond her life in school.

24. Likewise, it was not suggested before me that there was anything in the
    evidence in relation to  K  that  required  specific  consideration  in
    reaching a decision as to whether it was reasonable for T to leave  the
    United Kingdom. It was not suggested that there was  anything  in  such
    evidence that was not adequately covered by the  judge's  finding  that
    educational provision was available and that there were no difficulties
    experienced by K in her education. Accordingly, I have  concluded  that
    the fact that the judge did not mention the specific evidence submitted
    in relation to K does not mean that she did not take them into  account
    when reaching her finding, implicitly made, that it would be reasonable
    for K to leave the United Kingdom. There was  no  evidence  before  the
    judge of any private life ties established by  K  beyond  her  life  in
    school. Indeed, as stated above, the evidence in relation to K was even
    more limited than was the evidence in relation to T.

25. There was no specific evidence before the judge that the best interests
    of T or K as a paramount consideration required their remaining in  the
    United Kingdom. The judge was left to make  assumptions  on  the  basis
    that  educational  and  health  provision  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    generally considered to be to a higher standard than  in  Nigeria.  Her
    finding, that there was educational and  health  provision  in  Nigeria
    dealt adequately with this point, in the absence of  specific  evidence
    on the issue.

26. For all of these reasons, I have concluded that the judge did  not  err
    in law in reaching her findings, implicitly  made,  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for T and for K to leave the United Kingdom.

27. I acknowledge that Mr Tarlow accepted that the judge  had  not  made  a
    finding as to whether it would be reasonable for K to leave the  United
    Kingdom. However, I am unable to reach that conclusion for the  reasons
    given above. I also acknowledge that para 4 of the Respondent's "Reply"
    under rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    appears  to  accept  that  the  judge  "would  have  had  to   consider
    [s.117b(6)]in relation to the [first appellant]", which indicates  that
    it was accepted in the respondent's "Reply"  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider s.117B(6). However, the question whether the judge had made  a
    material error of law is a question for me to decide.  Having  had  the
    benefit of considering  the  judge's  decision  more  fully  since  the
    hearing, I have reached my conclusions as set out above.

28. I should make it clear that, in reaching these conclusions, I have  had
    very much in mind the clear importance of an individual  assessment  in
    the case of each child whether it would be reasonable for the child  to
    leave the United Kingdom  and  individual  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of each child. I have nevertheless reached the conclusions  I
    have reached given, as I have said, the very  limited  evidence  before
    the judge concerning the circumstances of T and K. Such evidence as she
    did have (which was even more limited in the case of K than it  was  in
    the case of T) did not require specific mention by  the  judge,  in  my
    judgement. The judge was aware of the essential principles in  relation
    to the best interests  of  children  and  the  requirement  for  strong
    reasons for refusing leave where there has been continuous residence by
    a child in excess of 7 years.

29. However, even if I am wrong in  reaching the conclusion I reached at my
    para 26 above and even if the judge  did  err  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider whether it would be reasonable  for  T  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and/or whether it would be reasonable for K to leave the United
    Kingdom, any such error(s) are not  material,  for  the  reasons  given
    above.  There was, quite frankly, no evidence before the judge that, on
    any reasonable view, could have led  her  to  find,  even  if  she  had
    overlooked considering the issue of reasonableness  in  relation  to  T
    and/or K, that it would be unreasonable for T or K to leave the  United
    Kingdom. The contents of the documents listed at my para 21 above  were
    simply  insufficient,  given  the  judge's  adverse  reasoning  in  her
    assessment from para 25 onwards. This is more  so  in  relation  to  K,
    given the more limited evidence before the judge in relation to K  than
    was the case in connection with T and that K was not a British citizen.

30. I record that Ms Nnamani did not pursue the grounds of  appeal  in  the
    application for permission to appeal, which I have summarised at para 8
    above. The appellants  lodged  written  submissions  in  reply  to  the
    respondent's Reply under cover of a letter dated 21 July 2017, which  I
    have considered. There is no substance in these grounds,  which  I  can
    deal with briefly as follows:

    i.      To the extent that the grounds contend that the judge erred  at
        para 44, they ignore the fact that EEA residency was  only  granted
        in 2013, whereas it is clear that K has received education  in  the
        United Kingdom since her arrival in 2004, R since  his  arrival  in
        2009 and T was born in the UK before she became a  British  citizen
        and has  also  accessed  education  prior  to  becoming  a  British
        citizen.

    ii.     The remaining grounds, including the challenge to  the  judge's
        assessment of credibility, do not demonstrate any error of  law  in
        the judge's decision. They simply amount to no more than an attempt
        to re-argue the case.

Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Herlihy  did  not  involve
the making of any material errors of law.





[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 31 July 2017
