
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/14400/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13th October  2017                      |On 20th October 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                BIBEK GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbola (instructed by Everest Law Solicitors)

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge AMS Green) promulgated on 10  June  2017.  Judge  Green
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against an Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision to refuse him leave to enter the UK to join  his  mother,  the
    Sponsor.

 2. The background to this case is  that  the  Appellant  was  born  on  21
    September 2001.  He  and  the  Sponsor  are  nationals  of  Nepal.  The
    Appellant's parents divorced in 2010 and in 2011 the Appellant's mother
    secured entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse.  As  her
    husband had insufficient funds to sponsor him the  Appellant  was  left
    behind in Nepal by his mother where he lived with  his  maternal  uncle
    and his wife.

 3. The Appellant's mother was subsequently  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and then made an application for the Appellant join her  in  the
    UK. That application was refused, the Entry Clearance Officer not being
    satisfied that she exercised sole responsibility for the Appellant. The
    Appellant appealed and that  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Blandy. Judge Blandy made numerous adverse  credibility  findings
    in relation to the Sponsor. The Sponsor relied on a letter purported to
    have been written by the Appellant's father supporting the application.
     However when challenged at the hearing she confessed to having written
    that letter herself with the assistance of a friend. Judge Blandy found
    the Sponsor did not have sole parental responsibility either  prior  to
    the date of the application or at the date of  the  hearing.  He  found
    that while there was some evidence of money being transferred to  Nepal
    there was no clear evidence that this was received by the Appellant.

 4. After that appeal was dismissed the  Sponsor  travelled  to  Nepal  and
    apparently removed the Appellant from her brother's care and placed him
    in a hostel attached to his school. She then made a  fresh  application
    for her son's entry clearance. That was refused on 1 December 2015  and
    the decision upheld  by  an  Entry  Clearance  Manager.  That  was  the
    decision under appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In her submissions Miss Akinbola said that the issue for me  to  decide
    was a narrow one.  She argued that in relying on the previous  decision
    of Judge Blandy, Judge Green had  not  made  findings  about  what  had
    changed in the intervening period. The Judge noted the evidence but did
    not make any findings about what had changed. She submitted that  while
    the Judge set out the legal principles concerning  the  issue  of  sole
    responsibility he had not made findings in relation to it.  Furthermore
    in paragraph 13 the Judge attached little weight to a letter  from  the
    school written two years previously but failed to appreciate that there
    was a more up-to-date letter in the bundle.

 6. Miss Isherwood on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer submitted there
    was no material error of law.  The  Judge  was  required  to  take  the
    previous decision as a starting point and did assess  the  evidence  in
    relation to sole responsibility and reached findings that were open  to
    him on the evidence and found that the Sponsor had not  exercised  sole
    responsibility. He had acknowledged that there  was  some  evidence  of
    money being transferred but not  clear  that  this  money  reached  the
    Appellant.

 7. The Judge was right to take Judge Blandy's Decision and  Reasons  as  a
    starting point as required by Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  and  as
    acknowledged by Miss Akinbola.  I do not agree that the Judge failed to
    consider the current situation.   At  paragraph  7  he  listed  various
    issues with the evidence.  There are difficulties  with  the  Sponsor's
    evidence about her former husband  and  his  involvement,  particularly
    when the Appellant's birth was registered  [7(iv)].   The  Judge  noted
    difficulties with the Sponsor's evidence as to why she  approached  the
    Appellant's father for permission to bring him to the UK when  she  had
    sole custody. The Judge noted the Sponsor's evidence at one point  that
    the Appellant was living with his uncle but then later that  he  is  no
    longer living with his uncle but with a friend.

 8. The Judge noted difficulties with the Sponsor's evidence about how  the
    school was able to say that she collected the Appellant from the school
    bus.

 9.  The  Judge  also  noted  the  Sponsor's  dishonesty  in  the   earlier
    proceedings. The Judge found he  could  attach  little  weight  to  the
    evidence  coming  from  the  uncle  which  is   in   complete   control
    contradiction to what he had said earlier, namely that he made all  the
    decisions in relation to the Appellant's life.  The  Judge  also  noted
    difficulties in the letter now purporting to be  from  the  Appellant's
    father which  gives  information  which  if,  as  claimed,  he  had  no
    involvement and no contact he would not know.

10. There is clearly an issue as to the Sponsor's credibility  and  honesty
    in  this  appeal.  The  Judge  assessed  the  up-to-date  evidence  and
    concluded that it did not give him any reason to depart from  the  same
    conclusion that was reached by Judge Blandy earlier.

11. The more up-to-date letter which the Judge did not refer  to  from  the
    school which appears at page 50 of the Appellant's bundle and is  dated
    3 March 2017 does not assist  the  Appellant  as  it  also  contradicts
    previous evidence and the  evidence  of  the  uncle  provided  for  the
    previous appeal. Rather surprisingly it makes no mention of the time he
    spent living with his uncle. The Judge did not accept the uncle was  no
    longer involved as claimed.

12. In short the nature of this case has been so varied  over  time  as  to
    precisely what has happened that it is unsurprising that the Judge  was
    unable  to  conclude  that  the  Sponsor  had  been   exercising   sole
    responsibility for her son.  It is not the case that the Judge did  not
    assess the up-to-date evidence.

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error  of  law  in  its
    determination of this appeal.

14.  Notice of Decision



    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


          There was no application for an  anonymity  order  and  I  see  no
reason to make one.


Signed                              Date 19th October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
