
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14374/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2019                       |On 1 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              mr tikaman tamang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilford, instructed by Courtney Smith Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By my decision promulgated on 10 May 2019 I set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I now remake that decision.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 15 April 1991, who is
    seeking to join his mother ("the sponsor"), a widow of a former Gurkha
    soldier, in the UK.  The appellant and the sponsor applied at the same
    time for leave to settle in the UK. The sponsor's application was
    allowed whilst his was refused. The sponsor moved to the UK without the
    appellant 2017.

 3. The appellant claims that refusing him entry to the UK in order to join
    his mother would be a breach of article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The respondent's position is that the relationship between the
    appellant and the sponsor is not such that there is family life between
    them for the purposes of article 8(1) and therefore refusal of entry is
    not contrary to article 8.

 5. Both parties were in agreement (and confirmed at the outset of the
    hearing) that the appellant does not satisfy the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules or those set out in Annex K of Paragraph 9(1) of the
    IDI Chapter 15 Section 2A 13.2. It was also common ground that if
    family life for the purposes of article 8(1) exists then refusing entry
    clearance would not be proportionate because of the historical
    injustice faced by former Gurkha soldiers.

 6. The sole issue before me, therefore, is whether Article 8(1) is
    engaged.

Evidence

 7. I heard oral evidence from the sponsor and I have also considered her
    written witness statement dated 27 September 2018.  I have also
    considered the statement of the appellant as well as the various
    documents that were submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The factual matrix is to a large extent not in dispute.  The
    appellant's father is a former Gurkha soldier who died in 2010 leaving
    ten children, five of whom are children of the sponsor who was his
    second wife.  All of the children live outside of the family home apart
    from the appellant, who resided in the home with the sponsor until her
    departure to the UK and has since then resided there alone.

 9. The sponsor regularly sends funds to the appellant and has enabled him
    to withdraw money from her account.

10. The appellant does not work and has never done so.  Several years ago
    (before the sponsor moved to the UK) the appellant attempted to obtain
    work in Malaysia but was unable to do so because of a physical health
    problem.  The sponsor had difficulty describing or remembering the
    nature of the health problem or the circumstances of the attempted
    application for work in Malaysia but I am satisfied she was being
    truthful in her recollections and the failure to remember details
    (which she attributed to her age) does not, in my view, damage her
    credibility. I accept the sponsor's evidence that the appellant does
    not work and has not done so; and was unsuccessful in his attempt to
    secure employment in Malaysia.

11. I also accept the sponsor's evidence that the appellant is not married,
    that they are in regular contact, and are emotionally very close.



Submissions

12. Ms Everett argued that the relationship between the appellant and
    sponsor does not go beyond normal family ties that exist in Nepalese
    culture where it is not unusual for an unmarried son to live in his
    parents' home.  She argued that the fact that the appellant had sought
    work in Malaysia is indicative of independence and she stressed that
    living in the family home is not a sufficient basis to establish that
    family life exists.  She also argued that regard should be had to the
    appellant's age, maintaining that the older a son or daughter is the
    less ready one should be to accept that there is the real and effective
    or committed support necessary to establish family life under Article
    8(1).

13. Mr Wilford's argument, in essence, was that the appellant has lived his
    whole life in the family home and lived with his mother until she moved
    to the UK.  They had applied together to move to the UK, indicating an
    intention at all times to not be separated.  Mr Wilford drew attention
    to the documentary evidence showing that regular withdrawals have been
    made from the sponsor's bank account by the appellant and he
    highlighted withdrawals by him on four occasions between June and
    August 2018.  He argued that the evidence of the sponsor demonstrates
    that she provides the appellant (who is without employment and has not
    started his own separate family life) with real, effective and
    committed support.

Analysis

14. The issue in contention in this appeal is whether family life for the
    purposes of article 8 exists between the appellant and the sponsor. As
    was made clear by the Court of Appeal in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer,
    New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320, there is no legal or factual presumption
    as to the existence or absence of family life between a parent and an
    adult child; and the assessment under article 8(1) is highly fact
    sensitive, requiring consideration of whether there exists real,
    committed, or effective support that goes beyond normal emotional ties.

15. At paragraphs 41 - 42 of Rai, the Court of Appeal elaborated on the
    approach to be taken when considering an adult child of a Gurkha
    soldier. The Court stated:

          1. The burden of the evidence of the appellant's father and
             mother in their witness statements, and the appellant's in
             his, was this: that, in consequence of the "historic
             injustice", it was only in 2010 that his father had been able
             to apply for leave to enter the United Kingdom; that his
             parents would have applied upon the father's discharge from
             the army had that been possible; that they could not afford to
             apply at the same time as each other or with their dependent
             children - the appellant and their daughter Chandra; that the
             stark choice they had had to make was either to remain with
             the appellant and Chandra in Nepal or to take up their long
             withheld entitlement to settle in the United Kingdom; that
             they would all have applied together if they could have
             afforded to do so; that the appellant had never left the
             family home in Nepal, begun an independent family life of his
             own, or found work outside the village; and that he had
             remained, as his father put it, "an integral part of the
             family unit" even after his parents had settled in the United
             Kingdom.

          1. Those circumstances of the appellant and his family, all of
             them uncontentious, and including - perhaps crucially - the
             fact that he and his parents would have applied at the same
             time for leave to enter the United Kingdom and would have come
             to the United Kingdom together as a family unit had they been
             able to afford to do so, do not appear to have been grappled
             with by the Upper Tribunal judge under article 8(1). In my
             view they should have been. They went to the heart of the
             matter: the question of whether, even though the appellant's
             parents had chosen to leave Nepal to settle in the United
             Kingdom when they did, his family life with them subsisted
             then, and was still subsisting at the time of the Upper
             Tribunal's decision. This was the critical question under
             article 8(1). Even on the most benevolent reading of his
             determination, I do not think one can say that the Upper
             Tribunal judge properly addressed it.

16. I am satisfied that at the time the sponsor left Nepal she and the
    appellant enjoyed a family life within the meaning of article 8(1). The
    appellant was not married, did not have children, and lived with the
    sponsor, who provided him with free accommodation and sufficient funds
    to sustain himself. Ms Everett argued that this amounted to no more
    than normal emotional ties in the context of the culture in Nepal. I do
    not agree. None of the other children of the sponsor lived in the
    family home or were provided with support in a comparable way. The
    relationship between the appellant and the sponsor, whilst the sponsor
    and appellant resided together in Nepal, was markedly different to that
    between the sponsor and the other children and went beyond the normal
    ties that are to be expected between a parent and an adult child.

17. I am also satisfied that the relationship subsists. The sponsor and
    appellant did not intend, or wish, to separate. On the contrary, they
    applied at the same time to move to the UK, with the intention of
    continuing to live together. Since the sponsor moved to the UK she has
    provided for the appellant financially - for example, by giving him
    access to her bank account and allowing him to live rent free in her
    property. The evidence also establishes that a close emotional tie has
    been maintained. I therefore find that family life continues to exist
    between the appellant and sponsor within the meaning of article 8(1).

18. The issue of proportionality under article 8(2) was not in dispute. As
    explained in Ghissing [2013] UKUT 00567, in Gurkha settlement cases the
    weight to be given to the historic injustice will normally require a
    decision in the appellant's favour and Ms Everett did not argue that
    this was a case where the historic injustice would not tip the scales
    in the appellant's favour.

19. Accordingly, I allow the appeal on the basis that family life under
    article 8(1) exists between the appellant and sponsor and refusing the
    appellant entry to the UK would represent a disproportionate
    interference with that family life under article 8(2).



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 24 July 2019                  |

