
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14085/2015
                                                               HU/14102/2015
                                                               HU/14104/2015
                                                               HU/14105/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2018                          |On 30th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                          Mr Y U (FIRST appellant)
                         Mrs K S (SECOND appellant)
                        MASTER U A (THIRD appellant)
                         MISS U A (FOURTH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    A Blake promulgated on 8th March 2018  dismissing  their  human  rights
    appeals.  The  Appellants  appealed  against  that  decision  and  were
    granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  in  the
    following terms:

         "Although the First-tier Tribunal made reference to MA (Pakistan) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  it
         is arguable that there has been a failure to identify any strong or
         powerful reasons why  the  qualifying  children  and  their  family
         should be expected to leave the UK, given the  parents'  particular
         immigration history - see MT and ET  (child's  best  interests;  ex
         tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC), applying MA  at  [33]-
         [34]".

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 by the Respondent but was  given  the
    indication that the appeal was not resisted, for reasons which I  shall
    discuss below.



Error of Law

 3. Having discussed this matter with the parties at great length,  it  was
    the parties' agreed position that there was a clear material  error  of
    law in the decision as identified by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  in
    that the First-tier Tribunal had made reference to  MA  (Pakistan)  but
    had failed to consider as a  starting  point  whether  there  were  any
    strong or powerful reasons why the two children, then being  qualifying
    children  and  having  resided  in  the  UK  for   over   seven   years
    continuously, should be expected to leave the UK.

 4. Since the promulgation  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  the
    Supreme Court has handed down its judgment in KO (Nigeria) and Others v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 wherein  Lord
    Carnwath JSC giving the judgment of the court (with  which  Lord  Kerr,
    Lord Wilson, Lord Reed and Lord Briggs agreed) made clear  in  [15]  to
    [19] of the judgment that the conduct of migrant  parents  are  matters
    which the child cannot be blamed for (see Zoumbas v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74 at [10]  per  Lord  Hodge).   In
    that light there was a further error identified in the judge's decision
    given that the judge has stated explicitly at paragraph 132 that he has
    taken into account the full immigration history of the family  and  had
    taken the parents' conduct into consideration.   Thus,  in  that  light
    there is a further error in the decision in that it conflicts with  the
    binding authority of KO (Nigeria).  It was agreed by the  parties  that
    as a consequence of the error in respect of the failure  to  take  into
    account the powerful  reasons  threshold  and  the  judge  taking  into
    account the immigration  history  of  the  family  and  implicitly  the
    parents, that paragraphs 124 to 139 of the Tribunal's decision suffered
    from material errors of law and should be set aside.  I agree with  the
    parties' position and I share the view that those paragraphs do  suffer
    from material error of law and are  hereby  set  aside  for  the  above
    reasons.

 5. In light of the above findings I canvassed with the parties  whether  I
    should go on to re-make the decision and they agreed that I should with
    nominal submissions  being  made  by  both  representatives  which  are
    contained in my findings below for the sake of completeness.

 6. Thus, in that light I go on to re-make the decision as follows.



Re-making the Decision

 7. In light of my findings, I briefly re-make the decision in these terms.



 8. Given that the First-tier Tribunal's findings at paragraphs  1  to  123
    are not infected with legal error I adopt those paragraphs as  part  of
    my decision but do not set them out herein given their length and  that
    their content is not controversial,  but  take  them  into  account  in
    reaching my decision.

 9. In light of the facts as set out in the First-tier Tribunal's decision,
    I find that the Appellants' Article 8 rights as a family are engaged by
    virtue of their shared family life  and  the  decision  to  remove  the
    parents.

10. In accordance with the judgment in KO (Nigeria), I acknowledge that the
    context of this appeal is that  the  parents  are  facing  removal  and
    consequently so are the children and that they are expected  to  return
    to Sri Lanka as a family.  That is the context of the  appeal,  but  as
    per the judgment of Lord Carnwath, I do not take  the  conduct  of  the
    parents into account other their immigration history (as set out  in  a
    plain  and  mundane  way  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  at
    paragraphs 7 to 10, and in the reasons for refusal letter  on  pages  2
    and 6 of the 19-page refusal) but do not consider that history  in  any
    way beyond merely reciting the facts, thus giving rise to  this  appeal
    and the context of my decision.

11. As agreed by Ms Everett, owing to the Secretary  of  State's  published
    policy in Appendix FM 1.0b, the Tribunal needs  to  take  into  account
    whether there are any qualifying children.  At present date, the  older
    child (Master U A) is now over 10 years of age and has acquired British
    citizenship as evidenced by the  passport  that  was  presented  to  Ms
    Everett and which she accepted.  Therefore he is a qualifying child and
    his citizenship is of significance, which I shall turn to shortly.   In
    respect of  the  younger  female  child  (Miss  U  A),  she  remains  a
    qualifying child in that she has lived in the United Kingdom for longer
    than seven years continuously.  Having identified that I am faced  with
    a British child and  a  third  country  national  qualifying  child,  I
    consider them in turn.

12. In respect of the older child, I bear in mind the guidance and decision
    given in the Upper Tribunal matter of SF and  Others  (Guidance,  post-
    2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) at [7] to [12] wherein the Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal took  into  account  the  Secretary  of
    State's guidance (as it previously was but  which  remains  in  largely
    similar form) and concluded that if the Secretary of State were to make
    a decision in a person's favour on the  basis  of  that  guidance,  the
    Tribunal would also  need  to  make  a  decision  on  matters  such  as
    reasonableness  which  are  consistent  with  decisions  taken  by  the
    Secretary of State in favour of individuals in her published  guidance.
    On that basis, the Upper Tribunal found that the parent  of  a  British
    citizen child, should be granted a period of leave in order  to  enable
    the British citizen child to remain in the UK with them.  The policy as
    it  currently  stands,  since  its  updation  on  22nd  February  2018,
    continues to reflect that it will not be reasonable to expect a British
    citizen child to leave the UK  with  an  applicant  parent  or  primary
    carer; and where in practice the child will not, or is not  likely  to,
    continue to live in  the  UK  with  another  parent,  EX.1.(a)  of  the
    immigration rules is likely to apply.   The  only  consideration  which
    could defeat this matter, according to the guidance,  is  if  a  parent
    suffers from a "very poor immigration history,  having  repeatedly  and
    deliberately breached the Immigration Rules".  Ms Everett did not  seek
    to persuade me that  this  was  the  case  having  had  regard  to  the
    immigration history in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and  in
    the  refusal  letter,  and  also  having  briefly   examined   previous
    determinations of the First-tier Tribunal as they were available to her
    although not shared with the Appellant nor myself.  Ms Everett  was  of
    the view that she would not press the point that there was a very  poor
    immigration history in this matter but simply a mundane one  given  the
    immigration history as set  out  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.  I am inclined to share this view, but in any event,  I  have
    reservations regarding the lawfulness or applicability of this guidance
    given the dicta of Lord Carnwath's judgment  in  KO  (Nigeria).   As  a
    consequence, I would have  been  averse  to  taking  into  account  the
    immigration history of the parents of this British child,  even  if  it
    were to be very poor, given that the judgment in KO is clear in stating
    that the child must not be blamed for matters for which he  or  she  is
    not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent,  which  is  precisely
    what the guidance appears to be asking the reader to do.  Happily, I do
    not need to confront this tension as when  applying  the  Secretary  of
    State's  policy,  and  taking  into  account   the   Appellant-parents'
    immigration history, I find  that  it  remains  unreasonable  for  this
    British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom.  Indeed, given  that
    the third Appellant has become a  British  citizen,  he  ceases  to  be
    subject to 'immigration control' by  virtue  of  Section  1(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and may  have  ceased  to  be  a  party  to  these
    proceedings, but remains the subject of my discussion in any event  for
    the sake of completeness.

13. Turning to the fourth Appellant younger child,  given  that  she  is  a
    qualifying child but a third country national,  turning  again  to  the
    Secretary of State's guidance under Appendix FM 1.0b, and in  light  of
    the decision in KO (Nigeria) and its approval (save for [40]  in  part)
    of Lord Justice Elias' judgment in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, given that  the  Secretary
    of State has in her policy published  that  it  will  be  necessary  to
    identify strong or powerful reasons why a qualifying  child  should  be
    expected to leave the UK, which was met with approval  and  applied  by
    the Upper Tribunal in the matter of MT and ET (child's best  interests;
    ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC) wherein at [33] and [34]
    the Upper Tribunal made  it  plain  that,  notwithstanding  their  best
    interests, would lie in remaining in the UK, the starting point  for  a
    Tribunal is to look for "powerful reasons" why a child who has  resided
    in the United Kingdom for seven continuous years should be removed.  In
    MT and ET the Upper Tribunal took into account the immigration  history
    of MT which the panel  described  as  "run  of  the  mill"  immigration
    offending, however given the judgment in KO (Nigeria) and that I should
    not take immigration offending of the parents  into  account,  I  start
    first with an appraisal of whether strong or powerful reasons have been
    given why the fourth Appellant  child  should  be  expected  to  leave.
    Notwithstanding my  finding  that  the  third  Appellant  child  cannot
    reasonably leave and the parents must stay here as a consequence, I  am
    of the further view - independent of that third Appellant child -  that
    there are no powerful reasons given to defeat the threshold  which  the
    fourth Appellant child has met in having passed the seventh  continuous
    year of residence in the United Kingdom.  On that  basis  and  in  line
    with the Secretary  of  State's  published  policy  it  would  also  be
    unreasonable to expect the younger child to leave the UK.

14. Thus, in line with the published policy it is unreasonable  for  either
    of the children to leave the United Kingdom.

15. I take into account Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and I note the Appellants  did  not  give  evidence  in
    English which I find of course falls against them, but they  appear  to
    be self-sufficient during their time here which does not  fall  against
    them.  I further note that the  Appellants  have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom at a time  when  their  status  was  precarious  and  that  the
    decision is in accordance with firm and fair and effective  immigration
    control.  Notwithstanding the above factors,  on  balance  I  find  the
    decision is a disproportionate interference with the family life of the
    Appellant family and that the  balance  is  tipped  in  favour  of  the
    Appellants as a consequence  of  it  being  unreasonable  for  the  two
    children to leave the United Kingdom with their parents for Sri  Lanka.



16. In light of the above findings and in light of the Secretary of State's
    published  position  concerning  British  children,   and   non-British
    children who have passed the residence threshold of seven years; I find
    that the family's removal would be a disproportionate interference with
    their family life.

17. Accordingly I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

18. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  in  respect  of
    paragraphs 124 to 139.

20. I re-make the decision in the above terms and hereby allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

21. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 25 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
