
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
HU/14586/2016

                                                     HU/14591/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 January 2018                        | On 5 February 2018              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between


                             PHAL BAHADUR GURUNG
                            TIRTHA KUMARI GURUNG
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. A. Gurung
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge T. Jones, promulgated on  7  March  2017,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decisions to
     refuse leave to enter as the adult  dependent  relatives  of  a  former
     Gurkha.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "In a decision promulgated on 7 March 2017 F-tT Judge T Jones dismissed
    their appeals on the papers under the policy in Annex K which came into
    effect from 5 January 2015.  He also dismissed their Article 8 appeals.
     He accepted that they are in receipt of funds from their  parents  and
    remain in the family home.  He accepted that there is  family  life  at
    [15].  He did not accept that they met the "Immigration  Rules".   They
    could have settled with their parents back in 2011 when  they  came  to
    the UK.  He found with regard to Article 8 that they were in a position
    to settle with their parents in 2011.


    The grounds assert that they could not make applications  as  dependent
    adult children under the rules or policy prior to  2015.   The  "rules"
    applicable before then did not cover their situation.


    It is arguable that the judge did not take into account that they might
    not have been able to make  a  successful  application  in  2011.   The
    grounds are arguable."


 3. The Sponsor, Mr. Rudra  Bahadur  Gurung,  attended  the  hearing.   The
    Appellants were represented by Mr. Asbadahur Gurung, who explained that
    he was a relative of the Sponsor, and that the Sponsor could not  speak
    English.  I heard brief submissions from Mr. Avery and  Mr.  A.  Gurung
    following which I announced that the decision involved the making of  a
    material error of law.  I set aside the decision to be remade.


Error of law


 4. As accepted by Mr. Avery, there is a conflict in  the  decision,  given
    that at [15], the Judge accepts that there  is  family  life,  at  [18]
    appears to suggest that it is not a relationship  which  is  protected,
    and then at [19] again finds that there  is  family  life.   Mr.  Avery
    further accepted that the Appellants would not have been able  to  make
    an application to settle with their parents in 2011 as they  were  over
    18 at the time.  It was only in 2015 that the provisions were made  for
    the adult dependent relatives of former Gurkhas to  settle  with  their
    parents.


 5. I find that the Judge finds at [15] that there is family  life  between
    the Appellants and their parents:


    "I have found that the Appellants are in receipt of  funds  from  their
    parents and remain in the family home.  I accept the claim is such that
    in these circumstances, taking account of the relationship between  the
    Sponsor and his albeit adult children, there is family life."


 6. The Judge makes his conclusions at [19], and states:


    "Accordingly, and in line with the conclusions reached on review of the
    grounds of appeal, by the Entry Clearance Officer Manager (ECO (M)),  I
    find,  for  reasons  I  have  already  given  there  is  no  historical
    injustice, no prior history of the Appellants or  Sponsor  having  made
    prior applications that were unjustly refused  to  their  detriment  in
    planning their lives.  The Appellants were  in  a  position  to  settle
    along with their parents in 2011, and reasons as to why  this  was  not
    done then, of (sic) within two years  afterwards,  have  not  been  put
    before me.  The Appellants and parents knew of the construction of  the
    rules, and  had  made  reference  to  them  fully.   They  applied  for
    settlement and left for the United Kingdom when  both  Appellants  were
    adults.  They maintain their present family life by periodic visits for
    nearly, if  not  three  months,  almost  annually.   On  the  available
    information I find the parents have a viable  option  of  returning  to
    Nepal if they choose to in line with the ECO (M)'s representations.  In
    line with the Respondent's representations as to proportionality, it is
    for these reasons, that I find the balance therein falls in  favour  of
    the Respondent and not the Appellant's (sic) and I dismiss the appeal."


 7. As accepted by Mr. Avery, the Appellants were  not  in  a  position  to
    settle along with  their  parents  in  2011,  as  there  was  no  route
    available to them given that they were over 18 years old.  I find  that
    the Judge has erred in finding that the Appellants were in  a  position
    to settle in 2011, and that this finding has affected his consideration
    of Article 8.  He has stated that there was no historical injustice due
    to the fact that the Appellants had not  made  any  applications  which
    were unjustly refused, but this is because the Appellants were not able
    to make applications when their parents came to settle in 2011 as  they
    were over 18 years old.


 8. I am mindful of the  cases  which  deal  with  the  position  of  adult
    dependent relatives of Gurkhas, namely Gurung [2013] EWCA  Civ  8,  and
    Ghising and others [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) and Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.
     The Respondent has referred to the first two cases  in  the  decision.
    Contrary to the Judge's finding, there is an acceptance that there  has
    been historical injustice - "I am satisfied that the reasons  for  your
    refusal outweigh the consideration of historical injustice".  This is a
    clear indication  that  the  Respondent  considers  the  issue  of  the
    historical injustice to be relevant to the Appellants' case,  but  that
    the reasons for refusal outweigh it.


 9. The Judge has found that there is family life, but has failed to  carry
    out a full assessment of the Appellants' position under  Article  8  in
    accordance with the caselaw.  It appears that this is  largely  due  to
    his finding that  there  was  no  historical  injustice  based  on  his
    erroneous finding that the Appellants could have applied for settlement
    in 2011.  I find that this is a material error of law.   Accordingly  I
    set the decision aside.


Remaking


 10. I stated at the hearing that I would remake the decision,  and  that  I
     would preserve the finding made in the First-tier Tribunal  that  there
     was family life between the Appellants and Sponsor.  Mr.  Avery  agreed
     with  this.   I  have  also  considered   the   Appellants'   evidence,
     particularly that provided with the appeals.


11. I find  that  the  Appellants  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules, nor can they meet the requirements of the policy set
    out at Annex K.


12. I have considered the Appellants' appeals under Article 8  outside  the
    immigration rules in accordance with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.
     I find that there is family life between the  Appellants  and  Sponsor
    sufficient to engage the operation of  Article  8.   I  find  that  the
    decision would interfere with this family life.


13. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with  the  law,  as  being  regular
    immigration decisions taken by UKBA in accordance with the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.


14. In carrying out the proportionality exercise, I have taken into account
    the case of Ghising.  Headnote (4) states:


    "Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and, but  for
    the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled  in  the  UK
    long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the  matters
    relied on by the Secretary of State/ entry  clearance  officer  consist
    solely of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration
    policy."


15. I have taken into account the factors set out in section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act, insofar as they are relevant, mindful of [55] to [57] of  Rai
    where the effect of section 117B on such appeals is considered.   While
    section 117B(1) provides that the maintenance of effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest, taking into account headnote (4) of
    Ghising, given the historic wrong, there needs to be more than this  in
    such Gurkha settlement cases.  There are no  additional  considerations
    in the  Appellants'  cases  such  as  criminality  or  bad  immigration
    history.  In relation to sections 117B(2) and 117B(3), the weight to be
    given to the English-language skills and financial independence of  the
    Appellants does not outweigh the weight to be given to  the  effect  of
    the historic injustice.  Sections 117B(4) to (6) are not relevant.


16. I have taken into account the fact that when  the  Appellants'  parents
    applied for settlement in 2011 it was not possible for  the  Appellants
    to apply with them as dependents of the Sponsor as they  were  over  18
    years old.  I find that, had they been able to apply for settlement  at
    the time, they would have done so.  The policy was amended in  2015  to
    allow adult dependent relatives to apply for settlement.


17. Further, I find that at the time that the Sponsor was  discharged  from
    the British army the Appellants were under 18 years old, and would have
    been able to settle with him, had he had the opportunity to  settle  at
    the time.


18. Taking into account all of the above I find that, were it not  for  the
    historic injustice, the  Sponsor  would  have  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom when he  completed  his  service  in  the  British  army.   The
    Appellants would have settled with him.  I further find that they would
    have applied in 2011 to settle with him, had they been able to.  I find
    that the balance comes down in  favour  of  the  Appellants,  and  that
    limited weight is to be given to the Respondent's  aim  of  maintaining
    immigration control.  Taking into account the case of Ghising,  I  find
    that the Appellants have shown on the balance of probabilities that the
    decisions are a breach of their rights, and those of  the  Sponsor  and
    their mother, to a family life under Article 8.


Decision


19. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.


20. I remake the decision allowing the Appellants' appeals on human  rights
    grounds, Article 8 ECHR.


21. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals, I have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.   Further  evidence  was  provided   for   the   appeals.    In   the
circumstances I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 2 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

