
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/14921/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2018                          |On 10h January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                      miss Dharmistha Ravjibhai Parmar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOt MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, instructed by ATM Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision by the Secretary of State dated 21st August 2015  to
    refuse her application for leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  First-tier Tribunal Judge J S Burns dismissed the appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 13th September 2018.  The Appellant now appeals
    to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hollingworth on 11th October 2018.

 2. It is contended in essence that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in
    considering the wrong decision. The judge dismissed the appeal  against
    a decision of the Secretary of State dated 7th March  2016  but  it  is
    contended that the appeal  was  in  fact  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 28th August 2015.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal based on a decision by the
    Secretary of State dated 7th  March  2016  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
    application for a derivative residence  card  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   The  judge
    considered that refusal letter and noted that  the  representative  for
    the Appellant had conceded that the Appellant could not qualify  for  a
    derivative right of residence  as  the  relevant  relative,  a  British
    citizen, is her uncle and  not  a  direct  relative  within  Regulation
    15A(7).  The judge noted that Counsel  had  conceded  that  the  appeal
    under Regulation 26 must fail.

 4. The judge went on to decide that, as the Appellant had not made a valid
    application for consideration  of  her  private  and  family  life,  no
    Article 8 appeal lies against the refusal of 7th March 2016.  The judge
    noted that there was reference in the papers to the appeal  being  made
    against the decision of the Secretary of State of 28th August 2015  but
    noted that the Presenting Officer had submitted that there was  no  in-
    country right of appeal against that decision as it had been  certified
    as clearly  unfounded.   The  judge  said  that  he  was  unwilling  to
    determine an Article 8 appeal in the absence  of  clear  evidence  that
    there was a right of appeal which  had  been  validly  exercised.   The
    judge decided to treat this appeal as one against the decision  of  7th
    March 2016 only and dismissed the appeal.  The judge noted at paragraph
    9 that, after the  hearing,  Counsel  returned  to  the  Tribunal  room
    asserting that the Appellant appeared to have appeal rights against  an
    earlier decision but the judge said that he made no decision about this
    and said "any valid appeal that the  Appellant  may  have  against  any
    decision of the Respondent other than that dated 7.3.2018 will have  to
    be presented and considered separately".

 5. There is some confusion within the papers in relation to  this  appeal.
    The Respondent's bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  indeed
    before the Upper Tribunal contains the  application  for  a  derivative
    residence card and the decision dated  7th  March  2016.   However  the
    Notice of Appeal contained in the Respondent's bundle states at Section
    2F that it relates to a decision of the Home Office dated  28th  August
    2015.  The Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  contend  that
    the Appellant has an in-country right of appeal against the decision of
    21st August 2015.

 6. In the file there is a direction made by a Duty Immigration  Judge  and
    issued on 2nd August 2016 stating that the Appellant seeks to appeal  a
    decision of the Respondent refusing her leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules dated 21st August 2015.  The  directions  state  that
    the Appellant's representatives assert that the  Respondent  failed  to
    state that she had a right of appeal against the decision  as  she  was
    due the benefit of transitional provisions in relation to appeal rights
    relating  to  the  amendments  to  Section  82  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  because  her  application  for  the
    variation of her leave to remain was made before 6th April  2015.   The
    Duty Judge considered that this appeared to be a correct  statement  of
    the law unless the Respondent filed submissions that  persuade  a  Duty
    Judge that it is not.   The  Duty  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant's
    representative failed to submit Grounds of Appeal in  relation  to  the
    decision itself and have only addressed  jurisdictional  matters.   The
    directions required that  Grounds  of  Appeal  addressing  the  refusal
    itself must be supplied if the Appellant is to demonstrate that she has
    a right of appeal in accordance with Section  88(4)  of  the  2002  Act
    before its amendment following the coming into force of Schedule  9  of
    the Immigration Act 2015.  A direction was issued to the Respondent  to
    file any evidence or submissions which  address  the  validity  of  the
    appeal within five days of the date on the notice and to the  Appellant
    to file Grounds  of  Appeal  in  accordance  with  the  direction  with
    supporting reasons and any evidence upon which she relies  within  five
    days.

 7. Ms Harris submitted a document entitled Grounds  of  Appeal  which  has
    handwritten at the top DJ/BF 0908016 which asserts that the decision is
    in breach of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.  It  appears  that  this
    was received by the Tribunal and the Tribunal went on to list the  case
    for hearing.

 8. Mr Lindsay submitted copies of two decisions at the hearing before  me.
    The first was a decision of 23rd June  2015  refusing  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain on the basis of her private and  family
    life.   That  decision  was  certified  under  Section  94(1)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  it  was  stated  that
    this was because the Appellant did not meet the requirements for  leave
    to remain on the grounds of family life under Appendix  FM  or  private
    life under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and had not raised
    any exceptional circumstances, the Secretary of  State  concluded  that
    the application was clearly without substance and could not succeed  on
    any legitimate view and that the Appellant could not  therefore  appeal
    whilst in the UK.  However Mr Lindsay accepted that the decision issued
    on 21st August 2015 refusing leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules was not certified.

 9. It appears from the chronology set out  above  that  the  decision  the
    subject of this appeal is the decision of 21st August 2015 and not  the
    decision of 23rd June 2015 which was certified or the decision  of  7th
    March 2016 which relates to  the  application  for  an  EEA  derivative
    residence card (the only decision letter contained in the  Respondent's
    bundle).

10. In light of the fact that it appears from the chronology set out  above
    that, as the Appellant responded to the directions issued on 2nd August
    2016 and the Respondent did not, and, given that the appeal went on  to
    be listed for hearing, the Appellant was  treated  as  having  heard  a
    right of appeal against  the  decision  of  21st  August  2015  by  the
    Tribunal.

11. At the hearing Mr Lindsay asked  to  be  given  further  time  to  make
    specific submissions in relation to the issue raised in the  directions
    served on 2nd August 2016 about whether the Appellant had  a  right  of
    appeal against the decision of 21st August 2015.  However  he  informed
    the tribunal after the hearing that he would not be making any  further
    submissions.

12. In my view it is now clear from the chronology set out above  that  the
    appeal against the decision of 21st August 2015 has not been determined
    by the First-tier Tribunal and it  is  appropriate  to  set  aside  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns which deals with the  wrong
    decision by the Secretary of State and remit the matter to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal where the appeal against the decision of 21st August 2015
    remains outstanding.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is allowed.

14. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  the  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 21st August  2015  remains
    outstanding.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 21st December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have  remitted  the  appeal  because  the  substantive  appeal  remains
outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal, the issue of  a  fee  award  too
remains outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 21st December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
