
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14751/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 07 February 2019                  |On 27 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     J D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare. I find that it is appropriate to  continue  the
order.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C. E. Moll, instructed by Howe & Co. Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Upper Tribunal remakes the decision relating  to  the  appellant's
      appeal against the respondent's decision  dated  31  October  2017  to
      refuse a human rights claim having set aside a decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal in an earlier decision promulgated on 13  December  2018
      (annexed).

2.    I am conscious of the length of time that it has taken  to  promulgate
      this decision. Unfortunately, it took longer than usual to prepare due
      to the lengthy history of this case, the complexity  of  some  of  the
      issues, the need to invite further submissions  and  the  pressure  of
      other work.

BACKGROUND

3.    The history of the case is relevant to a proper determination  of  the
      appeal. The appellant is an Angolan citizen who says that  he  entered
      the UK on 11 December 2003. He claimed asylum on 12 December 2003. The
      application was refused on 10 February 2004 and  a  subsequent  appeal
      was dismissed on 26 April 2004. His appeal rights became exhausted  on
      24 August 2004. The appellant remained in the UK without leave.

4.    On 06 September 2010 the appellant was convicted under  a  false  name
      for 'driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol'  for  which  he  was
      fined and disqualified from driving for 12 months.

5.    On 17 January 2012 the appellant was convicted under  the  same  false
      name of 'threatening to damage  or  destroy  own  property  so  as  to
      endanger life'. On 20 March  2012  he  was  sentenced  to  15  months'
      imprisonment. The context of the offence was that the  appellant  made
      serious threats towards his then partner during an argument. He poured
      white spirit in their bedroom and then in their children's bedroom and
      had a lighter in his hand. The sentencing  judge  made  the  following
      comments about the offence:

         "My assessment of you is that you behaved as you  did  to  frighten
         your partner. I do not consider that there  was  at  any  time  any
         intention on your part to set fire to this house, or to  hurt  your
         partner in that way or for that matter any children  that  were  in
         the house.


         The whole thing got completely out of control. It  is  quite  clear
         from the statements that  [his  partner]  has  now  made  that  she
         regrets calling the police, although she was right to do  so.  What
         she says in her letter is that you have spent long enough in prison
         and I agree with that.


         Although  this  crosses  the  custody  threshold  and  was  a  very
         frightening episode, it does not seem to  me  that  a  sentence  in
         excess of 15 months' imprisonment can be justified. I am not  going
         to burden the probation service by making a community order of  any
         sort. You have been punished enough and  I  do  not  think  further
         supervision is going to help you. What will help you is  trying  to
         get back on the rails with your family and your children and I know
         that you are determined to do that.


         You made a very serious mistake but you are not  a  danger  to  the
         public and you are not  a  fire  raiser.  It  is  for  that  reason
         therefore that for the offence of threatening to  cause  damage,  I
         impose a sentence of 15 months' imprisonment. I direct that you  be
         given credit for the 253  days  that  you  have  already  spent  in
         custody. The effect of that and my intention in passing that length
         of sentence is that you should be released from custody during  the
         course of today and that brings the matter to an end."

Deportation decision (2012)

6.    The respondent notified the appellant of  his  intention  to  make  an
      automatic deportation order on 20 March 2012. The  appellant  admitted
      his correct identity in an ensuing interview. The respondent signed  a
      deportation order on 08 October 2012 pursuant to section 32(5) of  the
      UK Borders Act 2007 ("UKBA 2007") and section 5(1) of the  Immigration
      Act 1971 ("IA 1971").

First-tier Tribunal decision (2013)

7.    At the  time,  the  appellant  had  a  right  of  appeal  against  the
      deportation  decision.  A  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTTJ
      Onoufriou and Mrs Jordan (NLM)) allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds in a decision promulgated on 06 December 2013. The  panel  was
      satisfied that  there  was  substantial  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant had a family life with his partner and children before going
      to prison. There was evidence to show that they visited him in  prison
      although  the  visits  eventually  ceased.  The  appellant  tried   to
      establish contact with his family when he was released. He said he was
      prevented from doing so because social services wanted to carry out  a
      risk assessment. At the date of the hearing, the appellant  had  filed
      an application to the family court  for  contact  with  the  children.
      Although the application was rejected for failure to pay the  relevant
      court fee, the panel was satisfied that he intended  to  resubmit  the
      application. The panel considered the decision in RS (immigration  and
      family court proceedings) India [2012]  UKUT  00218  and  allowed  the
      appeal "to a limited extent" in order to enable the appellant to  make
      an application for contact with his children. The panel concluded: "We
      do not consider it would be in the interests of justice and  certainly
      not in the best interests of his children applying section 55  of  the
      2009 Act, to  deny  the  appellant  the  opportunity  to  resume  more
      meaningful contact with his children."

Upper Tribunal decision (2014)

8.     The  respondent  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 25 July  2014,  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Conway found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  did  not
      involve the making of an error of law. The panel took into account the
      nature of the offence and the sentencing remarks. It was open  to  the
      Tribunal to find  that  the  appellant  intended  to  make  a  renewed
      application for contact with his children and that this was a relevant
      fact in light of RS (India) and the subsequent  decision  in  Mohan  v
      SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1363. The Upper Tribunal concluded  that  it  was
      open to the panel to conclude that Article 8 was engaged  pending  the
      conclusion of the intended family proceedings.

Subsequent events

9.    The appellant made an application to  the  family  court  for  contact
      with his children. On 06 August  2014  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
      appellant's  solicitor  requesting  further  information   about   the
      appellant's family circumstances and the family court proceedings. His
      solicitor responded on 22 August 2014 stating that family  proceedings
      were ongoing. The appellant had supervised contact with  his  children
      once a month in line with arrangements made by social services and had
      unlimited non-physical contact with the children. At  this  stage,  it
      was asserted that he was still in a relationship with  the  mother  of
      his two older children albeit social services had  not  yet  permitted
      him to return to the family home.

10.   On 17 November 2014 District Judge Hearne adjourned the  family  court
      application with liberty to restore.  The  order  stated  that  if  no
      further application were made by 17  May  2015  then  the  application
      would be dismissed without further order.  The  judge  apparently  was
      told that the appellant and  the  children's  mother  were  trying  to
      resolve the matter through mediation.

11.   On 04 December 2014 the respondent wrote to the appellant care of  his
      legal  representative  stating  that  he  was  granted  three  months'
      Discretionary Leave to Remain (DLR).  The  letter  stated  that  leave
      would be issued on a Biometric Residence Permit (BRP).

12.   The respondent says he did not receive an application for a BRP  so  a
      reminder was sent on 18 February 2015. On 12 March 2015 the respondent
      wrote to the appellant inviting further  representations  because  the
      respondent was  aware  "that  your  client's  Family  court  case  has
      concluded."

13.   The appellant made further representations in a letter dated 14  April
      2015. The letter was brief. It asserted that the appellant  was  in  a
      new relationship. Their daughter was born on 25 July 2014.  No  detail
      was given as to  the  history  of  the  relationship  given  that  the
      previous representations made on 22 August 2014 claimed  that  he  was
      still in a relationship with the mother of his  two  oldest  children,
      one month after the third child was born to another woman. The  letter
      asserted the family court proceedings had not come to an  end  because
      the order made on 17 November 2014  provided  for  an  application  to
      restore the proceedings. A copy of the signed BRP application dated 16
      December 2014 was enclosed but no mention was made as  to  whether  it
      was sent previously. A copy of a letter from the  same  representative
      to the Criminal Case Unit in Liverpool,  also  dated  14  April  2015,
      attached a completed BRP application and two photographs.  This  would
      appear to indicate that the application was only made on 14 April 2015
      and  not  at  an  earlier  stage  even  though  the  application  form
      apparently was signed on 16 December 2014.

14.   There is no evidence  to  suggest  that  a  BRP  card  was  issued  as
      evidence of a grant of leave to remain at any stage before  a  further
      decision was made in June 2015.

Decision to refuse a human rights claim (2015)

15.   On 30 June 2015 the respondent made  a  decision  to  refuse  a  human
      rights claim. The decision stated: "Although it is noted that you were
      granted Leave to Entre (sic) (LTE) on 4 December 2014 for a period  of
      3 months, it is noted that this was  to  await  the  outcome  of  your
      application to the Family Court. The Tribunal did not  determine  that
      the original decision  was  in  any  way  unlawful  or  needed  to  be
      withdrawn. It therefore remains extant." No new deportation order  was
      signed. The decision  letter  simply  asserted  that  the  appellant's
      deportation was required by section 32(5) UKBA  2007.  The  respondent
      certified the human rights claim under section 94B of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").

Decision to refuse a human rights claim (2017)

16.   It seems that no further action was taken for over  two  years  until,
      on 31 October 2017, the respondent withdrew  the  decision  certifying
      the human rights claim following the Supreme Court decision in  Kiarie
      & Byndloss v SSHD [2017] UKSC 42. He issued a fresh decision to refuse
      a human rights claim on the same day, which  attracted  an  in-country
      right of appeal. The wording regarding the deportation order  remained
      the same as the decision made in 2015. The decision is the subject  of
      this appeal.

17.   The respondent accepted that the appellant was  the  father  of  three
      British children (A),  (B)  and  (C).  He  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  the
      two children from his previous relationship (A and B) because  "it  is
      known that you do not have any contact with either  child".  Following
      the family court hearing on 17 November 2014 a social worker spoke  to
      the children who confirmed that they did not want to have contact with
      him.

18.   In respect of the child  by  the  more  recent  relationship  (C)  the
      respondent noted that the appellant did not live at the  same  address
      as  the  child's  mother.  The  respondent  found   that   there   was
      insufficient evidence to show that he had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with the child or to show that he was still in a
      genuine and subsisting relationship with her mother.

19.   Nevertheless, in principle, the respondent accepted that it  would  be
      'unduly harsh' for the children to live in the  country  to  which  he
      would be deported. However, it was  not  accepted  that  it  would  be
      'unduly harsh' for the children  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
      appellant because there was insufficient evidence to show that he  had
      a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the  children  and
      they were looked after by their respective mothers.

20.   In the same decision, the respondent refused  the  application  for  a
      Biometric Residence Permit made on 14 April  2015  because  the  leave
      granted on 04 December 2014 had expired.

First-tier Tribunal decision (2018)

21.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cary  allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 25 September 2018. The judge heard  evidence  from  the
      appellant and his partner (C's mother). By the date of the hearing the
      respondent accepted that the appellant had  a  family  life  with  his
      current partner and their daughter and that he also had  some  contact
      with A and B. The judge considered evidence, which indicated that  all
      three children had a strong bond with their father. The appellant  had
      regular contact with the two children from his previous  relationship.
      He lived with  the  youngest  child.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
      appellant "plays a significant, active  and  beneficial  role  in  his
      daughter's life". The judge concluded that there was  no  evidence  to
      suggest that the appellant represented an ongoing threat to the public
      or to his family. The judge took into account the weight to  be  given
      to the public interest and the need to deter crime. However,  he  went
      on to conclude that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
      remain in the UK without their father if he were to be deported.

22.   The Upper Tribunal set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  for
      lack of reasoning to justify the finding  that  it  would  be  'unduly
      harsh' for the children to remain in  the  UK  without  their  father.
      However, the factual findings remain intact relating to the nature and
      extent of the appellant's familial relationships in the UK.

LEGAL FRAMEWORK

Legal framework applicable to the first appeal (2013)

23.   The deportation order signed on 08 October 2012  formed  part  of  the
      decision dated 09 October 2012 to make an automatic deportation  order
      under section 32(5) UKBA 2007 with reference to the  underlying  power
      to make a deportation order contained in section 5(1) IA 1971.

24.   Section 32(5) UKBA 2007 required the Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
      deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal who  was  sentenced
      to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

25.   Section 33(2) (Exception 1) includes where  removal  in  pursuance  of
      the deportation  order  would  breach  a  person's  rights  under  the
      European Convention on Human Rights or the Refugee Convention. Section
      33(7) makes clear that the application of an exception  (a)  does  not
      prevent the making of a deportation order and (b) results in it  being
      assumed neither that deportation of the person concerned is  conducive
      to the public good nor that it is not conducive to the public good.

26.   The appellant had a right of appeal under  section  82(3A)  NIAA  2002
      against the immigration decision that section 32(5) UKBA 2007 applied.
      The relevant ground of appeal under  section  84(1)(g)  was  that  his
      removal from the United Kingdom in consequence of the  decision  would
      be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 ("HRA  1998")
      as being incompatible with his Convention rights.

27.    The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  made  shortly  after  the
      introduction of new immigration  rules  relating  to  deportation  and
      Article 8 of the  European  Convention.  The  relevant  parts  of  the
      Statement of Changes to the Immigration Rules HC 194 came into  effect
      on 09 July 2012. Rules 398 to 399A outlined the Secretary  of  State's
      policy as to where a fair balance would be struck  in  cases  where  a
      person claims that their deportation would be contrary to  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.
      By the time the First-tier Tribunal heard the appeal  on  27  November
      2013 the Court of Appeal had decided MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2014] 2  All
      ER 543 and concluded that the new rules amounted to a 'complete  code'
      to Article 8.

The legal effect of the First-tier decision (2013)

28.   In directions sent on 28 June 2019 the Upper Tribunal invited  further
      submissions from the parties as to the legal effect of the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision made in 2013 on (i) the original deportation  order;
      (ii) how it might impact on  the  scope  of  this  appeal;  and  (iii)
      including any other submissions arising.

29.   The appellant filed further submissions on 12  July  2019.  The  Upper
      Tribunal has no record of the  respondent  having  filed  any  further
      submissions. In the absence of further submissions, I  have  tried  to
      anticipate and to deal with any arguments that  might  have  been  put
      forward by the respondent.

30.   Although I note that the First-tier Tribunal in 2013 did not  consider
      the new immigration rules relating to deportation and  Article  8  the
      respondent was unsuccessful in his appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal.
      As such,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  was  a  final  judicial
      decision.

31.   Even though the First-tier Tribunal stated that it allowed the  appeal
      to "a limited extent", in fact, the only ground upon which the  appeal
      could be allowed was that removal in consequence  of  the  immigration
      decision dated 20 March 2012 was unlawful under section  6  HRA  1998.
      The First-tier Tribunal made a clear direction under section  87  NIAA
      2002 (applicable at the time) for the appellant to be granted leave to
      remain for three months.

32.   Section 5(1)  IA  1971  states  that  where  a  person  is  liable  to
      deportation the Secretary  of  State  may  make  a  deportation  order
      against him, "that is to say an  order  requiring  him  to  leave  and
      prohibiting him from entering the United Kingdom". Section 5(2) states
      that a deportation order may be revoked at any time by a further order
      of the Secretary of State.

33.   Section 32(6) UKBA 2007 states that the Secretary  of  State  may  not
      revoke a deportation order made under  section  32(5)  unless  (a)  he
      thinks that an exception under section 33 applies; (b) the application
      for revocation is made while  the  foreign  criminal  is  outside  the
      United Kingdom; or (c) section 34(4) applies. In  respect  of  timing,
      section 34(4) states that  the  Secretary  of  State  may  withdraw  a
      decision that section 32(5) applies or revoke a deportation order made
      in accordance with that section for the purpose of (a)  taking  action
      under  the  Immigration  Acts  or  the  Immigration  Rules;  and   (b)
      subsequently taking a new decision  that  section  32(5)  applies  and
      making a deportation order in accordance with section 32(5).

34.   The effect of the First-tier Tribunal decision was that the  exception
      to deportation contained in section 33(2)(a) UKBA 2007 applied at that
      date even if the First-tier Tribunal only envisaged that  a  temporary
      period of leave to remain should be granted.  At  that  stage,  it  is
      clear the respondent did not require the appellant  to  leave  the  UK
      pursuant to the deportation order. The Secretary of State gave  effect
      to the Tribunal's decision under  the  Immigration  Acts  by  granting
      leave to remain on 04 December 2014 albeit a BRP was never  issued  as
      evidence of the fact.

35.   It matters not whether the grant of leave  was  for  three  months  or
      three years, the act of granting leave to remain was a  further  order
      of the Secretary of State for the purpose of  section  5(2)  IA  1971,
      which granted leave to remain and no longer required him to leave  the
      United Kingdom for the purpose of section 5(1). In my assessment,  the
      act of granting leave to remain revoked the deportation  order  signed
      on 08 October 2012.

36.   Section 34(4) UKBA 2007 states that the Secretary of State can  revoke
      a deportation order made in accordance  with  section  32(5)  for  the
      purpose of taking action  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  which  might
      include making a subsequent decision. However, the wording of  section
      34(4)(b)  states  that  revocation  could  be  for  the   purpose   of
      "subsequently taking a new decision that  section  32(5)  applies  and
      making a deportation order in accordance with section 32(5)" [emphasis
      added]. The wording suggests that once a deportation  order  has  been
      revoked a new deportation order needs to  be  made  to  accompany  any
      subsequent decision that section 32(5)  applies.  This  is  consistent
      with the requirement contained in section 32(5) itself,  which  states
      that the Secretary of State "must make a deportation order"  [emphasis
      added] in respect of a foreign criminal.

37.   For these reasons I conclude that the act  of  giving  effect  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal decision by granting leave  to  remain  for  three
      months revoked the original deportation order.  In  order  to  make  a
      fresh decision that section 32(5) applied the Secretary of  State  was
      also required to make a new deportation order.

38.   The decision dated 31 October 2017 was made after the changes  brought
      about by the Immigration Act 2014 ("IA 2014"). On the face of it, this
      was a decision to refuse a human rights claim without having  followed
      the statutory procedure under section 32(5) UKBA 2007.  Having revoked
      the original order by the act of granting leave to remain the decision
      to refuse a human rights claim did not have  the  necessary  statutory
      underpinning to be one made in the context of deportation proceedings.



Legal framework applicable to this appeal (2019)

39.   A final piece of the complicated  puzzle  of  provisions  relating  to
      deportation must be considered. The rules relating to deportation  and
      Article 8 introduced by  HC  194  were  a  precursor  to  the  further
      amendments made by way of a Statement of Changes  to  the  Immigration
      Rules HC 532, which came into effect on 28 July 2014 at the same  time
      as the new Part 5A of the NIAA 2002 came into force.

40.   I have considered whether section 117C NIAA 2002 may  still  apply  to
      the appellant in determining this appeal. The appellant  comes  within
      the definition of a 'foreign criminal' contained  in  section  117D(2)
      because he is not a British citizen and was convicted  of  an  offence
      for which he was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  12
      months.

41.   However, the crucial wording is contained in  section  117A.  Part  5A
      applies where a court of tribunal is required to determine  whether  a
      decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right  to
      respect for private and family life under Article 8  of  the  European
      Convention and as a result would be unlawful under section 6 HRA 1998.
      In considering the public interest question the court or tribunal must
      have regard to the considerations listed in section  117B.  In  "cases
      concerning deportation of foreign criminals"  the  court  or  tribunal
      must have regard to the considerations in section 117C.

42.   "Deportation" is  not  a  general  term  of  art.  There  is  a  legal
      distinction between removal pursuant to a deportation order made under
      section 5(1) IA 1971 and  administrative  removal  in  non-deportation
      cases under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  ("IAA
      1999"). In this context the wording of section  117A(2)(b)  NIAA  2002
      has some import. The more  stringent  public  interest  considerations
      contained  in  section  117C  only  apply  in  cases  "concerning  the
      deportation" of foreign criminals. Section 117C itself repeatedly uses
      the legal term "deportation" thereby reinforcing  the  fact  that  the
      provisions only apply to those cases where  a  decision  to  refuse  a
      human rights claim is made in the context of an additional deportation
      decision.

43.   The original deportation order was revoked by the respondent's act  of
      granting leave to remain. There is  no  valid  decision  that  section
      32(5) UKBA 2007 applies because the decision was not accompanied by  a
      fresh deportation order as mandated by that section. For these reasons
      I conclude that the decision to refuse a human rights claim  dated  31
      October 2017 does not concern the deportation of the  appellant  as  a
      foreign criminal. The Upper Tribunal is not required by Part  5A  NIAA
      2002 to have regard to the public interest considerations contained in
      section  117C  although  it  is  obliged  to  have   regard   to   the
      considerations contained in section 117B.

FINDINGS AND REASONS

Best interests of the children

44.   In assessing the best interests of the  children,  I  have  considered
    the broad principles outlined in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC4,
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and  others  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best  interests  of  children  are  a  primary
    consideration although they are not the only consideration.

45.   The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are "in the United Kingdom". I take  into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 ("BCIA 2009"). In the guidance,  the  respondent  acknowledges
    the importance of international human rights instruments including  the
    UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on
    to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." The UNCRC sets  out
    rights including a child's right to survival and development, the right
    to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

46.   The appellant has three children. A and B are British  citizens.  They
    are the appellant's children from his  previous  relationship.  At  the
    date of the hearing A was 13 years old and B was  11  years  old.  They
    live with their mother. It is  accepted  that  the  appellant  now  has
    regular contact with the children. C is also a British citizen. She  is
    the appellant's daughter from his current relationship. At the date  of
    the hearing she was four years old.

47.   After having heard from the appellant  and  his  partner,  and  having
    considered the independent social work report of Gugu Nare, Judge  Cary
    was satisfied that the appellant had a strong bond with  his  children.
    In relation to the youngest  child  he  concluded  that  the  appellant
    "plays a significant, active and benefits role in his daughter's  life"
    [42].

48.   The children have benefited from their father's involvement  in  their
    lives since birth. It is in their interests to continue to  be  brought
    up by both parents and  to  benefit  from  the  care  and  support  the
    appellant provides. The children  are  British  citizens,  which  is  a
    matter that should be given weight. They are entitled to  the  benefits
    and advantages of life in the UK. It is not in their  interests  to  be
    separated from their father. The evidence of  the  appellant's  current
    partner indicates that he  is  the  main  link  between  the  children.
    Without his presence the  youngest  child  is  unlikely  to  have  much
    contact with her half-sisters. For these reasons I conclude that it  is
    in the best interests of all three children to be brought  up  by  both
    parents in the UK.

Article 8(1) (private and family life)

49.   The appellant is a 41-year-old national of Angola  who  has  lived  in
    the UK for 15 years. It is likely that he has developed a private  life
    in the UK during that time. He has also developed a  family  life  with
    his partner and three children. The children are British citizens  with
    whom he has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship.  I  am
    satisfied that his removal in consequence of the decision would  affect
    his right to private and family life in a sufficiently grave way as  to
    engage the operation of Article 8(1) of the European Convention.

Article 8(2) (non-deportation)

50.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects  the  right  to  private
    and family life. However, it is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

51.   Having concluded, for the technical  reasons  given  above,  that  the
    decision being appealed is not one  concerning  the  deportation  of  a
    foreign criminal I have considered whether the appellant meets  any  of
    the requirements for leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
    requirements of the immigration rules and the statutory provisions  are
    said to reflect the respondent's position as to where a fair balance is
    struck for the purpose of Article 8 of the European Convention.

52.   The appellant has not been resident in the  UK  for  a  period  of  20
    years, so he does not meet the private life  requirement  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules. Although it is  some
    time since he lived in Angola, there is no evidence to suggest that  he
    would face 'very significant obstacles' to his  integration  there  for
    the purpose of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  The  appellant  was  born  in
    Angola and has spent most of his life there. It is likely that he  will
    continue to  have  cultural,  linguistic  and  other  ties  there.  The
    appellant does not meet the requirements for leave  to  remain  as  the
    parent of a British child contained in Appendix FM of  the  immigration
    rules because he is not the sole carer for the children.

53.         Part 5A NIAA 2002 applies where a court or tribunal is  required
    to determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the  Immigration  Acts
    breaches a person's right to private or family life and as a result  is
    unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998. In  considering  the  'public
    interest question' a court or tribunal must have regard to  the  issues
    outlined in section 117B in non-deportation cases. The public  interest
    question means the question of whether  interference  with  a  person's
    right to respect for their private or family life  is  justified  under
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

54.   Little weight can be placed on any private life  or  any  family  life
    with  his  partner  established  while  his  immigration   status   was
    precarious. The appellant's level of English  is  somewhat  unclear.  I
    note that he gave evidence in the First-tier with the assistance  of  a
    Portuguese interpreter but other  evidence  indicates  that  he  speaks
    fairly good English. He did not need the assistance of  an  interpreter
    when speaking with the independent social workers. Although the  mother
    of his oldest two children is of Angolan origin, his current partner is
    of Ugandan origin. It seems unlikely that she would  speak  Portuguese.
    In light of this evidence  it  is  likely  that  the  appellant  speaks
    English at home. The appellant's partner is a social worker.  There  is
    nothing to suggest that the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  work  to
    contribute to the  family  income.  The  evidence  shows  that  he  has
    obtained a number of qualifications since  arriving  on  the  UK  which
    might assist him to find work. The appellant is unlikely  to  become  a
    burden on taxpayers and would be better able to integrate into society.



55.   Although several public interest considerations are listed in  section
    117B, section 117B(6) is the operative provision  for  the  purpose  of
    this appeal. The provision states that the  public  interest  will  not
    require the person's removal if the person has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child and "it would not be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom." A 'qualifying child'  is
    defined as a person who is under the age of 18 and who is (i) a British
    citizen; or (ii) has lived in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  at
    least seven years.

56.   In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 the  Supreme  Court  found  that
    the assessment of 'reasonableness' is directed to the position  of  the
    child without reference  to  the  misconduct  of  his  or  her  parents
    although what is reasonable must be  considered  in  the  'real  world'
    context in which the children find themselves.

57.   In JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72  the
    Upper Tribunal rejected the submission that  section  117B(6)  is  only
    engaged if the children would, as a matter  of  fact,  be  expected  to
    leave the UK. It found that the provision requires a court or  tribunal
    to hypothesise that the  child  in  question  would  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and must ask whether it would be reasonable to expect the child
    to do so.

58.   I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with qualifying children. In assessing whether it
    would be unreasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK  I  take
    into account the fact that it is in the best interests of the  children
    to remain in the UK in the care of both parents. The best interests  of
    the children are a primary consideration.

59.   The real world situation is that the appellant has no leave to  remain
    and is liable  to  removal.  Although  the  oldest  two  children  have
    connections to Angola through both parents they were born in the UK and
    have known no other home. The appellant is no longer in a  relationship
    with their mother. The youngest child only has a tenuous connection  to
    Angola through her father. Angola is likely to be a foreign country  to
    all three children. They would  all  lose  the  practical  benefits  of
    growing up in the UK that  their  citizenship  brings.  Crucially,  the
    respondent accepts that it  would  be  'unduly  harsh'  to  expect  the
    children to live in Angola.  As  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    pointed out, this is a more stringent test  than  the  'reasonableness'
    test contained in section 117B(6)  NIAA  2002.  For  these  reasons,  I
    conclude that it would be unreasonable to expect the children to  leave
    the UK. The appellant satisfies the requirements  of  section  117B(6).
    The public interest does not require his removal in such circumstances.

60.   I conclude that removal in consequence of the  decision  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim would be disproportionate with reference to  Article
    8(2) of the European Convention and would therefore be  unlawful  under
    section 6 HRA 1998.

Article 8(2) (deportation)

61.   If I am wrong in my assessment of the scope of  this  appeal,  I  make
      alternative findings with reference to the framework relating to cases
      concerning the deportation of foreign criminals.

62.   The statute makes clear that deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in
      the public interest and that the more serious  the  offence  committed
      the greater is  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  However,  the
      statutory scheme also sets  out  circumstances  in  which  the  public
      interest in deportation is outweighed because a person  meets  one  of
      the stated exceptions.

63.   The appellant is eligible to argue that he comes  within  one  of  the
      exceptions to deportation outlined in section 117C(5) NIAA  2002.  The
      appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  qualifying
      children. The public interest in  deportation  is  outweighed  if  the
      effect of deportation would  be  'unduly  harsh'  on  the  appellant's
      children.

64.   In NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] WLR(D) 662 the Court  of  Appeal  noted
      that the inevitable consequence of deportation is for children  to  be
      separated from a parent even though  it  is  contrary  to  their  best
      interests. The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) made clear that something
      more than the usual harsh effect of deportation on a child  is  needed
      to reach  the  elevated  threshold  of  'unduly  harsh'  to  meet  the
      requirement of section 117C(5) NIAA 2002.

'Unduly harsh'

65.   The respondent accepts that it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
      children to live in the  country  to  which  the  appellant  would  be
      deported. The only issue is whether it would be unduly harsh to expect
      the children to remain in the  UK  without  their  father.  Given  the
      distance and expense of visiting a country such  as  Angola  it  seems
      unlikely that the children would  have  many  opportunities  to  visit
      their father. The most likely consequence is that they would face long
      term separation with only distant contact by telephone and other forms
      of modern communication.

66.   I have considered the  most  recent  independent  social  work  report
      prepared by Gugu Nare on 03 September 2018. There is  no  evidence  to
      suggest that the appellant's family circumstances have changed in  any
      material  way  since  then.  The   report   describes   the   familial
      relationships between the appellant, his former partner,  his  current
      partner and the children. The report describes normal  familial  bonds
      between the appellant and his children. He has a particular bond  with
      his youngest  daughter  because  he  is  the  person  who  is  largely
      responsible for her daily care. Ms Nare  noted  that  the  two  oldest
      children found the breakup of their parents'  relationship  difficult.
      This was exacerbated by their subsequent separation from the appellant
      when he was detained. B found it particularly difficult to the  extent
      that she received counselling at school. The report  states  that  she
      admitted to contemplating self-harm  when  access  to  her  father  is
      blocked.  A  second  separation  from  their  father  would  be   more
      detrimental to their wellbeing. Ms Nare concluded that it would be  in
      the interests of the children to continue to have regular contact with
      their father.

67.   I bear in mind that 'unduly harsh' denotes  something  more  than  the
      usual negative effects  of  deportation  on  a  family.  The  evidence
      largely describes normal  family  life  that  would  be  significantly
      disrupted by  the  appellant's  deportation.  The  separation  of  the
      children from their father would, unfortunately, be one of  the  usual
      negative  effects  of  deportation.  Although  the  evidence  is   not
      particularly   detailed,   it   does   outline   other   compassionate
      circumstances beyond  the  usual  negative  effects  on  children.  In
      particular, the assessment of  whether  it  is  unduly  harsh  on  the
      children must take into account the family history. Ms  Nare's  report
      makes clear that A and B have already  been  deeply  affected  by  the
      separation of their parents.

68.   There  is  some  evidence  to  suggest  that  B,  in  particular,  has
      struggled with her father's absence to a greater  degree  and  to  the
      extent that  she  had  to  receive  counselling.  The  fact  that  she
      mentioned contemplating self-harm is particularly  worrying.  Although
      there is no detailed evidence from a psychologist outlining quite  how
      seriously events have affected her, I am satisfied  that  this  is  an
      additional  compelling  factor  that  elevates  the  harsh  effect  of
      deportation to it being unduly  harsh  in  respect  of  B.  Given  the
      vulnerabilities that she  already  has  as  a  result  of  the  family
      breakup, a second major event that wrenches her from the  contact  she
      has re-established with her father is likely to have very serious  and
      long-lasting  detrimental  effects  on  the  child.      Although  the
      evidence shows that the effect of deportation would be  harsh  on  the
      other two children it does not go beyond the usual negative effects of
      deportation. However, the appellant only needs to show that  it  would
      be unduly  harsh  on  at  least  one  of  his  children  to  meet  the
      requirements of the exception  to  deportation  contained  in  section
      117C(5) NIAA 2002.

69.   In the alternative to my central finding, I conclude that  the  effect
      of deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on at least one of the children
      and that the appellant meets the requirement of section  117C(5).  His
      removal in consequence of the decision would be unlawful under section
      6 HRA 1998.

'Very compelling circumstances'

70.   I turn to consider whether there are 'very  compelling  circumstances'
      that might outweigh the public interest in deportation. I bear in mind
      that the  test  reflects  the  strong  case  needed  to  outweigh  the
      significant weight that must be  placed  on  the  public  interest  in
      deportation. Whether there are 'very  compelling  circumstances'  will
      depend on the circumstances of each case.

71.   The courts have repeatedly emphasised that significant  weight  should
      be given to the public interest in deportation. However, that  is  not
      to say that the weight to be given to the public interest  is  uniform
      or monolithic. The more serious the offending behaviour;  the  greater
      the weight is placed on the public interest in deportation.  The  less
      serious the offending behaviour;  the  more  readily  an  individual's
      compassionate or compelling circumstances might  outweigh  the  public
      interest in deportation. In other words, the assessment under  section
      117C(6) NIAA 2002 and paragraph 398  of  the  immigration  rules  more
      closely resembles the overall balancing  exercise  undertaken  by  the
      Strasbourg court  when  assessing  whether  the  interference  with  a
      person's private or family life is justified and  proportionate  under
      Article 8(2) of the European Convention. After all, that is the stated
      intention of the statutory scheme.

72.    In  assessing  what  weight  to  place   on   the   public   interest
      considerations I take into account the fact  that  the  appellant  has
      never had leave to remain in the UK save  for  the  brief  three-month
      period granted in 2014. He is liable to  removal  in  any  event.  The
      maintenance of an effective system of immigration control  is  in  the
      public interest. The appellant was convicted of two criminal offences.
      The first attracted a minor non-custodial sentence and  would  not  be
      sufficient to define him  as  a  'foreign  criminal.  The  second  was
      sufficiently serious to justify a custodial  sentence  of  15  months'
      imprisonment.

73.   The appellant's conviction must be given significant weight.  However,
      it must also be considered in its proper context.  The  appellant  has
      only been  convicted  of  one  offence  giving  rise  to  a  custodial
      sentence. The comments made by the sentencing judge made clear that he
      did not consider the appellant a danger to the community or in fact to
      his family. The offence was committed in the  context  of  a  domestic
      argument. In sentencing the appellant to 15 months'  imprisonment  the
      judge was reflecting the period of time already spent in custody  (253
      days reflected the half way point when  a  person  would  normally  be
      released on licence). It is impossible to know whether the judge would
      have given him a lesser sentence had the case come before him  earlier
      given the tone of his comments. The judge followed the  recommendation
      made in the pre-sentence report that no further time  in  custody  was
      required but did  not  find  it  necessary  to  impose  an  additional
      community sentence. In short, the  sentencing  judge  dealt  with  the
      matter in a pragmatic way given the time already  served.  The  effect
      was that the appellant was released the same day.

74.    Although  the  pre-sentence  report  from  2013  indicates  that  the
      appellant did not take full responsibility  for  his  actions  at  the
      time, by the time Judge Cary heard the case  in  2018,  the  appellant
      appeared to have a full  understanding  of  the  consequences  of  his
      actions. The judge noted  that  the  appellant  expressed  regret  and
      apologised for the offence [15]. Although the judge noted some concern
      about evidence which indicated that the  appellant  still  has  "anger
      management issues" he was  satisfied  that  there  was  no  meaningful
      evidence to suggest that the appellant posed a threat to his former or
      current partner, his children or society at large [41].  There  is  no
      evidence of a pattern of offending. There is no evidence to show  that
      the appellant has been convicted of any  further  offences  since  the
      index offence was committed in 2011. The significant period  that  has
      elapsed since the offence indicates that there is a low  risk  of  the
      appellant reoffending.

75.   The public interest in deportation reflects society's  disapproval  of
      criminal behaviour whether a person presents a risk of reoffending  or
      not. This is a matter that must be taken into account, but  it  cannot
      be a monolithic or overriding  factor  otherwise  no  one  would  ever
      succeed in  resisting  deportation,  especially  in  cases  where  the
      offence is less serious and the evidence indicates that there is a low
      risk of reoffending.

76.   In assessing what weight should be placed on  the  public  interest  I
      also take into account the long history of this case. If there  was  a
      pressing social need to remove the  appellant  one  might  expect  the
      respondent  to  act  without  undue  delay.  Following  the   original
      deportation decision made in 2012 the appeals process took its  usual,
      albeit relatively slow, course of time. The respondent  could  not  be
      criticised for that. However, after the first  human  rights  decision
      was made 30 June 2015 the respondent failed  to  take  any  action  to
      remove the appellant despite the claim being certified  under  section
      94B NIAA 2002. No further action was  taken  until  the  decision  was
      withdrawn and replaced with a fresh decision on 31 October  2017.  The
      respondent's reliance on the original  deportation  order,  which  was
      revoked by the act of granting leave to remain, failed to  follow  the
      proper procedure for a valid decision to be made under  section  32(5)
      UKBA 2007. In the meantime, it is likely that the  appellant's  family
      life with his partner and children strengthened. This is  particularly
      so in relation to the youngest child, who was  born  after  the  first
      appeal was determined, who lives with the appellant and with  whom  he
      is said to have a "strong bond".

77.   The appellant's offence was at the lower end of the scale and did  not
      form a pattern of offending behaviour. Nevertheless,  if  this  was  a
      case concerning the deportation of  a  foreign  criminal,  the  public
      interest in deportation should be given  significant  weight.  On  the
      other side, I weigh the cumulative effect of the appellant's length of
      residence (albeit little weight is placed on it with reference to  his
      private life), the length and depth of his family life during the long
      period in which proceedings to remove him have been  pending  and  the
      fact that it would have an unduly harsh effect  on  one  child  and  a
      harsh effect on the other two, whose best interests are to be  brought
      up by both parents in the UK.

78.   The provisions contained in the statutory scheme are  intended  to  be
      compliant with a proper application  of  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention. After having conducted a holistic assessment  of  where  a
      fair balance should be struck between the undoubted weight  that  must
      be placed on the public interest in  deportation  and  the  individual
      circumstances of this case, I conclude that the cumulative  effect  of
      the   appellant's   circumstances   amount   to    'very    compelling
      circumstances' that outweigh the public interest in deportation.

79.   In the  alternative  to  my  central  finding,  I  conclude  that  the
      appellant meets the  requirements  of  the  exception  to  deportation
      contained in section 117C(6) and that his removal  in  consequence  of
      the decision would be unlawful under section 6 HRA 1998.


DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date   21 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14751/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2018                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     J D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues.  We  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State who we shall  continue  to
    call "the respondent" against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cary promulgated on 25 September 2018 in which the First-tier  Tribunal
    upheld an appeal by the appellant,  a  citizen  of  Angola,  against  a
    deportation order.  The appeal was allowed broadly on  the  basis  that
    the appellant was exercising contact with two children and lived with a
    partner and another child and that it would be unduly harsh  for  these
    children if the appellant were deported.

2.    We need not go into the full history of the  case  which  is  set  out
    fully in the Determination and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    is  to  be  noted  however  that  a  previous  Tribunal  dealt  with  a
    deportation order on the basis of the same offence in 2013.  The First-
    tier Tribunal on that occasion allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  to  a
    limited extent because he was in the process of approaching the  Family
    Court for contact orders in respect  of  two  of  the  children.   That
    decision was appealed to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State
    and the appeal was refused.  The implications of that are not  entirely
    clear, either as a matter of law or as a matter of fairness,  and  that
    is a matter which we expect will have to  be  addressed.   Nonetheless,
    the case came before us for a decision as to whether there was an error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

3.    The Home Office Presenting Officer,  Mr  Bramble,  made  a  number  of
    arguments, but the principal argument as far as we can see  is  related
    to paragraph 43 of the decision where the judge said,  "I  consider  it
    would be unduly harsh for any of the Appellant's children to remain  in
    the United Kingdom without him, in view of the  active  and  beneficial
    role he plays in their respective  lives."   Put  shortly,  Mr  Bramble
    submitted that that sentence alone was insufficient to allow the reader
    to know what the reasons were for the finding that it would  be  unduly
    harsh for the appellant to be deported and the children to remain here.



4.    In reply, Ms Nnamani submitted that the decision had to be read  as  a
    whole and referred us to an independent social work  report  which  set
    out  the  effects  of  the  appellant's  proposed  deportation  on  the
    children.  That social work report is referred to at  paragraph  42  of
    the decision but it is not clear what aspects of it  were  accepted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal  except  that  the  judge  accepted  that  both
    children were benefitting from contact with the appellant, that the two
    children had a firm bond with him and wished to have  ongoing  contact,
    which must be for their benefit, and it  was  equally  clear  that  the
    appellant had a strong bond with the other  child,  who  is  a  younger
    child and with whom he lives.

5.    Having considered the decision as a whole, we are not  satisfied  that
    it can be said that the reader could work out what the reasons were why
    the high test of undue harshness was thought to have been  met  and  it
    seems to us that the decision requires to be set  aside.   The  parties
    were agreed that if we set it aside it would be appropriate for  it  to
    be remade in the Upper Tribunal, so the  case  will  be  listed  for  a
    hearing in this Tribunal before any panel.  We  would  expect  that  at
    that stage parties would be in a position,  which  understandably  they
    tell us they are not in at the moment to discuss  the  implications  of
    the previous Tribunal's decision which was not  successfully  appealed.
    We have decided that it would  be  appropriate  that  the  findings  of
    primary fact made by the First-tier Tribunal should be maintained.  The
    parties are of course at liberty, subject to appropriate directions and
    appropriate applications, to submit any  further  evidence  which  they
    think appropriate in due course.

Notice of Decision

6.    The First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside and  the  case  will  be
    listed for rehearing.

Directions

(1)   Any further documents or up to date evidence  to  be  filed  at  least
    fourteen days before the date of the next hearing.

(2)   The parties shall be ready to argue the issue of proportionality.  The
    appellant succeeded in an earlier deportation appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds with reference to the immigration rules in place on 10  October
    2012. The respondent remade  the  decision  based  on  the  same  index
    offence, and without the appellant having reoffended, with reference to
    the more stringent test outlined in the immigration rules in  place  on
    18 June 2015.



                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                      Date: 13 December 2018

