
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14755/2016
     HU/14766/2016
     HU/14767/2016
     HU/14768/2016
     HU/14769/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On November 30, 2018                         |On December 7, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                 WEIMING [L]
                                 KRISTIE [T]
                                   [Z X L]
                                   [Z H L]
                                   [Z T L]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fisher, Counsel, instructed by Zelin and Zelin
For the Respondent:    Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first-named appellant  is  a  Chinese  national.  The  second-named
    appellant is a Malaysian national and is the wife  of  the  first-named
    appellant.   The   remaining   appellants    are    potentially    both
    Chinese/Malaysian nationals and are  the  children  of  the  first  and
    second-named appellants. The children's dates of birth  are  [~]  2008,
    [~] 2011 and [~] 2012 respectively.

 2. The first-named appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  September  8,
    2002 with entry clearance as a work  permit  holder  with  leave  until
    February 26, 2007. His leave expired at that date and he  has  remained
    here unlawfully since that date.

 3. The second-named appellant entered the United Kingdom in April 2006  as
    a visitor. Her leave expired six months  later.  They  met  before  the
    first-named  appellant's  leave  expired  but  after  the  second-named
    appellant's leave had expired.

 4. On October 11, 2013 the appellants applied for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of their family and private  life,  but  the  respondent  refused
    these applications on November 16, 2013. Subsequently submissions  were
    lodged on their behalves which led to  a  fresh  refusal  letter  being
    issued by the respondent on May 27, 2016.

 5. The appellants appealed on June 9, 2016  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  their  appeals  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal on December 8, 2017
    who in a decision  promulgated  on  December  18,  2017  refused  their
    appeals on human rights grounds.

 6. Permission to appeal was sought but this was refused by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Easterman on May 2, 2018. Permission to appeal  was
    renewed and on September 17, 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  granted
    permission to appeal on all grounds although indicated that grounds one
    and two may be difficult to argue. In  granting  permission  on  Ground
    Three, he found it was arguable the Judge may have erred in finding  it
    was reasonable to require the third-named appellant to leave the United
    Kingdom given that he had lived here since his birth  on  December  28,
    2008.

 7. This matter came before my colleague Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Lewis
    on October 24, 2018 who adjourned  the  case  on  the  basis  that  the
    Supreme Court had handed down judgement  in  KO  (Nigeria)  and  others
    [2018] UKSC 53 that morning.

 8. At the commencement of the hearing I raised with Ms Fisher whether  all
    grounds were to be pursued and she confirmed that they were.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Ms Fisher  adopted  the  original  grounds  of  appeal  that  had  been
    submitted on January 2, 2018.

10. With regard to the first ground of appeal she argued that the Judge had
    applied to high a burden of proof and in reaching  the  conclusion  she
    did she had  ignored  the  evidence  given  by  the  witnesses  and  in
    particular that the appellant had never  been  to  Manchester  and  her
    findings at paragraphs 34 and 35  of  her  decision  were  flawed.  She
    submitted that the Judge's findings on the conviction and relevance  to
    the first-named appellant raised more questions than  answers  and  the
    first-named appellant could not have obtained further information about
    the conviction as he did not have an identification document.

11. With regard to ground two,  she  submitted  that  the  Judge  erred  in
    finding the third-named appellant would be able  to  settle  in  either
    China or Malaysia because there was no evidence to her finding that the
    third-named appellant would be able to accompany his mother to Malaysia
    as neither he  nor  any  of  his  siblings  were  guaranteed  Malaysian
    citizenship. Ms Fisher referred to  evidence  from  both  the  Canadian
    Refugee Board and the US Report (March  2001)  submitted  that  as  the
    second-named appellant had been outside Malaysia for  almost  12  years
    (as at today's date) it was questionable whether  she  would  still  be
    considered a Malaysian citizen.

12. Turning to the final ground of appeal she submitted  that  the  Judge's
    approach when considering reasonableness and the best interests of  the
    third-named appellant was flawed. The Judge had  placed  far  too  much
    weight on the cost to the NHS and schooling costs  and  had  failed  to
    give due weight to the respondent's own policy and the  guidance  given
    by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) and others [2016] EWCA Civ 705.
    The Judge had failed to identify any strong reasons  for  refusing  the
    application especially in circumstances where  his  parents  were  from
    different countries and the family, if removed, would be split up.  She
    submitted that the decision by the Supreme Court in KO did not  address
    the issue of strong reasons and did not disapprove of MA.

13. Ms Kenny opposed the grounds of appeal. In respect of the first  ground
    of appeal she submitted that this Tribunal  could  not  go  behind  the
    conviction recorded against the first-named appellant. All the  matters
    that had been raised by Ms Fisher at today's  appeal  had  been  argued
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the Judge had found  the  conviction
    did relate to the first-named appellant and  contrary  to  Ms  Fisher's
    submission the Judge had applied and the correct standard of proof.

14. In respect of the second ground of appeal  both  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins and Deputy Upper Tribunal Lewis had pointed out that there  was
    no expert evidence adduced in this  case  to  support  this  ground  of
    appeal. The Judge had considered the issue of return and in  particular
    whether the children could accompany either of their parents  to  China
    or Malaysia and had given reasons  for  her  finding.  Without  further
    evidence from an expert there was no basis upon which to find an  error
    in law.

15. Turning to the final ground of  appeal  Ms  Kenny  submitted  that  the
    Judge, in light of the decision in KO, was entitled to find it would be
    reasonable for the child to accompany his parents to  either  China  or
    Malaysia. Neither parent had any legal basis upon which  to  remain  in
    this country. The first-named appellant had been  here  unlawfully  for
    over 10 years and the second-named appellant had been  here  unlawfully
    for longer. Their relationship had  been  substantially  formed  whilst
    they were both here unlawfully and at a  time  when  their  immigration
    status was precarious at  best.  The  Judge  had  considered  the  best
    interests of the children and had then looked  at  whether  there  were
    strong reasons which would make it reasonable  to  require  the  third-
    named appellant to leave the United Kingdom. She submitted it was  mere
    speculation they would be removed to different countries and in finding
    it reasonable to require the third-named appellant to  leave  with  his
    parents, the Judge applied significant  weight  to  his  parent's  poor
    immigration history, his father's illegal working and the accessing  of
    publicly funded facilities.

    FINDINGS

16. The appellants have each appealed the Judge's decision to  refuse  them
    leave to remain under article 8 ECHR. Three grounds of appeal were  put
    forward and argued before me.

17. The first ground of appeal concerned a conviction recorded against  the
    first-named appellant. The Judge heard evidence from the appellant  and
    his witnesses. In her oral submissions, Ms Fisher pointed to  the  fact
    that the evidence before the First-tier Judge was that the  first-named
    appellant did not drive, had never lived in Manchester, the  respondent
    had not raised it in the 2013 decision letter or and the conviction did
    not appear on a basic CRB check. Ms Kenny submitted that  the  starting
    point for the  Judge  was  that  the  first-named  appellant  had  been
    convicted of the fraudulent use of the  tax  disc  and  the  Judge  had
    considered all the evidence and had given and reasons for concluding he
    was the person convicted.

18. This was not a case where the Judge did not consider the  evidence  and
    unless the Judge's decision was perverse there could  be  no  error  in
    law. The Judge had considered Ms Fisher's submissions in the First-tier
    Tribunal but pointed out that  steps  could  have  been  taken  by  the
    appellant, bearing in mind the age of the conviction, to challenge  the
    conviction. Whilst I take on board Ms  Fisher's  submissions  regarding
    potential difficulties he may have doing this the Judge was entitled to
    find no efforts had been  taken  and  all  the  findings  contained  in
    paragraph 35 of the decision were open to the  Judge.  Contrary  to  Ms
    Fisher's submission, the Judge did apply the correct standard of  proof
    stating in paragraph 35 of her decision that she was satisfied "on  the
    balance of probabilities". No error in law was identified on the  first
    ground of appeal.

19. Turning to the second ground of appeal  I  take  on  board  what  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins stated when giving permission to  appeal  namely
    that in order to demonstrate there was an error in  law  the  appellant
    would have to produce something tangible such as an expert opinion from
    a suitably qualified lawyer. The First-tier Judge  was  presented  with
    two differing arguments and the Judge had to make  a  decision  on  the
    information presented to her. In the absence of a legal opinion to  the
    contrary there is nothing  contained  in  the  Judge's  decision  which
    would, without further evidence, support Ms  Fisher's  submission  that
    there had been an error in law.

20. The final ground of appeal was the issue  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins  found  most  troubling.  There  has   been   much   litigation
    surrounding cases where a child of the  family  has  accumulated  seven
    years  residence  in  this  country.  The  respondent  has  issued  two
    policies, that I am aware of. The previous policy from August 2015  was
    replaced by one in February 2018 and whilst  some  presenting  officers
    have suggested the February 2018 policy has been  withdrawn,  following
    the decision in KO, that was not a position adopted by Ms Kenny  before
    me today.

21. Before considering Ms Fisher's submission that the Judge  erred  it  is
    necessary to  consider  how  the  Judge  approached  this  issue.  This
    assessment commenced at paragraph 36  of  the  decision  and  continued
    until paragraph 53.

22. The Judge, having concluded the  Immigration  Rules  could  not  be  me
    identified that if it was unreasonable for the third-named appellant to
    go to either China or Malaysia then not only would he succeed  but  his
    whole family would also succeed.

23. Contrary to Ms Fisher's submission, the Judge considered the children's
    best interests first and foremost. The  Judge  took  into  account  the
    various school reports but concluded  that  the  child  was  not  at  a
    critical stage of his  education.  The  Judge  took  into  account  the
    guidance issued  in  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and  at
    paragraph 38 of her decision, she set out the current  situation.  None
    of the conclusions given by the Judge in paragraph 38 of  her  decision
    were factually incorrect and the Judge concluded that it  would  be  in
    the third-named appellant's best interests  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

24. In EV (Philippines) the Court stated, "how the tribunal should approach
    the proportionality  exercise  if  it  has  determined  that  the  best
    interests of the child or children are that they should  continue  with
    their education in England. Whether or not it is in the interests of  a
    child to continue his or her education in England may  depend  on  what
    assumptions one makes as to what happens to the parents. There  can  be
    cases where it is in the child's best interests to remain in  education
    in the UK, even though one or both parents did not remain here."

25. The Judge having established that it  would  be  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain then set about looking at  the  proportionality  of
    requiring him to leave the United Kingdom.  Ms  Fisher's  challenge  to
    this is that the Judge's approach  was  flawed  through  a  failure  to
    properly apply section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act or the respondent's  own
    policy.

26. At paragraph 41 of the Judge's decision she noted that the child's best
    interests were a primary consideration, but they could be outweighed by
    the cumulative effect of other considerations. The Supreme Court in  KO
    did provide guidance on how this should be approached.

27. The Supreme Court in KO concluded that the purpose of Part 5A of the
    2002 Act is to produce a straightforward set of rules, intending to
    reduce discretion in taking public interest into account, and to be
    consistent with the general principles relating to the 'best interests'
    of children.

28. The Court considered that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) contained no
    requirement to consider the criminality or misconduct of a parent as a
    balancing factor and such a requirement cannot be read in by
    implication. Equally it was considered that s 117B of the 2002 Act did
    not include criminality or misconduct of a parent as a consideration,
    though it recognised that this may indirectly become relevant if an
    individual's record impacts where they will be, and where their
    dependent child will be.

29. At paragraph 18 of KO the Supreme Court stated:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it seems to
         me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of the parents may become indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain
         here and having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain."


30. The Supreme Court went on to adopt what Lewiston LJ had stated in EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874, namely:

         "... the assessment of the best interests of the children must be
         made on the basis that the facts are as they are in the real world.
         If one parent has no right to remain, but the other parent does,
         that is the background against which the assessment is conducted.
         If neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
         background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus, the
         ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect the child to
         follow the parent with no right to remain to the country of
         origin?"


31. The Judge made a finding that there was no  evidence  before  her  that
    China  or  Malaysia  would  prevent  the  third-named  appellant   from
    accompanying either of his parents to either China or Malaysia and  she
    also found that there was nothing before her to support the  submission
    that the parents would not be able to enter either China or Malaysia as
    a family.

32. The Judge noted that the child's parents had spent substantial parts of
    their lives (26  and  24  years  respectively)  in  China  or  Malaysia
    respectively. The  Judge  took  into  account  that  the  children  had
    extended family in both countries and the third-named  appellant  spoke
    both Cantonese and English and  had  been  learning  Mandarin  for  two
    years. Whilst he did not speak Malay the Judge noted that both  English
    and Cantonese were spoken in Malaysia and it was reasonable  to  expect
    the child and his siblings to be able to learn Malay.

33. The Judge addressed the ability of the family to be able  to  obtain  a
    Hukou and she rejected Ms Fisher's  submission  that  the  second-named
    appellant would be  unable  to  register  the  third-named  appellant's
    birth. Whilst Ms Fisher argued the family would be split  up  this  was
    something considered by the Judge who concluded at paragraph 45 of  her
    decision that there was no evidence to suggest they would be unable  to
    apply for entry clearance to the other's  home  country  as  either  an
    unmarried partner or ultimately as a  spouse.  Whilst  I  accept  every
    country  has  entry  clearance  requirements  the  burden  lay  on  the
    appellants to persuade the Judge that entry clearance was not available
    and they failed to satisfy the  Judge  that  entry  clearance  was  not
    available.

34. The Supreme Court made clear that in  assessing  reasonableness,  under
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, a parent's previous misdemeanours  was
    not something to take into account but such behaviour could be relevant
    because the Court/Tribunal had to consider the position  in  the  "real
    world". The  Judge  had  concluded  the  third-named  appellant  was  a
    qualifying  child  and  came  within  section  117B(6)  but  ultimately
    concluded it would be  reasonable  for  that  child  to  accompany  his
    parents when they were removed.

35. The  respondent's  policy  makes  clear  that  relevant  factors,  when
    considering reasonableness, include:

      a) Whether the child would be leaving with a parent.


      b) Whether there are any wider family ties in the United Kingdom.


      c) Whether the child is likely to be able to  integrate  readily  into
         life in another country including taking into account:


          i) whether the parent/child are a citizen of the country they are
             being removed to.


         ii) How long the parent had lived in that country for.


        iii) Whether the child had ever lived in that country and if so for
             how long.


         iv) Whether the child had ever visited  the  proposed  country  of
             return.


          v) Does the parent/child have any family or social ties  to  that
             country.


         vi) Does the child had cultural ties to that country.


        vii) Can the parent/child read and write the language associated to
             that country.


      d) Would removal give rise to a significant risk to the child health.


      e) Any other factors  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in
         relation to education, health or public services.


      f) Significant weight should be given where a  non-British  child  has
         lived in the country for seven years or  more  and  strong  reasons
         would be required to refuse such a case.


      g) Such strong reasons may arise where, for example, the child will be
         returning  with  the  family  unit  to  the  family's  country   of
         nationality, and the parents have deliberately sought to circumvent
         immigration control or abuse the immigration process - for example,
         by entering or remaining in the UK illegally or by using  deception
         in an application for leave to enter or remain.


      h) The consideration  of  the  child's  best  interests  must  not  be
         affected by the conduct or immigration history of the parent(s)  or
         primary carer, but these will be relevant to the assessment of  the
         public interest, including  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
         control.


36. Having read the Judge's decision I am satisfied that these are  factors
    the Judge took into account when considering reasonableness. The  Judge
    rightly concluded that neither the first nor second-named appellant had
    any legal basis upon which to remain in this country  and  the  Supreme
    Court made clear that this is a factor the court must take into account
    when considering the reasonableness of the child being removed.

37. The Judge repeatedly stressed that  none  of  the  children  should  be
    blamed for the conduct of their parents but that their parent's conduct
    was something she could take into account at the proportionality stage.

38. I accept a Judge hearing an appeal on these facts may  have  reached  a
    different conclusion but that is  not  the  test  to  be  applied  when
    considering whether there has been an error in law.

39. This was a detailed decision in which the Judge recognised  the  issues
    and approached the assessment in the knowledge that a decision  on  the
    best interests of the child had to be made first and foremost, followed
    by an assessment of factors including whether  there  were  any  strong
    reasons which would make it unreasonable for the third-named  appellant
    to leave the country.

40. Applying the guidance in KO, I am satisfied that this decision was open
    to the Judge and in such circumstances there was no error in law.

Notice of Decision

41. There is no error in law. I uphold the original decision.


Signed                              Date     01/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal


Signed                              Date     01/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

