
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14627/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2018                       |On 04 April 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                        mr Harry Edionseri Osemwengie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Nwaekwu, Moorehouse solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Seelhoff promulgated on 17 August 2018 following a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 3 August 2018.  On that occasion  the  appellant  was  neither
    represented nor attended.

 2. Before I deal with the evidence that was submitted  in  support  of  an
    application for an adjournment, I will set out the immigration history.

 3. The appellant was granted leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  from  3
    September 2014 until 30 January 2016.  On 27 January  2016  he  applied
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the  Rules  and  that
    was rejected on 19 July 2016.  I am not entirely sure when he  actually
    entered the United Kingdom, but in the decision letter it said that  he
    had lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  approximately  nine
    months.  That would indicate that he entered the  United  Kingdom  some
    time in January 2016.  On the face of it,  when  he  had  been  granted
    leave to remain as a student and that leave had expired, there would be
    no reason why he should be entitled to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outside the  Rules.   However,  the  Secretary  of  State  invited  the
    appellant to attend an interview.  That was a request made on 29 August
    2017 but the appellant failed to attend the interview  along  with  his
    partner on 12 September 2017.  Accordingly, the appellant  was  invited
    to attend on 12 October 2017.  Once again he failed to  attend.   Worse
    still, he provided no further  explanation  as  to  why.   Accordingly,
    there was very little that sounded in  a  viable  claim  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.  There were two separate  occasions  when  he
    was invited to attend for interview and  failed,  and  finally  he  has
    never provided any explanation for his failure  to  attend.   That  was
    entirely sufficient for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  find  that  the
    suitability requirements for leave to enter had not been met.

 4. It followed from this that the claim was bound to fail.   Nevertheless,
    even if there had been a viable Article 8 claim, none was  put  forward
    with sufficient clarity to establish that the eligibility requirements,
    although not  met,  should  be  overlooked  in  order  to  provide  the
    appellant with leave to remain.

 5.  The  decision  maker  went  on  to  consider  beyond  the  eligibility
    requirements, whether  or  not  Exception  1  applied,  and  since  the
    appellant was in breach of immigration law, Exception 1 did not  apply.
    There was no relevant child when the Secretary  of  State  went  on  to
    consider what would have happened had Exception 1 applied.  As a result
    of there being no relevant child, the  Secretary  of  State  reasonably
    concluded that he had not  seen  any  evidence  of  any  insurmountable
    obstacles in accordance with Exception 2.  Insurmountable obstacles  he
    reminded himself would be very significant difficulties that either the
    appellant or his partner would face in continuing family  life  outside
    the United Kingdom.

 6. The decision maker then went on to consider whether the time  that  the
    appellant had spent in the United Kingdom was sufficient to provide him
    with leave to remain.  He noted  that  the  appellant  had  resided  in
    Nigeria until he was aged about 35, and therefore unsurprisingly, there
    would not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Nigeria.  Those reasons were compelling.  They set out a series of good
    reasons why the claim was bound to fail.  Nevertheless,  the  appellant
    appealed to the Tribunal.

 7. The grounds of appeal to the  Tribunal  were  hopeless.   There  is  an
    allegation of irrationality and Wednesbury unreasonableness, though  no
    details were provided of what was said to be irrational  and  what  was
    said to be Wednesbury unreasonable.  It was said that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the relevant and applicable law.  Once again  there  is
    no suggestion of what the law was and how it was that the decision  was
    not in accordance with it.

 8. It was then said that consideration was not given to Article 8, but  no
    details are provided as to what that dereliction  of  duty  might  have
    been.

 9. It follows that the grounds of appeal were simply a device to bring the
    case to the Tribunal without there being any substance whatever  behind
    them.

10. It is against that background that the hearing has to be assessed.

11. On the day of the hearing 3 August 2018, the appellant did not  attend.
    There  was  however  a  document  provided  from  the  North  Middlesex
    University Hospital which  indicated  that  this  appellant  had  self-
    referred himself to the hospital and the diagnosis which the  appellant
    himself gave was food poisoning.  That was entirely related to what  he
    said had been his meal  the  day  before.   There  is  nothing  in  the
    material to show that there  was  anything  seriously  wrong.   He  was
    discharged in the course of the day.  There was no  diagnosis,  but  if
    anything, it could  only  have  been  a  suspected  diagnosis  of  food
    poisoning.  No further document was provided,  and  indeed  no  further
    document was provided, after the event, to indicate that he had been to
    the GP, that the GP had examined him and had made a diagnosis  and  was
    satisfied on examination of the patient that there was something  wrong
    with him.  So the judge was faced with the decision as  to  whether  or
    not he should grant an adjournment.

12. The appellant in the preparation of the case had instructed solicitors.
     Those solicitors had served no evidence  in  advance  of  the  appeal.
    There was no witness statement. There was  only  a  letter  from  those
    solicitors that the appellant  had  instructed  them  to  withdraw  the
    appeal because he was not feeling well and had attended hospital  on  1
    August 2018.  The  judge  did  not  treat  that  as  being  an  express
    withdrawal because he thought it was equivocal and so he treated it  as
    a request for an adjournment.

13. The judge considered the overlying circumstances  and  the  appellant's
    apparent inability to attend the hearing on 3 August 2018.  The papers,
    the judge noted, said that the appellant had  attended  hospital  on  1
    August 2018.  The report said the appellant had apparently had fish the
    previous  evening.   The  judge  incorrectly  says  the  appellant  was
    diagnosed with food poisoning.  In fact, there was no  such  diagnosis.
    He was discharged the same day.  That does not appear to  be  a  reason
    why the appeal should be adjourned some two days later.

14. The judge noted that no witness statements had been made,  the  outline
    of the appeal had not been stated in the grounds of appeal.  There  had
    been no bundle. There was no evidence from the schools, from his wife:,
    there was nothing upon which it could properly be  said  that,  if  the
    appellant had attended on 3 August 2018, his appeal had any prospect of
    succeeding.  Indeed, nothing further is said  about  what  the  overall
    merits of the appeal might be.

15. This is not a case where the appellant  had  not  been  served  by  the
    Tribunal and consequently he was entitled to a hearing because  of  the
    interest of justice.  This was a case where he had been properly served
    with a notice of hearing and was required to participate in the appeal.
     He had plainly failed to do so from  the  very  beginning.   In  those
    circumstances it was therefore  open  to  the  judge  to  look  at  the
    underlying merits of the appeal.

16. In the grounds of appeal before me nothing is said about the underlying
    merits of the claim.  It is  simply  said  that  it  should  have  been
    adjourned on the basis of medical grounds.  That is simply not  correct
    in view of the circumstances which I have outlined.  There was, at  the
    very least, a requirement  that  the  appellant's  grounds  should  put
    forward an arguable case that his removal was a violation of his  human
    rights.  No arguable case was submitted to me this morning  to  suggest
    that  there  is  a  viable  case  to  be  brought  forward.   In  those
    circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge was  entirely  correct  in
    refusing the adjournment.  For these reasons, there  was  no  error  of
    law.

17. No anonymity direction is made.

DECISION

There being no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  his
determination of the appeal shall stand.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                2 April 2019

