








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14484/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 15 November 2018              |On: 28 November 2018                     |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                          Mr Himansu Bhogilal Patel
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, counsel, instructed by London View
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge, who in a decision promulgated on  20  June  2018,
      dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
      dated 24 May 2016 to refuse the his human rights claim arising from an
      application under the Immigration Rules for indefinite leave to remain
      on long residence grounds.

   2. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  stated
      that the Judge had applied the correct version of  paragraph  276B  of
      the Immigration Rules, namely those in force at the date of decision.

   3.  She  noted  that  it  had  been  argued  that  having  submitted  his
      application within 28 days of the expiry of his leave,  the  appellant
      could rely on having accrued ten years in  the  UK  by  February  2016
      before the decision was made.

   4. She found that to be arguable as the respondent's policy  is  that  an
      applicant who accrues ten years' lawful residence  whilst  awaiting  a
      decision  cannot  make  a  further  application  but  can  amend   the
      application. That may well have been the reason that the  Home  Office
      Presenting  Officer  requested  an  adjournment  at  the  hearing   to
      reconsider the application.

   5. It is recorded at [5] of the decision that the respondent applied  for
      an adjournment to review the evidence produced by  the  appellant  for
      this appeal, '... about his last application being sent by  registered
      mail on 21 September 2015'.

   6. The respondent indicated in the Rule 24 response  to  the  grounds  of
      appeal that the appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  is
      not opposed. The Tribunal is invited to determine the  appeal  with  a
      fresh oral  hearing  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  meets  the
      requirements for indefinite leave to remain under  paragraph  276B  of
      the Rules, and on the basis of the Human Rights grounds  available  to
      the appellant under the amended appeal regime.

   7. At the hearing, Mr Lindsay on behalf of the respondent  accepted  that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. Mr Lindsay indicated  that,  subject  to  the
      respondent  being  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  no   relevant
      convictions, the appeal can be re-made and allowed. The PNC  check  is
      to be made.







      Assessment

   8. I find that the appellant had accrued ten years in the UK by  February
      2016, before the decision was made. In the circumstances, as  accepted
      by the respondent the decision of the First-tier tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law. I accordingly set it  aside  and
      remake it.

   9. Following the hearing Mr Lindsay has sent the Tribunal a printout from
      Border Force WICU PNC and UKVI Crosscheck Bureaux.  The  PNC  printout
      reveals  that  there  are  no  convictions  registered   against   the
      appellant.

  10. In remaking the decision, I am satisfied that the appellant meets  the
      requirements for indefinite leave to remain under  paragraph  276B  of
      the Rules.  On the basis of the human rights grounds available to  him
      under section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  act
      2002, I find that there would be a breach of his rights under  Article
      8 of the Human Rights Convention, if the appeal was dismissed.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.


      I remake the decision and allow the appellant's appeal.


      No anonymity direction made.






      Signed                             Date 22 November 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


