
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14488/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                |                                |
|On 14 May 2019                        |On 17 May 2019                  |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 ASHLEY [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Khan of SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge V A Cox promulgated on 29 January 2019, which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of an application for  entry
    clearance under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules. The refusal was
    under paragraphs 297(e) and (f) that the  Sponsor  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant and serious or compelling reasons  why
    exclusion was undesirable.

 3. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the  Judge  failed  to  give
    adequate weight to the evidence that the Appellant had been raped;  the
    Judge has failed to make a clear finding as whether the rape took place
    as at paragraph 33 she found it had and at paragraph 36  she  found  it
    had not; the Judge erred in finding  that  there  was  no  up  to  date
    medical evidence in respect of the grandmother (para 44) when there was
    a report dated 25 January 2018 at P 90 of the bundle.

 4.  On 21 March 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Gumsley gave permission  to
    appeal

 5. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Khan  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

 6. The Judges findings in respect of whether the Appellant was raped  were
    confused in that at  paragraph  33  she  found  that  she  had  and  at
    paragraph 36 she found that she had not.

 7. The Judge in determining whether the Appellant had sole  responsibility
    placed wright on the fact that the rape had not been  reported  to  the
    mother but reasons were given for that.

 8. There was medical evidence dated 24 August 2018  that  the  grandmother
    could no longer care for the Appellant.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tan, submitted that:

10. There were contradictory findings in relation to the rape  but  it  was
    clear from the decision that the basis on which  the  Judge  considered
    the test of sole responsibility was that the  rape  had  occurred.  The
    Sponsors lack of knowledge of the rape and her lack of  any  meaningful
    input into the decision making following that extremely important event
    did count against her.

11. However contrary to what was asserted by Mr Khan that was not the  only
    issue held against  the  Sponsor  in  making  her  claim  to  have  ole
    responsibility fir the  Appellant.  Her  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    Appellants schooling was vague and inconsistent.

12. Again the issue of serious and compelling circumstances was  considered
    on the basis that the rape had occurred. The Judge at  paragraph  56-57
    clearly looked at all of the circumstances of the Appellants life.

13. The Appellant was simply attempting to re argue the case.

14. In reply Mr Khan on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

15. Paragraph 41 was inherently contradictory: the rape was  evidence  that
    the Appellant could not be safely cared for by her grandmother.

The Law

16.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.

18. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

Finding on Material Error

19. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

20. Dealing briefly with the argument that the Judge failed to have  regard
    to the most recent medical evidence I note that this clearly post-dated
    the date of the application and decision made at the time the Appellant
    was under 18 : the only medical evidence before the decision maker  was
    dated 2001 and did not suggest that the grandmother was unfit  to  care
    for the Appellant . By the time the matter came before  the  Judge  the
    Appellant  was  an  adult  and  unable  on  that  basis  to  meet   the
    requirements of the Rules and therefore I am satisfied  that  it  would
    have been open to the Judge to find that the  level  of  care  required
    from the grandmother was limited for Article 8 purposes.

21. Mr Khan relies on what is said at paragraph 41 to suggest that the fact
    that she had been raped suggests she could not be safely cared  for  by
    her grandmother: nowhere in any witness statement or  in  the  skeleton
    argument or oral submissions do I see an  argument  advanced  that  the
    Appellant was raped and in any way this was due to an absence  of  care
    by the grandmother. I  conclude  that  in  the  absence  of  any  clear
    evidence that the level of care provided by the grandmother played  any
    role in those events it is an argument entirely without merit.

22. In relation to the issue of  the  rape  there  are  some  contradictory
    findings in that at paragraph 33 the Judge states she was,  at  35  she
    finds she was not, and at paragraph 56 she appears to accept  that  she
    was. However on any reading of the decision as a whole it is clear that
    the Judge has assessed the issue of sole responsibility  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant was raped and it was open to her to  find  that  the
    way this extremely important event was dealt with by the grandmother in
    the total absence of any contribution or  direction  from  the  Sponsor
    undermined the Sponsors claim to have had sole responsibility  for  her
    daughter. Thus it was open to her to find|:

      a) The incident is alleged to have  occurred  prior  to  the  date  of
         application but no reference was made to it in the  application  or
         indeed in the grounds of appeal dated 5 July 2018.

      b) The Sponsor was not told about the rape either by the Appellant  or
         the grandmother and it was the grandmother's decision not to do so.
         It was open to the Judge to reject the explanation  that  this  was
         done to spare the Sponsor more stress given the nature of the event
         she sought to withhold. It was open to the Judge to  find  that  in
         the absence of the grandmother it was the neighbours who  took  her
         to a hospital and still the Sponsor was not told.

      c) It was open for the Judge to find that having found out  about  the
         allegation the Sponsors decision not consider pursuing  the  matter
         with the police or to visit her daughter undermines her  claims  of
         sole responsibility.

23. In relation to the issue of  sole  responsibility  moreover  while  the
    issue of the rape was a factor the Judge considered it was not the only
    one where  the  evidence  failed  to  meet  the  evidential  burden  of
    establishing that she had sole responsibility for the  Appellant:  thus
    it was open to the Judge to find  that  the  Sponsor  lacked  knowledge
    about another important aspect of her daughter's life,  her  education.
    On the evidence before her she did not find her account of whether  she
    selected her daughter's school was credible; there was  little  contact
    with the school, she had no school reports. It was also open to her  to
    find that the evidence of her progress and absence of concerns from the
    school was inconsistent with the evidence from  the  Appellants  Church
    and that therefore was given little weight. It was  also  open  to  the
    Judge to find that the absence of a comprehensive  statement  from  the
    grandmother was unhelpful in addressing the issues in the case

24. In relation to  whether  the  fact  of  the  rape  was  a  sufficiently
    compelling circumstance to warrant a grant of leave I am satisfied that
    at paragraph 56 it was open to the Judge  to  find  that  the  incident
    happened some time ago, in December 2017. Her education was progressing
    well and she had accommodation and the support of her  grandmother,  an
    aunt and neighbours. These were all factors she took  into  account  in
    concluding that there were no serious or  compelling  reasons  why  the
    Appellant should be excluded from the UK.

25. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

27. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
15.5.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

