
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14614/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2018                   |On 6 December 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Punithawathy [S]
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Andrew McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Paul Richardson

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  his
   decision to refuse her further leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.
   The appellant is a citizen of New Zealand of Sri Lankan origin and is  74
   years old.





Background

2. The claimant came to the United Kingdom as a visitor on  24  March  2012.
   She overstayed, living with her son and his family.  In October 2013  and
   November 2014, she was refused leave to remain on human rights grounds.

3. On 27 August 2015, she was granted leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules
   until 27 February 2016.

4. On 26 February 2016, the claimant applied for further leave to remain  on
   private life grounds, citing her four-year stay in the United Kingdom and
   her kidney failure.

5. The Secretary of State considered that the  claimant  could  not  succeed
   under the Rules, and that there were no  exceptional  circumstances.   He
   noted that  the  claimant  was  awaiting  a  kidney  transplant  but  was
   satisfied that there were facilities to  treat  kidney  failure  and  for
   kidney transplants in New Zealand.

6. The Secretary of State refused to grant further leave to remain.

The 2014 decision

7. The decision of First-tier Judge Bennett on 19 February  2014  forms  the
   Devaseelan starting point for the  2018  decision.   He  found  that  the
   claimant had discovered  that  she  had  kidney  failure  in  the  United
   Kingdom, three months after her arrival: before that she  only  had  high
   blood pressure.  Her first dialysis was in July 2012.

8. Her son in New Zealand, who had been  supporting  her  there  before  she
   came on  her  United  Kingdom  visit,  was  contemplating  relocating  to
   Australia but no visas had yet been obtained. She did not know whether he
   would obtain a visa for her also.

9. Evidence was received from the claimant's son in the United  Kingdom  (he
   was tendered, but not cross-examined), and from her brother, who told the
   Tribunal that the claimant, like himself, had a hereditary kidney disease
   and his doctor brother had told him that it was never predictable when it
   would occur.  His sister had become ill suddenly after her arrival in the
   United Kingdom.

10. The Secretary of State told the Tribunal that the claimant would not  be
   removed if she was medically unfit to travel, and if  she  was  suffering
   from kidney failure, unless there was  a  change  in  circumstances.  The
   claimant accepted that there would be no prejudice to her  to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom on that basis.

11. The Judge found that the claimant was not a medical  tourist:  treatment
   was available in New Zealand  at  public  expense,  and  was  of  similar
   quality. He accepted that the claimant had established family  life  with
   her son in the United Kingdom  and  was  being  supported  by  him,  with
   helpful rom her two other sons in the United Kingdom  and  her  brothers.
   The majority of her family was here, but her ties with them were  private
   life only, save in relation to the son with whom she was living.

12. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal,  considering  that  to  be  a
   proportionate interference with her family and private  life:  it  was  a
   factor in that decision that the Secretary of State's case was  that  the
   claimant would not be removed if she was unfit to travel.

The 2018 decision

13. The First-tier Judge in 2018 heard oral  evidence  from  the  claimant's
   son, but the claimant herself did not attend  the  hearing,  due  to  her
   health problems.  The Judge set out the medical  evidence:  the  claimant
   now has 22 ailments, the most serious of which are  stage  5  (end-stage)
   kidney disease, anterior falx meningioma (a type of  brain  tumour  which
   can cause personality change including  mimicking  depression,  headache,
   vision problems and arm  or  leg  weakness,  loss  of  sense  of  smell),
   osteoarthritis and hypertension.

14. The First-tier Judge at [17] took  account  of  the  evidence  from  the
   claimant's consultant nephrologist at Imperial College Healthcare in June
   2014, directed to an airline for which she had to cancel a flight ticket:

         "[The claimant] is now suffering from peripheral neuropathy and  is
         generally weak and fatigued.  These are medical problems  which  we
         are working through.  She could not have anticipated these  arising
         at the time a flight was booked for holiday back to  her  homeland.
         I am afraid she is not medically fit for travel and I would endorse
         the family's request that she has a refund in full."

15. At [11] the  Judge  recorded  the  opinion  of  the  claimant's  general
   medical practitioner: the claimant was that:

         "[The claimant is] very frail  -  indicative  by  a  high  Rockwood
         Frailty Score

         As a result of her multiple problems,  her  exercise  tolerance  is
         very reduced.  In addition, her mobility is affected by severe pain
         in both legs, both knees and her left shoulder.  She also has had a
         left tibia plateau fracture.  She is very slow when walking and her
         gait is compromised.

         Her main overwhelming  problem  however  is  her  very  poor  renal
         function - she has end-stage renal failure - she currently requires
         dialysis three times a week.  Her clinical conditions are such that
         she gets exhausted so badly  that  she  cannot  take  part  in  any
         activities that evening and the following morning.

         This means that she gets very weak and mobility is a problem  as  a
         result.  Interruptions  to  effective  dialysis  can  have  serious
         consequences.  She is not a candidate for renal transplantation  so
         she is at maximal therapy for her renal failure."

   The evidence of the claimant's son was that even walking to an ambulance,
   his mother needed support and he could not 'even imagine taking her on  a
   flight'.

16. The Judge recognised that the 2014 decision was the Devaseelan  starting
   point in this appeal and adopted the finding of the previous  Judge  that
   the claimant has family life with her son and her  United  Kingdom  based
   family members, who were  helping  to  provide  physical  care  for  her.
   However, the claimant's cohabitation with her son and his family  was  of
   recent origin (6  years)  and  prior  to  that  there  had  been  lengthy
   geographical separation, with the claimant being supported  by  her  son,
   then in New Zealand,  who  was  now  living  in  Australia.   It  is  not
   suggested that the claimant has, or could obtain, a visa to go  and  live
   with him in Australia.

17. The First-tier Judge found that if the claimant travelled  back  to  New
   Zealand, she would do so via Sri Lanka and with the support of  her  son,
   'and she has  the  prospect  of  at  least  palliative  medical  care  to
   alleviate, so far as possible, any suffering during the period leading up
   to her death'.  The D/N 'deathbed test' was not met and  Article  3  ECHR
   did not avail her.

18. The Judge considered that the Article 3 ECHR standard was  not  met  but
   that the claimant's removal would breach her private  life  rights  under
   Article 8 ECHR.  The Judge allowed the appeal under  Article  8  ECHR  on
   private life grounds, finding that it would be unduly harsh to remove her
   to require her to undertake the journey  to  New  Zealand.   It  was  the
   removal itself that was  the  determining  factor.   The  Judge  made  no
   reference to Part VA of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
   (as amended) and the  statutory  presumptions  therein,  being  concerned
   principally with family life.

19. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

20. The Secretary of State contended that it was not open to  the  Judge  to
   give the weight he did to the general medical practitioner evidence as to
   the claimant's mobility problems and that 'the Judge has failed  to  give
   any adequate reasons to enable the Secretary of  State  to  establishment
   why the objective  specialist  evidence  did  not  mitigate  any  claimed
   detrimental impact (as it has not been set out what would be  the  effect
   on the [claimant]').

21. The third ground is that the Judge has essentially  allowed  the  appeal
   under Article 8 ECHR on the same facts which failed under Article 3 ECHR.
    The Secretary of State noted that following MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 279 it was possible for  an
   appeal to be allowed under Article 8 ECHR if there were  something  other
   than the facts of the Article 3 claim, but contended that the  First-tier
   Judge had failed to identify any additional factor of the  MM  (Zimbabwe)
   type.

22. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
   Judge's finding at [13] that there would be no very significant obstacles
   to reintegration in  New  Zealand  was  arguably  inconsistent  with  the
   finding at [30] that it would be unduly harsh to return her  there.   All
   the grounds of appeal were considered arguable.

Rule 24 Reply

23. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the claimant.

24. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

25. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr McVeety for  the  Secretary  of  State
   accepted that there was risk to the claimant from such a lengthy journey.
    The Secretary of State had hoped  that  if  the  claimant  had  dialysis
   immediately before embarking, she would be able to last until  Sri  Lanka
   or New Zealand  were  reached  and  then  have  dialysis  immediately  on
   arrival.  Mr McVeety argued that at  [29],  the  decision  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in Okonkwo (legacy/Hakemi; health claim) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 401
   (IAC) had been misapplied.

26. Mr McVeety said that people did fly with  end-stage  renal  failure  and
   that the Secretary of State had produced medical evidence to that effect.
    He did not suggest that the claimant's  other  ailments,  including  her
   mobility issues, had been taken into account in that evidence.

27.  For  the  claimant,  Mr  Richardson  relied  on  the  letter  from  the
   claimant's general medical practitioner  and  the  large  number  of  co-
   morbidities the claimant had, including end-stage  renal  failure  and  a
   brain tumour.  The claimant would need to break her  journey  because  of
   her extreme frailty.  He accepted that  healthcare  in  New  Zealand  was
   adequate: the risk was in the journey there, and the emotional impact  of
   separation from her family, with whom the claimant had lived for the last
   6 years.  Whilst this appeal might not reach the D/N 'deathbed' standard,
   it was very close to that standard and if the  Upper  Tribunal  had  been
   able to apply the Paposhvili extension, might well have  succeeded  under
   that more relaxed test.

28. Mr Richardson noted that as  long  ago  as  2014,  the  claimant  (whose
   medical conditions were then  less  serious)  was  considered  unable  to
   travel and that a period of discretionary leave had then been granted  on
   health grounds.  There had been no  positive  change  in  the  claimant's
   health since then: instead, it had significantly deteriorated.

29. The First-tier Judge had considered all  relevant  authorities  and  the
   economic needs of the United Kingdom, before concluding that  there  were
   compelling circumstances and/or that it would be unduly harsh  to  return
   the claimant to New Zealand, with the  journey  being  physically  nearly
   impossible, a revived family life of 6 years' standing with her  son  who
   lives here.

Analysis

30. This appeal sounds only in human rights outside  the  Immigration  Rules
   HC 395 (as amended).  The latest assessment of the difficulties caused by
   the Paposhvili extension is that of the Court of Appeal in MM (Malawi)  &
   Anor v the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
   2482.  However, the First-tier Tribunal did not have the benefit  of  the
   reasoning in that decision.

31. I bear in mind that  as  long  ago  as  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
   accepted that the claimant, who was not then as ill as she now is,  could
   not in practice be removed,  and  granted  discretionary  leave  on  that
   basis.  It is not clear to me that anything has changed for the better in
   the claimant's health circumstances since then: instead, it seems she  is
   much worse.

32. There is also the question of this claimant's brain tumour, about  which
   there was little detailed evidence before the First-tier Judge, her  age,
   and all of the other ailments, including her very  limited  mobility  and
   the extreme exhaustion which follows her dialysis treatments.

33. The journey to New Zealand is particularly long, involving several long-
   haul flights over a period of 2 days or more, around which  it  would  be
   difficult to organise dialysis.  An attempt to travel had to be cancelled
   in 2014 because she was 'suffering  from  peripheral  neuropathy  and  is
   generally weak and fatigued'.  The medical evidence before the First-tier
   Tribunal was that the claimant was worse than that now, that in fact  she
   was dying from kidney failure and if dialysis were  not  available  three
   times a week, might do so rapidly.  She is not considered to be  suitable
   for a kidney transplant, so dialysis is the only treatment available  for
   her now.

34. It was the journey which concerned the First-tier Judge.  The weight  to
   be given to medical evidence is always  a  matter  for  the  fact-finding
   Tribunal and the  grounds  of  appeal  are,  to  that  extent,  merely  a
   disagreement as to the weight to be placed thereon.

35. I have considered the guidance given by the Upper  Tribunal  in  Okonkwo
   but it significantly  pre-dates  the  Paposhvili  recalibration  and  the
   decision of the Court of Appeal in MM.  I do not think that there is much
   assistance to be gained from Okonkwo, where there was  considerably  less
   equivalence in treatment between the host  country  and  the  country  of
   origin.  It is not disputed that if the claimant can  reach  New  Zealand
   safely, she would have treatment there and presumably  also  some  social
   services support during her last few weeks or months of life.

36. The suggestion that the 'very significant  obstacles  to  reintegration'
   test is equivalent to that of 'undue harshness' in return  is  erroneous.
   The two tests are different and  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
   findings he did about the claimant's circumstances under each test.

37. In the final analysis, the question is whether he was also  entitled  to
   decide that this claimant could not lawfully be removed by  such  a  long
   journey. It may be a generous decision, but I am,  just,  satisfied  that
   such a conclusion was open to the Judge and  that  the  advanced  frailty
   recorded in the general medical  practitioner's  letter  was  sufficient,
   taken with the family life she has  in  the  United  Kingdom,  to  engage
   Article 8 ECHR and enable her to succeed on that basis.

38. The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore dismissed and the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


DECISION

39. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal but order that
   it shall stand.


Date:         30 November 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson
