
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/14290/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2018                   |On 06 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              mr donald brakaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Norton Folgate
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Albania who entered the UK illegally  on
6 January 2015. In September 2016, he made an  asylum  claim  and  this  was
refused on 11 October 2016. On 19 April 2017, he made a human  rights  claim
in an application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of family  life
with his partner, CT.  On  18  October  2017  the  respondent  refused  that
application. He appealed. In a decision sent on 25 June 2018 Judge  Ross  of
the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed  his  appeal.  Judge  Ross  accepted
that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship but  considered
that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life with his  partner
outside of the UK. As  regards  CT's  daughter,  C,  he  accepted  that  the
appellant and her were very fond of each other and that the appellant was  a
positive influence on his  step-daughter's  life,  but  concluded  that  the
appellant had not shown he had parental responsibility  and  accordingly  he
did not have a genuine parental relationship with a qualifying child  either
under the Immigration Rules or  s.117B(6)  of  the  NIAA  2002.   The  judge
considered that it was reasonable to expect  the  appellant's  partner,  CT,
and her daughter, C, to relocate to Albania.

2.   In a decision posted on 29 November 2018, I set aside the  decision  of
the FtT judge for material error of law. I found that the judge  had  failed
to apply or make a best interests of the  child  assessment;  had  erred  in
stating that it was reasonable to expect C,  a  British  citizen  child,  to
leave the UK; that the judge's error as regards reasonableness  clearly  had
a potential  impact  on  his  treatment  of  the  appellant's  circumstances
outside the Rules; and that the judge's  focus  on  the  issue  of  parental
responsibility clouded his approach to the test set out in  section  117B(6)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which   requires  or  an
appellant  to  establish,  not  parental  responsibility,  but   "a  genuine
subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child".

3.   I stated at para 7 that:

    "I am in agreement with both representatives that aside from the  issue
    of the nature and extent of the appellant's relationship with  C  there
    is no dispute about the surrounding facts and circumstances.  For  this
    reason, I consider that the  case  should  be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and will be listed for a two-hour hearing with  a  view  to  C
    attending as a witness and giving evidence about the nature and  extent
    of her relationship with the appellant and with her biological  father.
    It will then be open  to  the  parties  to  make  further  submissions,
    including as to the relevance or otherwise of  the  findings  of  Judge
    Lewis on 14 March 2017 that there was no  family  relationship  between
    the appellant and C (see paragraph 49)."

4.   At para 8, I stated that the case was retained in  the  Upper  Tribunal
with a direction allowing for time for oral testimony to be taken  from  the
child, C.

Oral testimony

5.   At the hearing before me I heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's
partner, CT, his step-daughter, C, and the appellant.

6.   His partner, CT, said that she had undergone therapy  as  a  result  of
the abusive nature of her relationship  with  C's  biological  father.  This
experience had made her very protective towards her daughter;  she  had  had
to get away from him and she had taken C to a new  environment.  C's  father
had played no part in C's life since 2007 and he had told her he now  had  a
new family. Since the appellant had come into her life, she had needed  less
medication. After a few months from when they met in July 2015 she  and  the
appellant and her daughter had become a close  family  unit.  They  are  now
married (they married in July 2017). The  appellant  had  been  an  enormous
help to C, who suffers from panic attacks and bed-wetting.  He  has  brought
stability and had become the father C had never had. He helped  C  with  her
schooling and with her routines and other  aspects  of  her  everyday  life,
ensuring she follows a routine and comes home safe. He has played an  active
part in helping her  choose  which  college  to  go  to.  C  had  been  very
distressed when the appellant had been detained  for  immigration  purposes,
but he had called her every day to reassure her that everything was OK  and,
when he was released on bail to the house of a friend nearby, he had  sought
to minimise C's concerns about him not living there by coming around in  the
morning before she got up and staying in the evening until she had  gone  to
sleep.  The appellant had told CT there were problems with  his  immigration
status when their relationship started getting serious. She  realised  there
was  therefore  a  risk  in  continuing  to  let  her  and  her   daughter's
relationship with the appellant deepen, but he had been the best thing  that
had happened to her and her daughter.

7.   In her oral evidence C confirmed that she  had  turned  18  earlier  in
January, that the appellant was a father to her  and  helped  him  with  her
education and with everyday support. He had  helped  her  deal  with  things
like a fall-out she had had with a friend.

8.   The appellant's oral evidence outlined the help he  had  given  C  with
her choice of college and courses and also with her  everyday  problems.  He
said he had tried to shield C from knowing about  his  immigration  problems
sol that she did not get too upset.

Submissions

9.   Mr Kotas submitted that as C had just turned 18 the appellant could  no
longer benefit from s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act  as  its  personal  scope  was
confined to parents of children under 18.   He  did  not  dispute  that  the
appellant had established family life in the UK but contended that that  was
primarily  with  CT  and  the  respondent's  position  remained   that   the
appellant's relationship with C was not a  parental  one.  The  support  the
appellant provided to her was more akin to that from a  nanny  or  a  carer.
The witnesses had only been able to specify limited examples of his role  in
making key decisions affecting C and  in  giving  her  advice  and  support,
mainly in the context of education: "A parent does so much  more",  said  Mr
Kotas. He submitted further that on the strength of the  evidence  given  by
the appellant and CT, the former had been careful, once he began  a  serious
relationship with CT, not to barge in and try and take control which  in  Mr
Kotas's view  conveyed  that  his  relationship  was  more  supportive  than
parental. In any event, the bare fact of the matter was that  the  appellant
and CT entered into their  relationship  at  a  time  when  his  immigration
status was precarious and as such their family life was  to  be  given  less
weight than otherwise.  He accepted that CT is well-settled in her  life  in
the UK and has two part-time employments and that it would not be at all  in
C's best interests, or reasonable, to expect her to leave the UK, given  her
vulnerabilities and the fact that she  was  still  involved  in  studies  at
college and re-taking some GSCE's and was clearly  still  dependent  on  her
family unit. However, he submitted that  the  appellant's  grounds  did  not
challenge the judge's finding that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles
to the family resuming family life in Albania.   The  medical  evidence  was
thin and fell well short of showing that CT's and C's  health  circumstances
were severe. The fact that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
the Rules meant that greater weight had to be given to the public  interest.
The emphasis placed in KO(Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 on the  situation  in  the
"real world" was important in this case because there was no expectation  in
this case that C would have to leave the UK.

10.  Mr Jafar submitted that the appellant had established  that  he  had  a
genuine and subsisting parental relationship with C  as  well  as  a  family
life with CT. The evidence was that the appellant was fully  involved  as  a
parent in C's life. The proportionality assessment required under Article  8
was a highly fact-sensitive  one  and  the  surrounding  circumstances,  not
disputed by the respondent, were that, until the  appellant  came  along,  C
was  a  single  parent  suffering  from  depression  following  an   abusive
relationship and was looking after a daughter  who  also  had  psychological
problems. There was a now strong family life between the three of  them  and
it was plainly not reasonable to expect C to go to Albania, and  her  rights
as a British citizen should not be downplayed. Given her  vulnerability,  it
was important not to treat her as suddenly transformed into  a  mature  non-
vulnerable adult just because she had recently turned 18. If the  FtT  judge
had not fallen into legal  error,  the  appellant  would  a  have  stood  to
benefit from  s.117B(6)  and  that  was  still  a  relevant  factor  in  the
proportionality assessment.

My assessment

11.  I have a very considerable body of evidence before  me  in  this  case,
now added to by  the  oral  testimony  of  the  appellant,  CT  and  C.  The
background  evidence  includes  a  number  of  letters  from   friends   and
acquaintances who live in the same village attesting to the  fact  that  the
appellant has become a father figure to C and plays an active  role  in  C's
life in her school, college and community life.

12.   The  documentary  evidence  also  includes  a  letter  from  a  doctor
concerning C confirming that the appellant is an important adult  figure  in
C's life and that C has needed specialist mental health support due  to  the
uncertainty over the appellant's immigration status.

13.  The first issue I have to address is the  nature  of  the  relationship
the appellant has with CT and C.

14.  Having considered the evidence as a whole,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
appellant has formed strong family life ties with CT. They met in July  2015
and began a serious relationship within a few months  and  married  in  July
2017, they have lived together apart from the  first  few  months  of  their
relationship and for a period when he was in immigration detention and  when
he was required to stay at  a  bail  address  nearby.  I  am  also  entirely
satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
relationship with C and that  this  relationship  has  existed  for  several
years.  (For the sake of completeness, I note that Mr Kotas did not seek  to
rely on the findings made by a  previous  judge  regarding  the  appellant's
relationship with C and, in view of the further  evidence  that  has  become
available in  the  present  appeal  proceedings,  I  consider  that  it  was
entirely right for him not to seek to rely on  them).  I  cannot  accept  Mr
Kotas's submissions that the appellant's relationship is not  comparable  to
that of a father. That is so for more than one reason. First,  the  case  of
R(on the application of RK) v SSHD (s.117B(6); "parental relationship")  IJR
[2016] UKUT 31 (IAC) makes clear that the fact that  a  person  is  a  step-
parent does not as such preclude them from having a  parental  relationship.
At paras 43-45 UTJ Grubb stated:

    "43. I agree  with  Mr  Mandalia's  formulation  that,  in  effect,  an
         individual must "step into the shoes  of  a  parent"  in  order  to
         establish a "parental relationship". If the role they play, whether
         as a relative or friend of the family, is as a caring  relative  or
         friend but not so as to take on the role of a parent then it cannot
         be said that they have a "parental relationship" with the child. It
         is perhaps obvious to state that "carers" are not per se "parents."
         A child may have carers who do not step into  the  shoes  of  their
         parents but look after the child for specific periods of time  (for
         example whilst the parents are at work) or even  longer  term  (for
         example where the parents are travelling abroad for  a  holiday  or
         family visit). Those carers may be  professionally  employed;  they
         may be relatives; or they may be friends. In all  those  cases,  it
         may properly be said that there is an element of dependency between
         the child and his or her carers. However, that alone would not,  in
         my judgment, give rise to a "parental relationship."

    44.  If a non-biological parent ("third  party")  caring  for  a  child
         claims such a relationship, its existence will depend upon all  the
         circumstances including whether or not there  are  others  (usually
         the biologically parents) who have such  a  relationship  with  the
         child also. It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a person  will  be
         able to establish they have taken on the role of a parent when  the
         biological parents continue to be involved in the child's  life  as
         the child's parents as in a case such  as  the  present  where  the
         children and parents continue to live and function  together  as  a
         family. It will be difficult, if not  impossible,  to  say  that  a
         third party has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.

    45.  It is not necessary to consider more fully the position of a step-
         parent or partner of the primary carer of a child when a family has
         split after separation or divorce of the parents. That is not  this
         case. That situation may, depending upon the circumstances, present
         a persuasive factual matrix for there to be a "third  parent".  The
         respondent's guidance differentiates between situations  where  the
         non-residential biological  parent  plays  no  (or  no  meaningful)
         continuing role in the child's life and where he or  she  does.  In
         the latter situation, it  is  said  that  the  step-parent  or  new
         partner would be unlikely to have a "parental relationship". Whilst
         each case will be fact sensitive,  I  do  not  inevitably  see  the
         virtue of the argument (other than as  a  numerical  limitation  of
         parents to no more  than  two)  which  excludes  a  step-parent  or
         partner  in  this  latter  situation  from  being  in  a  "parental
         relationship" if that is the substance  of  the  relationship  even
         where the non-residential biological parent continues to play  some
         role. The issue will be fact sensitive and is best worked out in  a
         case where it properly arises for decision."

15.  I observe that in this  case,  we  are  not  concerned  with  a  "third
parent" scenario since the biological father has not been  involved  in  C's
life since 2007. Second, despite Mr Kotas's  submission  that  a  father  is
someone who would be doing "much more", the evidence in this case  satisfies
me that the appellant is doing  everything  that  could  be  expected  of  a
father and that he has provided  C  with  a  father  figure  she  previously
lacked.  Until the appellant became part of her life C had no father in  her
life and it is very clear that she now regards him  as  a  father  and  that
their emotional bond is in substance one of father-daughter. Furthermore,  I
am also satisfied that the  appellant  has  provided  an  important  missing
element to the family unit previously made up of CT and C as  single  mother
and child. In this  regard,  I  would  observe  that  I  did  not  find  the
inability of the three witnesses  to  give  detailed  examples  of  how  the
appellant played an active role in C's life to be significant since  it  was
very clear from the evidence as a whole that he has  been  involved  in  C's
daily life for some time,  doing  precisely  the  things  actively  involved
parents do with their teenage children, and indeed, no doubt in view of  C's
vulnerability, has  been  exercising  more  care  and  supervision  than  is
normally the case.

16.  It  is  clear  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent  represents  an
interference in the appellant's family life.

17.  The next - and the central  -  issue  in  this  case  is  whether  that
interference is proportionate.

18.  In assessing proportionality, I have to  take  into  account  that  the
appellant has not shown he meets the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
and hence the public interest weighing against  him  is  stronger  for  that
reason. I must also take  into  account  that  he  has  a  poor  immigration
history and has only been in the UK since early 2015.

19.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr  Kotas's  submission  makes  clear  that  the
respondent now accepts that it would not be reasonable to expect  CT  and  C
to leave the UK and live in Albania -  CT  because  she  is  a  well-settled
British citizen with two part-time jobs and C because she  is  currently  in
full-time education. Although Mr Kotas properly submits that neither CT  nor
C have serious mental health issues,  he  does  not  dispute  that  C  is  a
vulnerable  young  adult  and  in  any  event,  I  am  entirely   satisfied,
particularly having  seen  and  heard  her  give  oral  evidence,  that  the
evidence establishes as much. The change in position  on  the  part  of  the
respondent as regards reasonableness in respect of CT and C  being  expected
to leave the UK, is important because it indicates to me  that  there  would
be insurmountable obstacles to the family moving to Albania. (I  consider  I
am entitled to revisit this issue, since the appellant's grounds  of  appeal
before the  FtT  judge  did  contend  that  there  would  be  insurmountable
obstacles in the way of the CT and C resuming family  life  in  Albania  and
the position now stated by the respondent through  Mr  Kotas  warrants  that
this issue be revisited.)  This  change  in  the  respondent's  position  as
regards reasonableness also indicates that the principal scenario  envisaged
by the respondent now involves the family being split. In my  judgement,  if
the appellant is required to leave the UK, the family life of CT and C  will
be  significantly  disrupted  and  it  is  likely  that  C's  mental  health
anxieties (which centre on concerns she will lose the father figure  in  her
life) will continue  or  worsen.  I  shall  return  to  this  scenario  when
addressing a related point made by Mr Kotas regarding s.117B(6).

20.  Mr Kotas is correct to  submit  that  I  cannot  decide  this  case  by
application of s.117B(6) because C is now 18 and so the appellant falls  out
with that provision's personal scope. However, I cannot agree with him  that
the appellant's historical position in relation to s.117B(6) is  irrelevant.
Had the FtT judge correctly applied the law when hearing the  case  in  June
2018, he would have had to conclude  that  (i)  it  was  not  reasonable  to
expect C, a British citizen child, to  leave  the  UK;  and  (ii)  that  the
appellant had established a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
with C and so fell within the personal scope of s.117B(6); and that  (3)  by
virtue of the appellant meeting the requirements set out in  s.117B(6),  the
decision could not be said to be a proportionate one. Indeed,  had  I  heard
this case a bare two weeks ago, I would also have been required to  squarely
apply s.117B(6)  in  the  appellant's  favour.  Whilst  I  must  assess  the
appellant's circumstances as at the date of the resumed  hearing  before  me
(which means that the appellant can no longer  benefit  from  s.117B(6)),  I
consider this recent historical backdrop reduces the weight to  be  attached
to the public interest factors in play in this case. I  would  also  observe
that during  the  period  since  the  appellant  began  a  genuine  parental
relationship with C and whilst she was still under  18,  her  best  interest
clearly lay in remaining in the UK with both her parents.

21.   Mr  Kotas  is  right  to  highlight  that  the  appellant  formed  his
relationship with CT and C at a time  when  his  immigration  status  was  a
precarious  and  that  he  is  a  failed   asylum   seeker.   Precariousness
significantly impacts on the weight to be accorded  to  family  as  well  as
private life: see  Rajendran  [2016]  UKUT  138.  On  the  other  hand,  the
appellant's English is competent and even though he has  no  employment  (he
is not permitted to work) he is not dependent on the state.  It  would  thus
appear he can benefit to some extent from the limited degree of  flexibility
afforded by s.117A(2): see Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58.  Further,  none  of  the
public  interest  considerations  weighing  against  him   mean   that   his
circumstances can be assimilated to those  of  a  parent  of  a  non-British
citizen young person - he is a parent who was playing  a  parental  role  in
C's life for several years  before  she  turned  18.  In  my  judgement  the
appellant's historic ability  to  meet  the  requirements  of  s.117B(6)  is
relevant and indeed provides a compelling circumstance because, had the  law
been correctly applied to the facts of his case when dealt with by  the  FtT
judge as recently as June 2018, the appellant would have  succeeded  in  his
appeal, especially given the context of a family life  situation  where  the
appellant's  presence  in  CT  and  C's  lives  had  clearly  provided  real
stability to a family unit that was hitherto lacking.

22.  Mr Kotas drew my attention to the reported UT case of   SR  (subsisting
parental  relationship  -  s117B(6))  Pakistan  [2018]   UKUT   334   (IAC),
anticipating that I would no doubt have  it  in  mind  when  making  my  own
decision in this case. He said that he would respectfully  take  issue  with
what UTJ Plimmer said at para 51 when she stated that:

    "... it is difficult to see how section 117B(6)(b) can be said to be of
    no application or to  pose  a  merely  hypothetical  question.  Section
    117B(6) dictates whether or not the public  interest  requires  removal
    where a person not liable to deportation has a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child. The question  that  must
    be answered is whether it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the UK. That question  as  contained  in  statute,  cannot  be
    ignored or glossed over. Self-evidently,  section  117B(6)  is  engaged
    whether the child will or will not in fact or practice leave the UK. It
    addresses the normative and straightforward question - should the child
    be "expected to leave" the UK? "

23.  Mr Kotas  submitted  that  this  was  not  consistent  with  what  Lord
Carnwath had said in KO (Nigeria) at para 19  about  needing  to  apply  the
reasonableness test in the "real world". I have two  difficulties  with  his
argument as applied to the circumstances of  this  case.  Firstly,  his  own
submission acknowledged that it would not be reasonable to expect C (or  CT)
to leave the UK and it seems to me that provides a complete  answer  to  the
"ultimate question" regarding reasonableness seen to  be  critical  by  Lord
Carnwath in para  19  (with  reference  to  what  Lewison  LJ  had  said  in
EV(Philippines)[2014] EWCA Civ 874 at para 58); the fact that C  is  now  18
does not on the facts of this case alter the unreasonableness  of  expecting
them to leave the UK . Second, the salient  "real  world"  circumstances  in
this case are surely that: there is one parent with a  right  to  remain  in
the UK (she being a  British  citizen);  a  child  who  is  British;  and  a
situation in which, again on the basis of Mr  Kotas's  own  submissions,  it
would be necessary (in order to avoid unreasonableness) to postulate  either
that the appellant and C went to live in  Albania  without  C  or  that  the
appellant went back to Albania. The first possible  option  was  indeed  one
that the FtT judge thought was feasible; he referred at para 30 to the  fact
that C had close family members nearby, including step siblings as  well  as
her grandfather, an uncle and aunts (the judge  also  mentioned  the  nearby
biological father, but Mr Kotas does not now dispute that this man plays  no
role  in  C's  life  and  has  not  since  2007).  That   option,   however,
contemplates  the  separation  of  mother  and  daughter   and   given   C's
psychological difficulties I consider that it would be  wholly  unreasonable
to expect her mother and the appellant to leave her  behind.  Albeit  now  a
young adult, she is still a dependant who I consider vulnerable. The  second
option  would  split  the  family  and  whilst  the  appellant  has  a  poor
immigration history he is not a foreign criminal and  (as  explained  above)
would have been entitled during the  period  2017-2018  to  have  relied  on
s.117B(6). Additionally, as I found earlier, if the  appellant  is  required
to leave the UK,  the  family  life  of  CT  and  C  will  be  significantly
disrupted and it is likely that C's mental health  anxieties  (which  centre
on concerns she will lose the father figure in her life)  will  continue  or
worsen.

24.  For  the  above  reasons  the  decision  I  re-make  is  to  allow  the
appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

25.  I would observe, however, that whilst  the  matter  of  an  appropriate
remedy under s.8 of the Human Rights Act 1998  is  for  the  respondent,  my
understanding is that the appellant would - and should - only  be  permitted
a period of limited leave, so that he is not placed  in  a  better  position
than persons have who have to meet the requirements of the Rules  applicable
to spouses.


Signed   Date: 31 January 2019

    [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
