
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14092/2017
                                                               HU/14094/2017
                                                               HU/14095/2017
                                                               HU/14096/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th January 2019                 |On 6th March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                       LINGLING [Z] (FIRST appellant)
                          BO [W] (SECOND appellant)
                           [J W] (THIRD appellant)
                          [G W] (FOURTH appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Wilford, instructed by Janes Tsang & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The Appellants, born on 5th November 1982,  25th  February  1982,  16th
    November 2010 and 20th November 2014, are all citizens of  China.   The
    third and fourth Appellants  are  children  of  the  first  and  second
    Appellants.  The  Appellants  were  represented  by  Mr  Wilford.   The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Howells, Senior Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The second Appellant was granted entry clearance to the United  Kingdom
    as a student on 23rd June 2006.  He entered the UK  on  21st  September
    2006.  On 28th November 2006 the  first  Appellant  was  granted  entry
    clearance as a student dependant.  In October 2007 the Appellants  made
    application for further leave to remain and that was granted until  May
    2009.  On 13th May 2009 both Appellants made  application  for  further
    leave to remain which was refused.

 3. On 6th June 2012 the first Appellant made a  human  rights  application
    which was refused in July 2013.  On 24th  March  2016  a  Statement  of
    Additional  Grounds  was  submitted,  and  on  18th  October  2017  the
    Respondent refused the Appellants' application for leave to remain.

 4. The Appellants appealed that decision and their appeals were  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Vernon  sitting  at  Newport  on  28th
    February 2018.   The  judge  dismissed  all  the  Appellants'  appeals.
    Application for permission to appeal was granted and  the  matter  came
    before the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether an error of law had
    been made in this case.  The matter came before me in  accordance  with
    those directions on 16th October 2018.  At that hearing Mr  Howells  on
    behalf of the Respondent accepted that the judge had  not  applied  the
    correct law or test when considering the case of  the  third  Appellant
    and it was conceded that a material error of  law  had  been  made.   I
    therefore set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  by
    agreement proceeded to rehear the matter in the Upper Tribunal on  17th
    January 2019.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 5. Both parties in this case agreed that no further evidence was required,
    nor  would  any  further  evidence  be  provided.   I  therefore  heard
    submissions from both parties.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 6. It was submitted there were two issues;  firstly,  as  to  whether  the
    third Appellant  was  a  qualifying  child  within  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rule, and secondly, an examination of the Appellants' cases
    under Article 8 outside of the Rules.  The third Appellant was born  on
    16th November 2010 and therefore was 8 years and 2 months  old  at  the
    date of hearing.  It was said  that  the  third  Appellant  was  not  a
    qualifying child at the time of  the  Respondent's  decision.   It  was
    further noted that the Appellants had immigration history as  noted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 9 in  that  the  mother  had
    been an overstayer since 2009 and the father an overstayer since  2010.
    It was submitted that both parents spoke English and Mandarin and  that
    both children could understand  Mandarin.   There  was  still  extended
    family in China and there was contact with that  family  and  both  the
    adult Appellants had contact with family in China.  It  was  said  that
    both the adult Appellants had a home and business in the  UK.   It  was
    submitted the best interests of the two  children  were  to  stay  with
    their parents, whether that was in the UK or China.  In terms of return
    to China and a consideration of the best interests of the children,  it
    was  submitted  that  both  children  were  Chinese  citizens  and  had
    relatives  in  China,  the  adult  Appellants  could  raise  money   to
    reintegrate into China, and there was no real difficulty  in  terms  of
    that reintegration as there were no health issues, free  education  was
    available in China, and that the third Appellant was in year 3 and  not
    therefore at any critical stage of education.  There was a  basis  that
    both  understood  or  spoke  some  Mandarin  and  that  school  reports
    demonstrated that they were above average students and could  therefore
    learn to write Mandarin.  There was no  reason  to  doubt  the  parents
    would not provide their children with a good education  in  China.   It
    was submitted that following the cases of MA and KO [2018] it would not
    be unreasonable to expect the child to leave, even  where  the  child's
    best interest was to remain in the UK when looking at the case  in  the
    round.  I was referred to specific paragraphs within KO, in  particular
    paragraphs 17 and 18 and 46 onwards.  It  was  submitted  that  it  was
    found reasonable for the child to leave the UK, it was  submitted  that
    the balance in respect of immigration control was  strong,  and  little
    weight should be given  to  private  life  particularly  of  the  adult
    Appellants as they were overstayers and therefore  their  private  life
    was either precarious or unlawful.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellants

 7. It was accepted that the Respondent's submissions  accurately  set  out
    the position in KO [2018].  It was  submitted  that  the  sins  of  the
    parent should not be visited on children in the assessment of the  best
    interests of a child.  It was accepted the starting  point  in  KO  was
    that it would be reasonable to expect a child to accompany the  parents
    if they left.  It was submitted that KO did not address paragraph 46 of
    the case of MA where there had to be strong reasons given for requiring
    a qualifying child to leave the UK under the terms of Section  117B(6).
    It was submitted it was unreasonable for the child to leave the UK.  It
    was said that the child had been born in the UK and  had  been  at  the
    present school for some four years.  It was submitted that  they  would
    have problems in terms of education in China and I was referred to  the
    Appellants' supplementary bundle in terms of the teaching  of  children
    in China in years 4 and 5 to underscore the uphill struggle that  would
    be faced by the third Appellant.  It was submitted that a consideration
    of  the  third  Appellant's  case  would  demonstrate   it   would   be
    unreasonable for her to leave the UK  and  therefore  all  four  should
    succeed in this case.

 8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and evidence submitted.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. In this case the burden  of  proof  lies  on  the  Appellants  and  the
    standard of proof for both immigration and human  rights  issues  is  a
    balance of probabilities.

10. I have carefully  considered  all  the  evidence  in  this  case.   The
    Appellants' appeal is brought under Section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act on
    the basis that the Respondent has refused the Appellants' human  rights
    claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11. If the Appellants came within the terms of the Immigration  Rules  then
    that factor is strong evidence that removal would  be  disproportionate
    under Article 8.  If the Appellants do not come within the  Immigration
    Rules then their cases need to be considered under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR outside of the Rule which includes the statutory duty  to  examine
    all aspects of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In a case  such  as  this
    where a child or children may be affected  directly  or  indirectly  by
    removal, there is an obligation to consider that child's best interests
    in accordance with Section 55 of the Borders Act.  As a matter of  good
    practice, the examination of the  child's  best  interest  which  is  a
    primary consideration is usefully conducted first.

12. None of the Appellants come within the Immigration Rules including  the
    third Appellant who is not a qualifying child (seven  years'  residence
    or more at the appropriate date).  It is accepted in both  the  Grounds
    of  Appeal  and  the  skeleton  argument  that  their  case  falls  for
    consideration outside of the Rules.

13. I deal first with the  best  interests  of  the  children.   The  third
    Appellant, born in the UK on 16th November 2010, is now 8 years old and
    in year 3 at primary school.  The fourth Appellant who is  younger  was
    born in the UK on 20th November 2014 and therefore is now 4 years old.

14.  The  evidence  strongly  points  to  both  parents  being  caring  and
    supportive who seek to achieve the best for their children.  It is easy
    to establish that the children's best interests lie by being with their
    parents.  Beyond that obvious and perhaps  overwhelming  factor,  there
    are a few other factors  disclosed  by  the  evidence.   Firstly,  both
    children  are  Chinese  citizens,  as  are  their  parents,  and   have
    potentially right to grow up within their own country and the knowledge
    of their own culture and people.  There is  extended  family  in  China
    with whom  the  Appellants  are  in  regular  contact.   It  is  a  not
    insignificant factor in a child's best interest to have contact  and  a
    relationship with members of their extended family.  Both children have
    not lost or are unaware of their Chinese culture and heritage  and  the
    evidence was that the third Appellant  spoke  some  Mandarin,  although
    English is her first language.  Whilst the third Appellant has been  at
    school in the UK she has been at primary full-time for less  than  four
    years and is not at a critical point in her education.

15. Accordingly, the schooling and education that has been  gained  by  the
    third Appellant is a factor but not in the  dynamics  of  this  case  a
    particularly significant factor.  I accept that she is an above average
    student and gets on well with others.  I find no reason to suggest that
    that would not continue in China.  I  accept  there  may  be  a  period
    potentially relatively short, where settlement into  a  new  school  in
    China and being required to read/write Mandarin as a first language may
    present some difficulty but I find that difficulty has been exaggerated
    and I find nothing  to  suggest  that  the  third,  and  indeed  fourth
    Appellant  would  experience  any  real   problems   in   writing   and
    communicating in  Mandarin.   Children  are  resilient  and  adaptable.
    Moving to new schools is something almost all children  experience  and
    moving to a new school in a different country is also something that is
    not particularly uncommon.

16. There are no educational, health or mental issues with either child, or
    indeed their parents.  The parents have financial resources  additional
    to family support in China.  They are resourceful individuals.  I  find
    therefore when considering all of the evidence that the best  interests
    of the children are balanced in favour of  residence  in  China  rather
    than in the UK.

17. In terms of proportionality under Article 8 of the ECHR I have moved to
    the final stage test in Razgar finding evidence to indicate  the  first
    four stages are met.  I have carefully considered Section 117B  of  the
    2002 Act.  The maintenance of effective immigration control is  in  the
    public interest.  The adult Appellants may speak  English  and  may  be
    considered financially independent and those factors in Section 117B(2)
    and (3) do not go against the adult Appellants.  Their private lives in
    the UK have been continued extensively whilst  they  have  remained  as
    overstayers and therefore unlawfully.  Their  private  lives  therefore
    count for little.  Finally,  in  terms  of  Section  117B(6)  I  accept
    Appellants 1 and 2 have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
    their children, namely Appellants 3 and 4.  However, having  found  the
    best interests of the children lie in a return to China and that  being
    a primary consideration in this case, I do not find that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the parents to relocate to China from the UK.  I
    further do not find  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children to go to China, that being in their best interests.

18. For the sake of completeness I have considered the recent  case  of  KO
    [2018] UKSC 53 which would  have  a  relevance  if  I  found  the  best
    interests of the third Appellant were to remain in the UK and concluded
    therefore that it would be unreasonable to expect her to leave  the  UK
    under the terms of Section 117B(6).  KO with reference to the  case  of
    NS (Sri Lanka) found that "reasonableness" is to be considered  in  the
    real world context in which the child finds themselves.   The  parents'
    immigration status is a relevant factor to establish that context.   If
    a child's parents are both expected to leave the UK,  the  child  would
    normally be expected to leave with them unless there is  evidence  that
    that would not be reasonable.  I find the rationale  in  KO  such  that
    even if I had  found  the  third  Appellant's  best  interests  lay  in
    remaining in the UK that would not be the conclusion of the matter  and
    KO does not suggest  that  Section  117B(6)  should  be  considered  in
    isolation.  I would find, having regard to KO  that  both  parents  are
    expected to leave the UK and it would  not  be  unreasonable  in  those
    circumstances to find both the third and fourth Appellants should leave
    the UK in company with their parents.  However, as I have indicated,  I
    have concluded the child's best interests lie in  relocating  to  China
    when considering all of the relevant evidence and I find that a removal
    of all of the Appellants as a cohesive family  unit  to  China  is  not
    disproportionate under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

19. I dismiss this appeal under the Human Rights Act.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
