
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14844/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|means)                               |                                     |
|On 9th March 2021                    |On 25th March 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 ADEJOKE IGE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mupara of Counsel, instructed on a direct
access basis
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    file contained the  documents  primarily  in  paper  format,  with  one
    document submitted electronically after the hearing in accordance  with
    directions given for the same.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie promulgated on 20 January 2020, in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse her human  rights
    claim dated 19 August 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 19 February  1968,  who
    claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  1995  and  who  has
    remained here unlawfully ever since.  The Applicant  made  applications
    for leave to remain on 15 July 2010 and 31 October 2011 on human rights
    and  long  residence  grounds;  both  of  which  were   refused.    The
    Appellant's appeal against the second refusal dated 21 October 2016 was
    dismissed in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul  promulgated
    on 3 April 2018.  The Appellant's most recent application for leave  to
    remain was made on 3 May 2019 on the basis  of  family  life  with  her
    partner in the United Kingdom who had  recently  been  granted  limited
    leave to remain and on private life grounds.  It is the refusal of that
    application which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The Respondent refused the application the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of
    leave  to  remain  and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    otherwise warrant a grant leave to remain.   The  Appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM because  her  partner  was  not  a
    British citizen or settled in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE as the Appellant had  not
    established that she had been in the United Kingdom for at least twenty
    years (there being no evidence of her being in the United Kingdom prior
    to 2004) and there would not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    reintegration in Nigeria, a country where she had spent the majority of
    her life and where she speaks a local language of Yoruba.

 5. Judge Gillespie dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  20
    January 2020 on all grounds.  The Appellant sought  an  adjournment  of
    the hearing in writing before the listed date,  on  the  basis  that  a
    witness was going to be outside of the United  Kingdom  and  unable  to
    attend.  The application was refused on the papers and when renewed  at
    the oral hearing, refused again.

 6. On the substance of the appeal, the First-tier Tribunal considered  the
    earlier decision of Judge  Paul  promulgated  on  3  April  2018  as  a
    starting point in accordance with  the  principles  in  Devaseelan  and
    noted in particular that the Appellant's account differed  between  her
    two appeals.  Overall, the Appellant was not found to be  credible  and
    although it was likely that she had been in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    substantial period, she had failed to establish that it had  been  over
    twenty years.  The refusal would not be a disproportionate interference
    with the Appellant's right to respect for private and family life.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  in  failing  to  grant  an
    adjournment in circumstances where there  was  evidence  of  a  witness
    being abroad and that witness evidence was crucial and would have  been
    decisive of the appeal.  As a matter of fairness, an adjournment should
    have been granted.  Further, the  reasons  given  at  the  hearing  for
    refusing the adjournment differed  to  those  given  in  the  decision.
    Secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    failing to  consider  the  Appellant's  private  life  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and failed to  conduct  a  proportionality  balancing
    exercise.  Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give  proper
    weight to the evidence before it;  specifically  that  weight  was  not
    given to the positive credibility findings  made  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's husband in his appeal contrary to the weight given  to  the
    previous adverse credibility findings in relation to the Appellant; the
    plausibility of the Appellant and her husband  living  separately;  and
    the evidence of the Appellant's children  and  means  of  contact  with
    them.

 8. There were earlier directions in this case with a provisional view that
    it may be one in which the error of  law  issues  could  be  determined
    without a hearing  (albeit  subsequently  listed  for  a  remote  video
    hearing), pursuant to which both parties made written submissions.

 9.  At   the   oral   hearing,   Mr   Mupara   relied   on   his   written
    submissions/skeleton argument in support of the grounds of appeal.   He
    submitted that in circumstances where the Appellant sought to establish
    that the case against her was wrong with  evidence  from  Mr  Ebo,  the
    central question was what fairness demanded; regardless of  the  timing
    of the request for an adjournment or the reasonableness of Mr Ebo being
    out of the country at the time of the hearing.

10. Mr Ebo is a businessman originally  from  Nigeria  who  was  unable  to
    attend the appeal in 2018 as he was  out  of  the  country;  albeit  no
    application for an adjournment was made on that  occasion  for  him  to
    attend.  In relation to the  present  appeal,  an  application  for  an
    adjournment was made, accompanied by  Mr  Ebo's  travel  itinerary  and
    tickets; which was refused on the papers.

11. Mr Mupara submitted that evidence as to the Appellant's presence in the
    United Kingdom between 1995 and 2004 could only be given by Mr Ebo  and
    as a matter of fairness, there should have been an adjournment to allow
    this evidence to be heard.  Mr Mupara accepted the points made  in  the
    refusal of the  application  for  an  adjournment  on  the  papers,  in
    particular that it was unreasonable for the Appellant not  to  warn  Mr
    Ebo about the listing date, or check his dates of travel with  him  and
    unreasonable not to put Counsel in funds until the end of December just
    before the hearing.  However, he submitted that these matters were  not
    relevant to the test of fairness.   Whilst  accepting  that  a  party's
    conduct may be relevant  to  the  assessment  of  fairness,  Mr  Mupara
    submitted  that  in  this  case,  regardless  of  the  Appellant's  own
    unreasonable conduct,  the  refusal  of  the  adjournment  amounted  to
    unfairness.

12. Further, as a matter  of  procedure,  Judge  Gillespie  stated  at  the
    hearing that he refused the adjournment on the basis that he  had  been
    brought in from Ireland to hear the appeal and had spent a considerable
    amount of time preparing for it.  However, the decision states that the
    reasons for refusal were that there was no itinerary available  for  Mr
    Ebo's travel; albeit Mr Mupara states that he specifically brought this
    document to the Tribunal's attention at  the  hearing.   There  was  no
    written statement from Mr Mupara as to the travel itinerary or  reasons
    given for refusing the adjournment at  the  hearing;  although  he  did
    refer to a witness statement from the Appellant on the latter point.

13. The second ground of appeal is that there was no consideration  of  the
    Appellant's private life outside of the Immigration Rules, the decision
    under challenge moving  from  finding  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), straight to  the  factors  in  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  but  without
    any attempt to assess the proportionality of the  Appellant's  removal.
    A reference to the factors in section 117B is not a  substitute  for  a
    proportionality  assessment.   This  is  a  clear  error  of   law   in
    circumstances where the only available ground of appeal  was  on  human
    rights grounds and not, as previously,  whether  the  decision  was  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.

14. The error in relation to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights  was  material  as  there  were  a  number  of  factors  in  the
    Appellant's favour showing that her removal would be  disproportionate.
    These include that she has been living in the  United  Kingdom  for  16
    years; that her husband has leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    the basis that he has lived here for more than twenty  years;  that  an
    application for Entry Clearance would not succeed  under  Appendix  FM;
    the Applicant speaks English and  would  be  able  to  find  employment
    without  being  a  burden  on  the  taxpayer.   The  evidence  of   the
    Appellant's private life also included her involvement in the church.

15. Mr Mupara accepted that the earlier decision dismissing the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds was the starting point, but matters had moved  on  by
    then with the evidence of Mr Ebo and the passage of time.  It was  also
    relevant that in the earlier appeal, no witnesses were  called  and  Mr
    Ebo was out of the country; the Appellant was not advised to arrange  a
    witness statement from him nor to apply for  an  adjournment.   It  was
    reasonable for the Appellant to  have  followed  advice,  although  the
    Appellant  has  not  made  a  formal  complaint  against  her  previous
    representatives and did not  refer  to  any  of  this  in  her  written
    statement (although she did also give oral evidence  there  was  little
    detail in relation to the conduct of her earlier appeal).

16. The  third  ground  of  appeal  is  as  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of and weight to  be  attached  to  specific  parts  of  the
    evidence before it.  First, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    attach weight to the statements of the Appellant's children given  that
    they were adults aged 25 and 28 at the date of their statements,  which
    confirmed that they grew up without their mother.   The  weight  to  be
    attached to the evidence should not have been reduced because they  had
    no practical knowledge of when the  Appellant  left  given  their  very
    young age at the claimed time.

17.  Secondly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  previous  adverse
    credibility findings against the  Appellant  but  failed  to  give  any
    reasons  for  not  accepting  the  finding  in  his  appeal  that   the
    Appellant's husband was a credible witness and as such  it  should  not
    have been held against him that his use of an  alias  and  obtaining  a
    mortgage in a false identity when assessing his credibility.

18. Thirdly, the First-tier Tribunal failed to explain why the  Appellant's
    husband's evidence that they could not live together prior to 2004  was
    implausible.  Mr Mupara accepted that this alone would not constitute a
    material error of law but was a factor to  be  considered  cumulatively
    with the other grounds.

19. Fourthly, the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give  clear  or  cogent
    findings that the lack of physical  evidence  of  contact  between  the
    Appellant and her children was implausible, in circumstances where  her
    evidence was that she did not keep calling cards between 1995 and  2004
    and that was before the days of social media.

20.  On  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  Mr  Melvin  relied  on  the  written
    submissions and resisted the appeal on all grounds.  In relation to the
    adjournment, it was submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reached
    perfectly permissible  findings  in  its  refusal  which  included  the
    historical failure of Mr Ebo to attend  the  hearing  in  2018  and  in
    failing to provide any written explanation for  his  absence  in  2020;
    even if his travel itinerary was available.  Mr Melvin  added  that  it
    should not be the case that the First-tier Tribunal is effectively held
    to ransom by a possible witness attendance by the late application  for
    adjournment.  In any event, the  application  for  an  adjournment  was
    adequately dealt with in paragraphs 4 to 6 of the decision and Mr Ebo's
    evidence was very limited, combined with the fact that he is  a  family
    members means that without move, it would be difficult for  a  Tribunal
    to attach any significant weight to it.

21. In relation to the second ground of appeal, in circumstances where  the
    Appellant was found to have lived egregiously under the  radar  in  the
    United  Kingdom;  where  her  relationship  and  stay   were   entirely
    precarious and established during a period of unlawful residence; it is
    unarguable that the claim could possibly have succeeded  under  Article
    8.  Mr Melvin noted in oral submissions Mr Mupara strayed  into  giving
    evidence as to the Appellant's family life when the  ground  of  appeal
    was expressly in relation to private life.

22. In relation to the final ground of appeal, the First-tier Tribunal gave
    copious good reasons for rejecting the core of the  Appellant's  claim,
    appropriately using the previous  Tribunal  decision  as  the  starting
    point.  The weight to be attached to the evidence was a matter for  the
    First-tier Tribunal and there were numerous  reasons  for  the  adverse
    credibility findings made.  The matters raised in the third  ground  of
    appeal were not relevant to the outcome.

23. Finally, Mr Melvin submitted that although the findings in relation  to
    Article 8 were brief in the decision, the factors in  section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 were set out  and  the
    findings were proportionate given  the  dearth  of  evidence  from  the
    Appellant.  Overall, there was  no  basis  upon  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  could  have  found  that  the  Appellant's  removal   was   a
    disproportionate interference with her right to respect for private and
    family life.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first ground of  appeal  is  as  to  whether  the  refusal  of  the
    application for  adjournment  amounted  to  procedural  unfairness  and
    therefore an error of law.  The issue is  not  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was unreasonable in  refusing  the  adjournment  request,  but
    whether there was any deprivation of the right to a  fair  hearing  for
    the Appellant.  This is set  out  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), as follows: "if a Tribunal refuses  to  accede
    to an  adjournment  request,  such  decision  could,  in  principle  be
    erroneous in law in several respects; these include a failure  to  take
    into  account  all  material  considerations;   permitting   immaterial
    considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a fair  hearing;
    failing to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting  irrationally.   In
    practice, in most cases  the  question  will  be  whether  the  refusal
    deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.   Where  an
    adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is  important
    to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal acted  reasonably.   Rather,  the  test  to  be
    applied is that of fairness: was there any deprivation of the  affected
    party's right to a fair hearing? ..."

 2. The appeal hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  listed  on  25
    September 2019 for hearing on 9 January 2019  with  notification  being
    sent on 25 September 2019 date to both  the  Appellant  and  her  legal
    representative on record with the Tribunal.  On 29  December  2019,  an
    application was made to adjourn the hearing because a  crucial  witness
    who provided the Appellant with food and accommodation between 1995 and
    2004 was going to be out of the United Kingdom on the date of  hearing.
    A copy of the travel  itinerary  was  included.   The  application  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 31 December  2019  on  the  basis
    that the hearing date had been notified some 8 weeks before the witness
    had booked flights, there was no written statement  from  him  (and  no
    Appellant's bundle at all) and the application for adjournment was made
    some 5 weeks after the witness booked his flight.   It  was  considered
    that  more  evidence  and  explanation  was  required  to  justify   an
    adjournment.

 3. The application for an adjournment was renewed at the oral  hearing  on
    the basis that Mr Ebo was a crucial witness for  the  period  1995-2004
    and a written statement was available from him.   The  application  was
    opposed.

 4. In the decision, having referred to the earlier  proceedings  in  2018,
    the adjournment application was refused for the following reasons:

         "5. An application was  made  to  adjourn  the  appeal  proceedings
         because Mr Ebo was once again in  Nigeria.   In  a  letter  to  the
         Tribunal dated 29 December 2019, Mr Mupara said that Mr Ebo  was  a
         crucial witness and that he was going abroad  on  1  January  2020,
         returning 9 February 2020.  No evidence was provided of his  travel
         itinerary.  He is apparently an accountant and a  businessman.   Mr
         Mupara said the appellant had instructed him  on  a  Direct  Access
         basis, there were issues over funding and that was the  reason  why
         the adjournment application was made so close to  the  hearing.   I
         refused the application in light of the fact that this was  such  a
         material issue  before  Judge  Paul;  that  the  hearing  date  was
         notified to the appellant on 25 September 2019 and yet no letter of
         explanation was provided by this man himself to explain why he  was
         once again unable to attend the hearing through being abroad.

         6. I was not satisfied that fairness required an adjournment  given
         the absence of evidence that he was in fact in Nigeria and all  the
         circumstances.  Mr Ebo is said to be a relative of the  appellant's
         husband and I am quite sure they both knew the importance  of  this
         witness attending, if indeed he is able to speak credibly  to  what
         is said in his statement."

 5. The grounds of appeal and  oral  submissions  state  that,  first,  the
    travel itinerary was available (which is an error, this was on file and
    was attached to the written application), and second,  the  Judge  gave
    different  reasons  at  the  hearing.   Although  there  is  a  witness
    statement from the  Appellant  on  the  latter,  there  is  no  written
    statement accompanied by a statement of truth nor any  notes  from  the
    hearing submitted by Mr Mupara, who instead sought to give evidence  as
    to  what  happened  during  his  oral  submissions  to  me.   That   is
    inappropriate.  In  circumstances  where  such  allegations  are  made,
    particularly relating to matters of fairness, such  a  statement  could
    and should have been provided by Mr Mupara dealing with these  matters.
    Less weight can be attached to a statement of  the  Appellant  on  this
    point, particularly where adverse credibility findings have  been  made
    against her previously.  In any event,  as  Mr  Mupara  submitted,  the
    question is one of fairness rather than adequacy  or  reasons  for  the
    refusal of adjournment so the point, even taken at  its  highest,  does
    not advance the Appellant's appeal in any material way.

 6. Aside from the error as to the itinerary, the other reasons for refusal
    of the adjournment were entirely appropriate.   The  question  is  what
    fairness  required,  which  includes  fairness  to  both  parties.   In
    circumstances where the Appellant claims  that  Mr  Ebo  is  a  crucial
    witness and the only person able to give evidence on her presence  from
    1995-2004, there was no explanation at all from her as to the very late
    application for adjournment and failing to make preparations for Mr Ebo
    to attend the hearing and no evidence  directly  from  him  as  to  his
    inability to attend.  Further, the assertion that Mr Ebo's evidence was
    key, crucial and in Mr Mupara's  submission,  decisive  of  the  appeal
    needs to be examined more closely.

 7. First, Mr Ebo did not attend the previous hearing  before  Judge  Paul,
    nor did he give any evidence or explain his absence and no  application
    for an adjournment was made on that occasion for  him  to  attend.   On
    behalf of the Appellant this was said to  be  on  the  basis  of  legal
    advice but no complaint has been made about this and the Appellant  has
    said little or nothing about this herself.  Applying the principles set
    out in paragraph 40(a) in Devaseelan the evidence not  brought  to  the
    attention of the earlier Tribunal, although  clearly  relevant  to  the
    issues before it as to the Appellant's  length  of  claimed  residence,
    should be treated with the greatest circumspection and the adduction of
    such facts should not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration  of  the
    conclusions reached by the first Tribunal - in this case that  although
    the Appellant had resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  considerable
    period, she had not established that this was from 1995 as  claimed  or
    over twenty years.

 8. Secondly, the written statement from Mr Ebo is sparse, going no further
    than an assertion not supported by any detail or  documentary  evidence
    of the Appellant being provided with accommodation by him between  1995
    and 2004.  Mr Ebo does not identify  the  address,  any  more  specific
    dates or any details as to the accommodation itself -  in  contrast  to
    setting out at least the location of where the Appellant's husband  was
    accommodated in 1995.   At  its  highest,  the  evidence  is  extremely
    limited.

 9. Thirdly, the evidence from Mr Ebo was not the sole  evidence  available
    or relied upon as to the Appellant's claimed  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1995.  There  was  witness  evidence  on  this  from  the
    Appellant herself, her husband, her two children and Rev Fawole;  three
    of whom gave oral evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Little
    weight was however attached to all of this evidence for the  clear  and
    cogent reasons given in the decision and  none  was  supported  by  any
    documentary evidence.  In particular it is of note that  the  Appellant
    did not address the issue at all in her own written statement,  instead
    simply adopting her husband's statement and  his  contained  a  similar
    lack of any detail to Mr Ebo's statement.  In her  oral  evidence,  the
    Appellant  only  referred  to  limited  additional  details  about  the
    accommodation.

10. It was of course open to the Appellant to have submitted evidence  from
    other persons as to her presence in the United Kingdom since 2005,  for
    example from any of Mr Ebo's family  members  whom  she  said  in  oral
    evidence she lived with and who had not travelled to Nigeria  with  him
    at the date of the hearing; or  anyone  else.   It  is  not  the  case,
    contrary to Mr Mupara's assertion, that Mr Ebo was the only person  who
    could give evidence  on  this  issue.   Further,  although  it  is  not
    uncommon for those unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  have  some
    difficulty in obtaining documentary evidence of  their  presence  here,
    the Appellant has not given any explanation for her inability to submit
    any at all, from any source, for the period 1995 to 2004.

11. Overall, in circumstances where the evidence of Mr  Ebo  was  extremely
    limited and to be treated with circumspection;  where  other  witnesses
    gave evidence on the same issue of  the  Appellant's  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom and where the Appellant had more than adequate  time  to
    prepare for her appeal (including as to the witnesses to be called, not
    limited to Mr Ebo); it was not procedurally unfair for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to refuse the application for an adjournment.   There  was  no
    error of law on the first ground of appeal.

12. As to the second ground  of  appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refer,
    entirely properly, to the decision of Judge Paul as the starting  point
    in accordance with the principles in Devaseelan  and  in  paragraph  33
    states:  "Like  Judge  Paul  I  have  considered  the  refusal  of  the
    appellant's application in terms of the guidance given by  the  courts,
    with reference to the  Razgar  schema  and  also  the  requirements  of
    section 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002."
    Those factors are set out,  with  the  findings  that  the  Appellant's
    immigration status was unquestionably precarious (as was her  husband's
    status) with her living under the radar having previously been found to
    be egregious.  Further, there was  nothing  to  prevent  the  Appellant
    and/or her husband from living with their adult children in Nigeria who
    could assist their reintegration; or it was  open  to  the  Appellant's
    husband to remain in the United Kingdom for the duration of  his  leave
    to remain.

13. These findings are undeniably brief, but in the context of this appeal,
    the earlier findings of Judge Paul and the lack of evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, they are more than adequate.   The  Appellant  has
    remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom for a significant  period  of
    time, such that little weight should be given to her private  life  and
    the maintenance of immigration control is in the public  interest.   On
    the Appellant's side of the scales for the  balancing  exercise,  there
    was very little evidence of anything beyond an extended period of  time
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom, living with her husband.   There  was
    no evidence from the Appellant at all claiming any substantive  private
    life developed in the United Kingdom (although some degree  of  private
    life can be inferred from her length of time  here),  for  example,  no
    evidence of any employment, education or any involvement in  the  wider
    community beyond attending church.  Further, there was no  evidence  at
    all from the Appellant as to any obstacles she may  face  returning  to
    Nigeria, let alone very significant obstacles to reintegration  and  no
    evidence at all from her or her husband  as  to  why  any  family  life
    between them could not be  continued  in  Nigeria  either.   There  was
    therefore no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of  any  substance
    to weigh in the Appellant's favour in the balancing exercise beyond the
    matters already considered in the decision and in section 117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  On these facts, this was
    an appeal which was bound to fail  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  There is therefore no error of law on  the
    second ground of appeal for these reasons.

14. The matters in the third ground  of  appeal  amount  to  no  more  than
    disagreements with findings made by the First-tier Tribunal which  were
    entirely open to it to make on the evidence before it.  As acknowledged
    by Mr Mupara, none of these matters alone are sufficient to establish a
    material error of law and even taken cumulatively there is no error  of
    law.  First, it was  entirely  reasonable  and  appropriate  to  attach
    little weight to the evidence of the Appellant's  children  as  to  the
    date the Appellant left Nigeria given that they could have no  personal
    knowledge or recollection of the date due to their age in 1995 (one was
    a matter of months old and the other under the age of  2)  and  had  no
    other reference point or evidence of contact with her in the key period
    in dispute between 1995 and 2004.  The fact that they are now adults is
    irrelevant.

15. Secondly, in paragraph 25 of the decision, reference  is  made  to  the
    Appellant's husband securing a mortgage  in  an  alias,  found  not  to
    encourage the Judge to find that he is an anyway  a  reliable  witness.
    There is no error in this comment, the use of  an  alias  to  secure  a
    mortgage can rationally be considered when assessing reliability  of  a
    person's evidence and in this case, there were no positive  credibility
    findings in relation to him from his own appeal that  could  or  should
    have been balanced against this.  The Appellant's husband's appeal  was
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Loke essentially on the  basis
    that the Respondent had accepted that he arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in 1995 and not left since, supported  by  at  least  some  documentary
    evidence of his presence in the United Kingdom dating back to at  least
    1998.  The finding  that  the  Appellant  did  not  fall  foul  of  the
    suitability requirements in the Immigration Rules does not amount to  a
    positive credibility finding.

16. Thirdly and fourthly,  there  is  no  identifiable  error  of  law  the
    findings that it was implausible that  neither  the  Appellant  or  her
    children were unable to produce any evidence at  all  of  contact  with
    them throughout their childhood; nor that it was  implausible  for  the
    Appellant and her husband to live separately for nine  years  and  only
    live together when he changed from staying with the church or  in  some
    form or house share to own his own property (with no transition  period
    of renting his own accommodation between).  In any event, these matters
    are at best peripheral to the core of the decision.

17. For these reasons there is no error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                               Date     17th March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

