
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14092/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 28 September 2020                 |
|remotely by Skype for Business       |                                     |
|On 17 September 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 UBARAJ RAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 28 November 1984.

 2. On 25 April 2019, the appellant made an application for entry clearance
    to come to the UK as the adult dependent child of his  mother,  Parbati
    Rai who is the widow of his late father  who  was  formerly  a  Ghurkha
    soldier.

 3. On 10 July  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application  for  entry  clearance.   On  6  January  2020,  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager maintained that decision.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 13 March 2020, Judge Mill dismissed the appellant's appeal.  In para
    37 of his determination, he concluded that Art 8.1 of the ECHR was  not
    engaged as the evidence before him did not establish that  the  support
    between the appellant and his mother was such that family life  existed
    between them.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 27
    April 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ford) granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

 6. As a result of the COVID-19 crisis, the appeal was listed  for  hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal to take place remotely  by  Skype  for  Business.
    Neither party raised any objection to this and, on 17  September  2020,
    the appeal was listed before me.  I was  based  in  the  Cardiff  Civil
    Justice Centre and Mr Moriarty, who represented the appellant,  and  Mr
    Howells, who represented the respondent,  joined  the  hearing  through
    Skype for Business.

Background

 7. The appellant is the son of  a  former  Ghurkha  soldier.   His  father
    served in the Brigade of Ghurkhas between 1974 and 1989 when he retired
    after 15 years' service.  His father died on 1 November 1990 in Brunei.
     Along with other Ghurkhas,  the  appellant's  father  was  denied  any
    opportunity to settle in the UK following his discharge from  the  army
    in 1989.

 8. As is  well-known,  the  'historic  injustice'  experienced  by  former
    Ghurkha soldiers and  their  families  was  rectified,  over  time,  by
    changes  in  government  policy  and  the   Immigration   Rules.    The
    appellant's father died before settlement in the  UK  became  possible.
    However, in March 2010, the appellant's mother was  granted  indefinite
    leave to enter the UK and she came to  the  UK  on  21  November  2013.
    However, by that time the appellant was 18 and so the  relevant  policy
    did not apply to him or, indeed, to his siblings.

 9. In 2014, the appellant unsuccessfully applied for a visit  visa.   That
    application was refused on the basis that the  ECO  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was, as he  claimed,  employed  and  in  receipt  of
    income.

10. In 2015, the appellant and his older sister applied for entry clearance
    to settle in the UK as the adult  dependants  of  their  mother.   (The
    appellant's elder sister lives in the UK with her husband).  On 2 April
    2015, those applications were refused and the appeals of the  appellant
    and his sister were dismissed by Judge Carroll.  Judge Carroll was  not
    satisfied, inter alia, that the appellant had established "family life"
    with his mother under Art 8 of the ECHR.

11. Subsequently, the appellant's sister (with  whom  he  lives  in  Nepal)
    unsuccessfully made an application for entry clearance  to  join  their
    mother in the UK.  The appellant's sister appealed the refusal decision
    of 22 March 2019.  The First-tier Tribunal subsequently  dismissed  her
    appeal in early 2020.

12. The appellant made a further application for entry  clearance  to  join
    his mother in the UK on 25 April 2019 which was refused on 10 July 2019
    and is the subject of the present appeal.

The Judge's Decision

13. Before the judge, the appellant's case was that he lived in the  family
    home in Nepal with his older sister.  He was financially  supported  by
    his mother from the UK.  He was unmarried and had not  formed  his  own
    family unit.  He remained in close contact  with  his  mother  who  had
    returned to Nepal, most recently living with him and  his  sister  from
    January 2018 to August 2019.  His case was  that  his  mother  provided
    him with "real, or effective or committed  support"  such  that  family
    life existed so as to engage Art 8.1 of the ECHR.  He  contended  that,
    given the 'historic injustice' which was engaged in  his  circumstances
    as a result of the treatment  of  former  Ghurkha  soldiers  and  their
    families in seeking settlement in the UK,  it  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with his "family life" to refuse him  entry  clearance  to
    the UK.

14. Having set out the immigration history of the appellant and his family,
    together with the earlier appeal decisions  to  which  I  have  already
    referred, Judge Mill considered the  evidence,  in  particular  of  the
    sponsor who gave oral evidence before him.  It is an understatement  to
    say that he was  unimpressed:  he  found  the  sponsor  (and  also  the
    appellant) not to be credible and reliable  sources  of  evidence  (see
    para 21).  The judge set out his reasons at paras 18-22 as follows:

         "18  ... I have heard only from the Appellant's Sponsor.  I did not
             find her a credible and reliable source of evidence.  I  found
             her surprisingly vague in her knowledge about  the  Appellant.
             She was also evasive in answering simple questions.

         19.  The Sponsor was asked under cross-examination as to whether or
             not anything had materially changed since 2016 at the time  of
             Judge Carroll's determination.  She  replied  that  there  had
             been no material changes.  Her frank admission does not assist
             me at all to depart from Judge Carroll's findings.

         20.  The Sponsor admitted in her oral evidence that she had,  along
             with the now Appellant, misled the Authorities  previously  by
             stating that her son and now Appellant had been in  employment
             in 2014 at the  time  of  his  visit  visa  application.   The
             Appellant admits this  in  his  witness  statement.   Such  an
             acceptance  does  of  course  impair  the  Sponsor   and   the
             Appellant's general credibility.  It was submitted  on  behalf
             of the Appellant that such acceptance is  actually  favourable
             to the Appellant as the fact that it is accepted that  he  was
             not in employment in 2014 supports the suggestion and reliance
             upon the fact that he has never been in employment and  solely
             reliant upon the  Sponsor.   I  do  not  find  that  there  is
             substance or merit in this submission.

         21.  I find that  both  the  Appellant  and  his  Sponsor  are  not
             credible and reliable sources of evidence.  I cannot rely upon
             their statements.  I find it equally likely that the Appellant
             was employed in 2014 but after having  been  refused  a  visit
             visa had since decided to claim that he was  not  working  and
             therefore has been and is reliant  upon  the  Sponsor  in  the
             alternative.  It is neither more likely that the Appellant has
             been in employment in Nepal given the state  of  the  evidence
             which is inherently unreliable.  I cannot find that it is more
             likely than not that the Appellant has not worked in Nepal  in
             the capacity which he claims in 2014.

         22.  Judge Carroll also relied upon question  54  of  the  relevant
             Visa Application Form giving rise to the decision under appeal
             before him in  which  the  Appellant  indicated  that  he  was
             'supported by spouse/partner/other'.  It is  noted  that  that
             was clearly not consistent with the evidence presented to  the
             effect that the Appellant is wholly financially dependent upon
             his Sponsor".

15. At para 24, having cited the decision in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439, at para 24, the judge found  the  documents  to  be  unreliable,
    being "self-serving" and he attached little weight to them.

16. At para 25, the judge referred to the earlier finding by Judge  Carroll
    that  "it  appears  that  the  Appellants  are  and  have  been  for  a
    substantial period of time  living  independent  lives  in  Nepal"  and
    concluded that:

         "As earlier referred to the Sponsor accepted in her  oral  evidence
         that nothing had changed since then".

17. Having made these adverse credibility findings, the judge  went  on  in
    paras 26-29 to consider the evidence of the support, if any,  from  the
    sponsor:

         "26. The Appellant is currently 35 years of age.  It is  said  that
             he has never had employment and  works  on  an  ad  hoc  basis
             playing music in a restaurant and bar once a month.  He stated
             that he derives a small income which is  described  as  pocket
             money.  The Sponsor was asked whether the Appellant ever  made
             any job application in Nepal to which [s]he replied  that  she
             is either unaware or that he hadn't and that on the basis that
             the entire focus had been upon  seeking  to  arrange  for  the
             Appellant to enter the UK.  The fact that  the  Appellant  has
             not obtained employment, and therefore may  require  financial
             support from the Sponsor is irrelevant to the determination of
             this appeal.  The question is whether or not  there  is  real,
             genuine and effective support, not the reasons as to why  this
             has become necessary.  However, the important  aspect  of  the
             Sponsor's evidence which impairs her credibility is her entire
             lack of understanding or knowledge about the Appellant's  day-
             to-day lifestyle.  She was  unable  to  provide  any  detailed
             evidence regarding this lifestyle in her  evidence.   This  is
             not set out in any of the written testimony with any degree of
             specification.  I find it much more likely  as  Judge  Carroll
             did that the Appellant being a healthy male in  his  30's  has
             worked and has supported himself at times in the past and now.
               The  Sponsor's  lack  of  knowledge  about   the   Appellant
             undermines the close family  ties  said  to  exist.   This  is
             perhaps  even  more  so  surprising  given  that  the  Sponsor
             returned to Nepal in January 2018 and says she  remained  with
             the Appellant and his sister, Anita, there until August  2019,
             a period of almost two years.

         27.  I can accept that the Appellant has some ongoing  family  ties
             with  his  Sponsor  mother.   There  is  evidence  of  ongoing
             indirect communication between them throughout the  period  of
             time the Sponsor has returned to the UK recently.   The  level
             of communication however is not at the level as claimed by the
             Sponsor in her oral evidence.  She  claimed  that  she  is  in
             contact with the Appellant two or three times a day  and  this
             is not evidenced.  The Sponsor's desire  to  exaggerate  is  a
             further factor which undermines her credibility.

         28.  Even taking into account the fact that the Sponsor returned to
             Nepal for a lengthy period recently and  taking  together  the
             modern indirect communications which are frequent,  I  do  not
             find that such factors evidence  anything  other  than  normal
             emotional ties between the  Appellant  and  his  Sponsor.   As
             Judge Carroll found in 2016 the Appellant  by  then  had  been
             living an independent life for some time.  I have no  credible
             or reliable evidence before me to depart from this finding.

         29.  I accept there is evidence of some degree of financial support
             in that the Appellant occupies, along with his sister,  Anita,
             the home which is owned by the Sponsor.  As such he  does  not
             pay towards the cost of his accommodation.  Reliance is placed
             upon the Sponsor's pension in Nepal  being  directed  for  the
             benefit of the Appellant.  In this respect her  statements  of
             account  from  Standard  Chartered  Bank  are  found  in   the
             Appellant's  bundle.   There  is  however  no  clear  evidence
             contained within these statements that any of the monies  have
             been directed specifically for the benefit of  the  Appellant.
             There is no corresponding letter from  the  bank  for  example
             stipulating that the Appellant is a beneficiary or  holds  any
             mandate to be a signatory on the account for  example.   There
             is a lack of clear specified credible and reliable documentary
             evidence to exhibit and vouch  substantial  financial  support
             from  his  Sponsor  which  the  Appellant  relies  upon".  (my
             emphasis)

18. Having then set out at paras 30-34, a number of relevant cases  dealing
    with family life and claims by members of the family of former  Ghurkha
    soldiers and Art 8, the judge continued at para 35:

         "35. It is well-established and settled that for an adult child  to
             establish that Article 8 is engaged, that something more  than
             normal emotional ties of those seen between adult children and
             their parents must exist.  This  approach  has  been  approved
             domestically applying Strasbourg jurisprudence.  The  approach
             applies  common-sense  in  that  obvious  relationships  which
             engage Article 8 would be, for example, cohabiting  dependants
             such  as  parents  and  their   dependent,   minor   children.
             Relationships  between  adults  and  their  parents   do   not
             automatically  qualify  for  the  protection  available  under
             Article 8  of  the  Convention  without  evidence  of  further
             elements of dependency involving more  than  normal  emotional
             ties.   There  may  be  a  number  of  different  elements  of
             dependency.  These should be of  a  committed,  sustained  and
             effective  nature,  not  contrived  and  generally  to  be  in
             existence by circumstance and not by choice".  (my emphasis)

19. At para 36, the judge added this:

         "36. Relevant factors to consider in  identifying  whether  or  not
             Article 8 is engaged between adult children and their parents,
             are factors such as their age, health, vulnerability and  past
             and present contact between them and  their  parents.   Family
             life for the purposes of Article  8  may  have  been  lost  or
             disengaged for a period but may have been regained.  There was
             clear  family  life  in  existence  at  the  time   that   the
             Appellants' parents left Nepal.  That  family  life  has  been
             preserved by the interaction between the Sponsor and his  wife
             and the Appellant since they were  forced  to  separate  as  a
             consequence  of  the  discriminatory  policy  in  place".  (my
             emphasis)

20. Finally, at para 37 the judge reached this conclusion:

         "37. Based upon the totality of the evidence before  me  I  do  not
             find that Article 8(1) is engaged.  I cannot find on the basis
             of the evidence before me that it is more likely that there is
             support between the Appellant and his Sponsor which  is  real,
             effective or committed.  I find that there is  nothing  beyond
             normal family ties  seen  between  adult  children  and  their
             parents". (my emphasis)

21. As a consequence, the judge went on to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Submissions

22. Drawing on his detailed grounds of appeal, Mr Moriarty  submitted  that
    the judge had erred in law in a number of respects.

23. First, he submitted that the  judge  had  applied  the  wrong  test  in
    determining whether there was "family life" between the  appellant  and
    his mother.  Mr Moriarty submitted, relying upon the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA
    Civ 320.  Mr Moriarty submitted that at para 26  of  his  determination
    the judge had required the  appellant  to  establish  that  there  were
    "real, genuine and effective support".  He submitted that the judge had
    read the three phrases as if they were conjunctive rather than, as  the
    case law established, they are disjunctive.  Mr  Moriarty  acknowledged
    that the judge had expressed the test, consistently with Rai,  at  para
    37, but, he submitted, the wrong test had already been "folded  in"  to
    his earlier findings.  Further, Mr Moriarty  also  submitted  that  the
    judge had wrongly expressed the test in para 35 when he had stated that
    the elements of dependency should be "of  a  committed,  sustained  and
    effective nature".

24. Secondly, Mr Moriarty submitted that the judge  at  para  35  had  also
    erred by requiring that the support should, in the  judge's  words,  be
    "not by choice".  Mr Moriarty submitted that there was  no  requirement
    that the support necessary to establish family life should  arise  'out
    of necessity' rather than 'out of choice'.  He  acknowledged  that  the
    judge had expressed the contrary position in para 26  when  having  set
    out that the issue was whether  the  support  was  "real,  genuine  and
    effective" and "not the reason as to why this  has  become  necessary".
    Again, Mr Moriarty submitted that it was  unclear,  therefore,  whether
    the judge had applied the correct test.

25. Thirdly, Mr Moriarty submitted that para 36 the judge  made  a  finding
    wholly inconsistent with  his  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   Mr
    Moriarty submitted that in para 36  it  appeared  that  the  judge  had
    accepted that family life existed at the  time  that  "the  Appellants'
    parents  left  Nepal"  and  that  that  had  been  "preserved  by   the
    interaction between the Sponsor and his wife and  the  Appellant  since
    they were forced to separate as a  consequence  of  the  discriminatory
    policy in place".  Mr  Moriarty  submitted  that  these  findings  were
    inconsistent with the judge's ultimate conclusion that family life  had
    not been established.

26. Finally, Mr Moriarty submitted that the judge had been  wrong  to  take
    literally the sponsor's evidence that nothing had changed  since  Judge
    Carroll's determination.  It  was  not  in  dispute  that  since  Judge
    Carroll's determination, the sponsor had returned to Nepal  in  January
    2018 and had remained there until August 2019 living in the family home
    with the appellant and his sister.

27. Mr Moriarty submitted that, despite  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings in relation to the appellant and sponsor, there was  evidence,
    including that and the financial evidence concerning the sponsor's bank
    account which showed withdrawals that could  only  have  been  made  in
    Nepal by the appellant and his sister.  They were also accommodated  in
    the family home throughout. Mr Moriarty invited me to conclude that the
    judge had materially erred in law in misdirecting  himself  as  to  the
    appropriate legal test and in reaching inconsistent findings.

28. Mr Howells accepted that the correct test for establishing family  life
    was whether the support was  "real  or  effective  or  committed"  read
    disjunctively.  He accepted that at para 26 the judge  had  stated  the
    test in a conjunctive form.  He also accepted that the judge had used a
    slightly different phraseology in para 35 when he spoke of  "committed,
    sustained and effective" support.  However, Mr Howells  submitted  that
    there was nothing to suggest that the judge had  misapplied  the  test.
    Indeed, in para 37 he had correctly stated the test when  reaching  his
    adverse finding in relation to family life.

29. Further, Mr Howells acknowledged that the judge had wrongly phrased the
    requirement to establish support as being "not by choice" in  para  35.
    However, Mr Howells submitted the judge had correctly stated it in para
    26 when he had said that the support need not have  arisen  because  it
    was "necessary".   Mr  Howells  submitted  there  was  nothing  in  the
    determination  that  demonstrated  that  the  judge   had   applied   a
    requirement of "necessity".

30. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had not  believed  the  sponsor  or
    appellant and had given detailed reasons for that at paras 17-22 of his
    determination.  Further, he had found that two Nepalese documents  were
    "self-serving" and should be given little weight as being unreliable at
    paras 23-24.  Neither of these findings was challenged and, Mr  Howells
    submitted, demonstrated that any error was not material.

31. Mr Howells accepted that para 36 of the judge's  determination  was  at
    odds with his decision.  He submitted it was a single sentence in  that
    paragraph and it did not undermine the judge's  overall  reasoning  and
    ultimate conclusion.

Discussion

32. It was common ground between the  parties  that  the  relevant  law  in
    respect of establishing "family life" for the purposes  of  Art  8  was
    helpfully summarised in the Court of Appeal's decision in Rai.  As with
    the present appeal, Rai involved a claim by an adult child of a  former
    Ghurkha soldier who sought to join his family in the UK relying on  Art
    8.  In that case, drawing on the earlier  case  law  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, Lindblom LJ (with whom Beatson and Henderson LJJ  agreed)  said
    this at [16]-[20]:

         "16.  The  legal  principles  relevant  to  this  issue   are   not
             controversial.

          1. In Kugathas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17  of  his
             judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
             "support", in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective"
             to the word "support", then it represents ... the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life  implies".  Arden  L.J.  said  (in
             paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the "relevant  factors  ...
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of  family  life".  Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same  country".  In  Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA  Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

          1. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  the  Upper
             Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that
             the  judgments  in  Kugathas   had   been   "interpreted   too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence". It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

                  "61. Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                  reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012] Imm.
                  A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be  whether
                  or not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If
                  he is still single and living  with  his  parents,  he  is
                  likely to enjoy family life with them. ...".

             The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
             judgment in AA v United Kingdom  (in  paragraphs  46  to  49),
             which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

                  "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                  suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old,
                  who resides with his mother and  has  not  yet  founded  a
                  family of his own,  can  be  regarded  as  having  "family
                  life"."

          1. Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in  Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case". In some instances  "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all  depends
             on the facts". The court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46),
             as "useful" and as indicating  "the  correct  approach  to  be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination  in
             Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy), including  its
             observation (at paragraph 62) that "[the]  different  outcomes
             in cases with superficially similar features emphasises to  us
             that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

          1. To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):

                  "24. I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                  referred lead to any difficulty in determining the correct
                  approach to Article 8 in cases involving  adult  children.
                  In the case of  adults,  in  the  context  of  immigration
                  control, there is no legal or factual  presumption  as  to
                  the existence or absence of family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
                  European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly  in
                  Kugathas   did   not   include    any    requirement    of
                  exceptionality. It all depends on the facts. The love  and
                  affection between an adult and  his  parents  or  siblings
                  will not of itself justify a finding  of  a  family  life.
                  There has to be something more. A young adult living  with
                  his parents or siblings will normally have a  family  life
                  to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family
                  life with his parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a
                  family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of  age.  On
                  the other hand, a young adult living independently of  his
                  parents may well not have a family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8."

33. As will be clear, the need  to  establish  "family  life"  is  a  fact-
    sensitive issue.  It will  not  be  presumed  to  exist  between  adult
    siblings  or  between  an  adult  child  and  parent.   What  must   be
    established is "more  than  normal  emotional  ties".   There  must  be
    "support" which is "real" or "committed" or "effective".

34. In Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 332, the Senior President of  Tribunals
    (Sir Ernest Ryder, with whom Bean and King LJJ agreed), having set  out
    extracts from the decision in Kugathas, said this at [31]:

         "Dependency, in the Kugathas sense, is accordingly not  a  term  of
         art.  It is a question of fact, a matter  of  substance  not  form.
         The irreducible minimum of what family life  implies  remains  that
         which Sedley LJ described as  being  whether  support  is  real  or
         effective or committed".

         (See also [40(i)].)

35. Again, as in Rai, the test of "support" is expressed  disjunctively  as
    having to be "real" or "effective" or "committed".

36. I accept Mr Moriarty's submission that the test of whether family  life
    is established turns upon whether there is  "real"  or  "effective"  or
    "committed" "support" provided, in this case, by  the  sponsor  to  the
    appellant.  Whilst the judge correctly set that test out at para 37  of
    his determination, it is clear that the judge misstated the  test  both
    in paras 26 and 35 of his determination.  In both paragraphs the  judge
    set out the nature of the support  required  with  the  three  elements
    stated conjunctively.   Also,  in  para  35,  he  substituted  for  the
    adjective "real" the adjective "sustained".  Further, he inconsistently
    set out whether or not the need for the support must  be  by  necessity
    and not by choice at paras 26 and 35.  There is a very real danger that
    the judge required more be proved to establish "family life" to  engage
    Art 8.1 than is required.  The misdirection amounts to an error of law.

37. Given the judge's rejection  of  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and
    sponsor as not being credible, Mr Howells submits, in effect, that  any
    error was immaterial.  That submission is not without  some  merit  but
    ultimately I am not able to accept it.  The judge did  not  reject  all
    ties or support, based upon the evidence, between the sponsor  and  the
    appellant.  In para 27 he accepted that there was "some ongoing  family
    ties" with the sponsor.  He also accepted that there  was  evidence  of
    "ongoing  indirect  communications"  between  them  after  the  sponsor
    returned to the UK recently.  However, he did not accept the  level  of
    communication claimed by the sponsor whom he considered had exaggerated
    that.  The judge also accepted that there was "evidence of some  degree
    of financial support", not least that he  and  his  sister  occupied  a
    house owned by the sponsor and that the appellant did not  pay  towards
    the costs of that accommodation.  The  judge  made  that  finding  even
    though he went on not to accept the evidence that the sponsor's pension
    paid into her account in Nepal was drawn upon by the appellant.

38. In other words, the judge accepted some emotional and economic  support
    was provided by the sponsor.  Those were,  as  Mr  Moriarty  submitted,
    findings which could potentially  have  met  the  disjunctive  test  of
    "effective" or "real" or "committed" "support" provided by the sponsor.
     There is no requirement that there  be  "exceptional  dependency"  for
    family life to exist between an adult  child  and  parent  (see,  e.g.,
    Uddin at [32]).  The context  of  separation  "by  long-delayed  right"
    arising from the "historic injustice" experienced by  Ghurkha  families
    may be a relevant factor (see Patel v ECO [2010] EWCA Civ  17  at  [14]
    and Rai at [17]).  Despite Judge Carroll's  earlier  adverse  decision,
    Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  000720  did  not  preclude  Judge  Mill  from
    reaching a different finding(s) on the evidence before him.    Contrary
    to what the sponsor said, there were "changes"  or  additional  matters
    that had arisen since  Judge  Carroll's  decision,  in  particular  the
    sponsor's visit and stay in Nepal in 2018-2019.   In  setting  out  the
    required support conjunctively (and with one misdescription in para 35)
    in his determination, the judge both misdirected  himself  in  law  and
    placed a potentially higher burden  upon  the  appellant  to  establish
    "family life" which I am not confident, given the  support  provide  by
    the sponsor that the judge accepted at [27]-[29], that the errors  were
    immaterial  to  his  ultimate  finding  that  "family  life"  was   not
    established. The judge's decision cannot stand and is set aside.

39. Two further matters reinforce my conclusion.

40. First, whilst the judge was aware that the  sponsor  had  visited  (and
    indeed lived with) the appellant between January 2018 and  August  2019
    (see para 26), it is unclear whether he accepted that was  evidence  of
    continuing ties and  "support"  relevant  to  assessing  the  issue  of
    "family life".  It clearly was relevant, if  accepted  as  evidence  of
    effective or real or committed support.

41. Secondly, para 36 of the judge's determination  is  problematic  as  Mr
    Howells acknowledged.  There, quite  inconsistently  with  the  judge's
    ultimate decision, he appears to have found that  family  life  existed
    when the sponsor lived in Nepal and was "preserved" since the appellant
    and sponsor have been separated.  Read at face value, para 36  contains
    a finding which is, in effect, that Art 8.1 is engaged.

42. It is unclear how para 36 came to be part of the judge's determination.
     One possibility is that it is an accidental insertion not dealing with
    the appellant's case at all.  That might follow from the fact that  the
    judge refers to two matters that are not part of the appellant's claim.
     First, he refers to it being clear that family  life  existed  at  the
    time that "the Appellants' parents left Nepal".   Of  course,  in  this
    case the appellant's father passed away in Brunei in November 1990  and
    his mother left Nepal, after his death to come to the UK,  in  November
    2013.  This is not a case where, as the judge's reference to the  facts
    implies, the appellant's parents both left Nepal to  come  to  the  UK.
    Secondly, the judge refers to family life being preserved between  "the
    Sponsor and his wife".  That, of course, makes no sense as the  sponsor
    is the appellant's mother and the preserved family  life,  if  any,  is
    between  the  appellant  and  his  only  living  parent,  his   mother.
    Nevertheless, para 36  is  placed  immediately  following  the  judge's
    assessment of  the  appellant's  case  and  para  37  where  the  judge
    dismisses  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  "family  life"   is   not
    established.  Its insertion leads to a necessary contradiction, on  the
    face of it, both in  the  judge's  reasoning  and  his  findings.   The
    findings in para 36 cannot stand with the findings in para 37 and vis �
    versa.  It is not, in my judgment, an answer to this  simply  to  'blue
    pencil' out para 36 on the basis that it should not be there as  it  is
    inconsistent with what came before and after it.  A  judge  must  reach
    sustainable, consistent findings otherwise they will  fall  into  legal
    error.  Likewise, the reasons read as a whole should be both cogent and
    clear  and  not  irrational  to  sustain  a  judge's   findings.    The
    inconsistency between paras 36 and 37, in my judgment, discloses both a
    material error of law and also evidences the inference that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in assessing the evidence.  I cannot  be  confident
    that his reasons, read as a whole, sustain his ultimate finding.

43. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law in dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal.

Decision

44. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of  a  material  error  of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

45. Both representatives accepted that if the appellant  succeeded  in  his
    appeal before this Tribunal, the proper disposal of the appeal was that
    there should be a de novo rehearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    agree with that position.

46. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Statement, the appeal is to remit
    it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing  before  a  judge
    other than Judge Mill.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           24 September 2020




