
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14798/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2021                   |On 28 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    E T C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic, Counsel instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of
       any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the
       Appellant. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
       court. I make this order because the Appellant is linked to a
       refugee from Zimbabwe and naming her might create a risk to her
       safety in the event of her return. I find that the risk is very slim
       but I see minimal public interest in the identity of the appellant,
       rather than the facts of her case, and so, out of an abundance of
       caution, I have made the order that I have.

    2. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal on
       24 February 2020 dismissing the appellant's appeal against a
       decision of the respondent on 9 August 2019 refusing her leave to
       remain on "private life" grounds.

    3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2005 and claimed
       asylum in January 2009.  The application was unsuccessful and her
       appeal against refusal was dismissed so that her appeal rights were
       exhausted in February 2010.

    4. However the appellant was given leave to remain on family life
       grounds from 21 February 2014 until 20 July 2016.  The appellant had
       a close relationship with a partner who was a Zimbabwean national
       who had been recognised as a refugee.  The respondent accepted that
       it was not reasonable to expect her to leave her partner and return
       to Zimbabwe without him and it was recognised that they were in a
       genuine and subsisting relationship.  Her leave in that capacity was
       extended until 21 March 2019.

    5. On 24 February 2019 the appellant made a further application leading
       to the decision complained of.  That application was based on the
       private life she had established in the United Kingdom and the
       family life she had established with her mother.  She made no
       mention of a relationship with her partner.

    6. During the progress of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the
       appellant asked to change her grounds and rely on the domestic
       violence provisions because, she said, that she had been a victim of
       domestic violence at the hands of her previous partner.  The
       Secretary of State regarded the argument as a "new matter" and
       indicated that she did not give consent for it to be considered in
       the current proceedings.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then started to consider the matters
       that could be considered.  The judge's findings begin at paragraph
       46 of the Decision and Reasons.

    8. He noted, correctly, that the appellant had claimed protection with
       her mother based on her mother's associated links with the MDC.
       Neither the appellant nor her mother were believed.  In particular,
       the judge rejected their account of being detained in 2005 and did
       not accept that they were at risk in the event of return.

    9. The appellant's mother made a subsequent application in September
       2011.  That succeeded on appeal.  However, it was based on sur place
       activity.  The appellant's mother had become an active member of the
       MDC and the Zimbabwe Vigil as well as being an official member of
       the MDC High Wycombe/Slough branch and being the Woman's Assembly
       Chairperson.

   10. The appellant's mother's appeal was allowed because the judge
       believed the evidence about the appellant's mother's sur place
       activities and concluded that they led to a significant risk for her
       in the event of return.  That finding does not necessarily assist
       the appellant.

   11. In this appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the
       appellant was not allowed to rely on domestic violence grounds and
       referred, understandably, to "some artificiality to the
       proceedings".

   12. The judge took no real issue with the private and family life that
       was relied upon.

   13. The appellant had been living in the United Kingdom for something in
       the region of fourteen or fifteen years and had established herself
       in the catering industry and by taking other employment and also
       enjoying a close family relationship with her mother and brother.
       Sadly, her mother suffered a stroke in February 2019 so that the
       appellant had taken on extra family responsibilities.  The judge
       accepted that the appellant, her mother and her brother and that the
       appellant "checked" on her mother before and after work and helped
       look after some of her daily needs, particularly more personal ones
       such as helping her change her clothes, as well as preparing an
       evening meal.

   14. As the appellant's brother lived at the same address and the judge
       found it "safe to assume that the appellant's brother also takes on
       some role in looking after her mother and her needs".

   15. The judge found the appellant was "clearly integrated" into British
       society but whatever family and private life she had established she
       had established it during a time of limited leave or no leave.

   16. At paragraph 58 of his Decision and Reasons the judge did take issue
       with evidence about the of assistance that the appellant provided
       her mother.  It was her mother's case that the daily care provided
       to her by the appellant was the kind of care that ought to be
       provided by a woman and could not be undertaken by her brother and
       if the appellant had to return to Zimbabwe there would be no-one to
       look after her mother in "sensitive areas".  The judge noted that if
       the appellant's mother was unable to provide that care for herself
       then it is the responsibility of the state to provide it for her.
       The appellant was almost certainly the preferred provided of care
       but she was replaceable.

   17. The judge also found that the appellant had no useful family ties in
       Zimbabwe.  She has a father and brother who used to live in Zimbabwe
       but the judge accepted there had been no communication with them for
       many years. The appellant had tried, unsuccessfully, to make
       overtures to her father recently but there was no response.  The
       judge found there would be no family support network to assist the
       appellant in the event of her return.

   18. The judge then noted it was the "key submission" that the appellant
       would be at risk because of her mother's sur place activities.  Ms
       Imamovic was careful not to make the case into an asylum claim but
       argued, appropriately within the scope of the appeal, that it would
       be a difficulty for the appellant in the event of her return because
       she would be linked with her mother, who it must be assumed would be
       known to the authorities.

   19. The appellant was born in Harare and her mother's reputation would
       add significantly to difficulties she would have on return.  The
       judge was unimpressed with this argument and explained at paragraph
       62 that the argument on the mother's behalf had succeeded in 2012
       and:

  "This is some eight years ago and I find that there is a lack of evidence
  that she continues to be active some eight years later.  The fact this
  may have been the position some eight years ago does not mean that it is
  the case today."

   20. The judge also found it unlikely that the appellant's mother had
       remained active because of the consequences of a stroke.

   21. Paragraph 64 of the Decision and Reasons is, if I may say so, a
       commendably clear synopsis of the judge's findings and he made plain
       at subparagraph (vii) that he did not accept that the appellant
       would face any obstacles on account of her mother's sur place
       activities because "I do not find that the evidential burden has
       been discharged on this issue."

   22. The judge accepted that the appellant would have difficulties in the
       event of her return because of her lack of family ties and the
       period of absence but found there was nothing preventing her,
       relying on the experience she had obtained in the United Kingdom,
       from advancing her employment prospects in Zimbabwe.  The judge was
       clear that this was a case for hardship, difficulty, inconvenience
       but not a case where there were "very significant obstacles" within
       the meaning of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.  Having repeated in
       paragraph 66 that the appellant would find hardship and difficulty
       re-integrating into Zimbabwe, the judge said that he was not
       persuaded "that the cumulative effect of those hardships and
       difficulties amounts to very significant obstacles".  The judge then
       dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, which might be
       thought slightly strange.  The judge then looked outside the Rules
       and came to essentially the same conclusion.  The Rules struck a
       fair balance and the Rules were not satisfied.

   23. The grounds supporting the application begin by complaining that the
       judge had no basis for doubting that the appellant's mother would be
       known to the authorities and this would impact on the appellant.  It
       was, the grounds contended, immaterial that the finding that she was
       involved in MDC activities was made eight years previously.  The
       finding was not undermined by the passage of time.  The grounds
       particularly refer to the skeleton argument where the importance of
       the mother's activity was explained.

   24. I cannot understand why the judge decided that the appellant's
       mother would no longer cause problems for the appellant because she
       may no longer be an activist and was poorly.  This just does not
       make sense to me.  It was established that the appellant's mother
       had been an activist and an activist of sufficient prominence in the
       United Kingdom to need international protection as a consequence.
       It is the appellant's case that she is at risk because her mother is
       an activist and she would be in the minds of the authorities tainted
       by reason of her mother's activities.  I cannot follow the judge's
       reasoning when he says that the appellant would not be at risk now
       because it was not established that her mother was still active.
       There is no justification for departing from the finding that she
       had been active and no reason was given for the inference that she
       would still be identified as an activist in Zimbabwe.

   25.  However, it does not follow that this error, for that is what it
       is, is material.  The grounds appropriately refer to paragraph 9 of
       the skeleton argument and this is, again appropriately, rather dense
       and in order to deal with it properly I will set it out and then
       consider the points made.  In her skeleton argument to the First-
       tier Tribunal Counsel said:

     "The appellant does not additionally have other family in Zimbabwe.
   The appellant's mother has been granted refugee status on account of a
   risk of persecution due to her MDC profile.  The current country
   situation in Zimbabwe, as noted in (Country Policy and Information Note
   Zimbabwe: Opposition to the government Version 4.0 February 2019) / CG
   (CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC)
   (31 January 2013), identifies return to all rural areas [other than
   Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South] 2.4.4 / high density areas of
   Harare see 2.4.17 / could expose people to a risk of harm and those
   returning to high density areas of Harare may be exposed to socio-
   economic difficulties [CM para 100].  Harassment/intimidation is reported
   to be high, use of violence and reprisals against opposition members by
   illegal evictions and deprivations of food [see also 2.4.20] is also
   reported in the CPIN against MDC supporters/members at para 7.1.1 - 7.7
   10.  There is a 'moderate level of 'moderate level of official
   discrimination throughout Zimbabwe' and 'members of their families' also
   suffer indirectly from the government's partisan distribution of food and
   agricultural products, as well as its demolition of illegal households'
   7.7.1.  Roadblocks make in country movement difficult: see 8.1.12 CPIN
   Women GBV v. 3 October 2018."

   26. It was Mr Kotas's submission that inspection of these references did
       not assist the appellant.  As far as I can make out, the CPIN is not
       in my papers but it is a public domain document and I have checked
       it on the government website.

   27. I cannot agree with Ms Imamovic's submissions.  It does not support
       the proposition that people who are related to MDC activists in the
       United Kingdom face a real risk of being identified as a relative of
       that activist in the event of return.  It is possible that a family
       living together would see all members persecuted even if they were
       not active themselves but this appellant would be returned on her
       own and her mother had not done anything in Zimbabwe. I see no
       reason why the appellant and her mother would be linked or why, if
       they were linked, the mother's activities in the United Kingdom
       would create any difficult for the appellant now.

   28. It follows that I rule against the appellant on the main reason that
       permission was granted.

   29. There are other grounds.

   30. They are presented as failing to take into account material matters
       though in reality they are no more than a criticism of the balancing
       exercise, complaining that the judge has ruled in the way that he
       has.  They are arguments based on weight.  The judge clearly
       understands the case as Mr Kotas submitted.  Paragraph 26 of the
       Decision and Reasons summarises it.  I do note Ms Imamovic's reply
       that acknowledging the point is not the same as considering it but
       the difference is subtle and, I find, not important in this case.

   31. The point is that the judge is said to have made an error of law but
       the judge has identified all the points of importance and I cannot
       see anything unlawful in the way that he has evaluated them. He has
       formed a view of the appellant's capabilities from considering her
       evidence and has decided that she does not face a risk of ill-
       treatment on account of being her mother's daughter, that the
       private life in the United Kingdom is not a weighty matter, that she
       can re-establish herself in Zimbabwe and that although her mother
       would no doubt prefer her to be in the United Kingdom because she is
       helping her getting over her stroke, that is not sufficient reason.

   32. The judge did attract criticism by embarking on an examination of
       whether the appellant's mother was still active politically.  The
       judge should not have done that without giving the appellant notice
       of his concerns but her present activity is irrelevant.

   33. When the point is followed through I find it would have made no
       difference if the judge had not erred. It may well be the case that
       his phrasing was not felicitous but I have not identified any
       material error of law.

   34. The fact is that this appellant is a woman who settled in the United
       Kingdom irregularly.  She has never had leave to remain on a
       permanent basis.  She may yet be able to show that she has a proper
       reason to remain but, in my judgement, not in these proceedings and
       although I am grateful to both representatives for clear submissions
       I am wholly unpersuaded there is any material error.

   35. It follows therefore that I dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

   36. This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 July 2021                   |


