
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15980/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                 Fayeza [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Katani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of India, has been  granted  permission
    to appeal the decision of Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Murray.  For reasons given in her decision dated 9 November 2018,
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 18 July  2018  refusing  her  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The appellant had  entered  on  a  valid
    Tier 4 Student visa in September 2016 with leave until 12 January 2018.
     On 11 January 2018 she made a human rights claim based on  her  family
    life with her partner [AM].  He is a refugee of Iranian  origin.   They
    had started living together in August 2017, having met a month earlier.



 2. The judge observed that having a close relationship, both parties would
    have known the situation was precarious  when  they  entered  into  the
    relationship.  With the appellant having finished  her  Masters  Degree
    with a qualification in Dentistry and in Public Health,  it  is  likely
    she would be able to  live  in  the  UAE  where  she  had  been  for  a
    considerable time.  Her partner could stay  with  her  in  India.   The
    judge did not  consider  there  would  be  problems  in  the  appellant
    integrating into  India  when  she  leaves  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    relationship was a short one and there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    show that it was genuine and subsisting.  The judge did not  find  that
    there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances   or   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles based on the objective evidence  were  she  to
    return to India.

 3. The grounds of challenge are that the judge had erred in finding  there
    was insufficient evidence to show  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.  There was failure to give sufficient reasons or to look at
    the evidence in the round.  The second ground relates  to  the  judge's
    conclusion the appellant could go  to  the  UAE.   She  was  not  being
    removed there but to India.  There was insufficient evidence  to  reach
    the finding that she would be able to obtain a residence permit and the
    judge had failed to ask  the  correct  question  whether  there  was  a
    sensible reason for her to go back and apply for entry  clearance  with
    reference to SSHD v Hayat [2013] Imm AR 15 and Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]
    1WLR 40.  In  addition,  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    difficulties the appellant's partner would encounter in India  and  the
    positive factors of her competence in English, the absence of  being  a
    financial  burden  and  the  lawful  basis  when  she   commenced   her
    relationship.

 4. Permission was initially refused by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Peart but on renewal it was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Warr.  In doing so, he explained that he was inclined to agree with the
    grounds that some reasoning was required to support  the  view  of  the
    judge on  the  issue  of  whether  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.

 5. The key passages from the judge's decision are as follows:

         "38. This is an appellant who came to the United Kingdom  to  study
             and since she arrived here has always  known  that  she  would
             require to return to India when her visa ended.  Her situation
             in the United Kingdom has therefore  always  been  precarious.
             When she entered into her relationship with her  partner,  who
             is a refugee from Iran, she knew that that was her  situation.
             It is not clear whether she told him this but she probably did
             as she states that they have a close relationship so  both  of
             them knew the situation was precarious when they entered  into
             the relationship.

         39.  The appellant has now finished her Masters Degree so she has a
             qualification in Dentistry  and  a  Master  Degree  in  Public
             Health.  I accept that it is unlikely that this appellant  can
             go to live in the UAF unless she applies for  work  there,  as
             her relatives are no longer there, they are in India.  She has
             however lived in the UAE for a considerable time and with  her
             qualifications it is likely that she would be able  to  get  a
             residence permit there as she could probably get  a  good  job
             there.  Based on her evidence she is not  interested  in  this
             and has not made any enquiries.

         40.  She states that her  parents  are  strict  Muslims  and  would
             object to her relationship with her present  partner.   He  is
             not a Muslim and he is not Indian.  Her evidence is that he is
             an atheist.  She states that they cannot go to live  in  India
             together but that is not supported by the objective  evidence.
             The objective evidence states that live-in  relationships  are
             becoming more popular in India and they are not illegal.   The
             relationships states that if she returns  to  India  she  will
             have to go to stay with her parents but  she  is  an  educated
             woman with good qualifications and I believe  that  she  could
             internally relocate in India and  get  work.   She  would  not
             require to be with her parents.  Her evidence is that  if  she
             goes to India and stays with her current partner she could  be
             the subject of an honour killing from her family, but when the
             appellant gave evidence about this she seemed  to  think  this
             was unlikely.

         41.  The appellant's partner  has  refugee  status  in  the  United
             Kingdom and he could go to stay with her in India.  She  could
             go there and apply to bring him over to join her or she  could
             apply from India to join him in the United Kingdom.

         42.  At present the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  cannot  be
             satisfied.   The  terms  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  cannot   be
             satisfied  but  it  has  been  put  to   me   that   paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi) can be satisfied as this  appellant  would  have
             great difficulty integrating into India if she has to  return.
             I find that on the balance of probabilities that  is  not  the
             case.  She has not  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  long.
             Although she lived in the UAE for a considerable time she  has
             spent time in India and knows the culture  and  the  language.
             She is an educated woman and I find that  there  would  be  no
             problems in her integrating into India  when  she  leaves  the
             United Kingdom.

         43.  With regard to her family, she and her partner have not  lived
             together for  two  years.   Under  the  Rules  she  cannot  be
             described as a partner.  The relationship has been a short one
             and there is insufficient evidence before me to show  that  it
             is genuine and subsisting.  The terms of EX1 do not apply."

 6. In a concluding paragraph at [48], the judge observed:

         "48. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on  a  student  visa.
             When her visa expired she should have returned to  India.   At
             that time she had a residence permit in the UAE so  she  could
             have returned there.  Her  situation  in  the  UK  was  always
             precarious and the  relationship  she  has  entered  into  was
             entered into in the knowledge that it  was  precarious.   When
             her circumstances  are  considered  and  are  weighed  against
             effective immigration control, which is a  necessity  for  the
             United Kingdom, I find  that  public  interest  and  effective
             immigration control must succeed.  The appellant has no  right
             to be here.  It would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  this
             appellant to go to India now that her visa has  expired.   She
             then has a choice as to whether she applies for Mr [M] to join
             her or she applies to come to the United Kingdom to join  him.
             I do not believe that she would be in danger from her  family.
             This is not a protection claim.  If she feels that  she  would
             be in danger then she could submit a  protection  claim.   She
             states that it would be difficult for her and her  partner  to
             live together in India  but  this  is  not  an  insurmountable
             obstacle based on the objective evidence."

 7. A 24 response was served on 18 March 2019 in  which  the  Secretary  of
    State argued that:

         "3.   The  genuine  and  subsisting  nature  of   the   appellant's
             relationship within the  UK  was  challenged  in  the  refusal
             decision, the HOPO relied upon the refusal decision and  there
             was  no  suggestion  any  concession   was   made   that   the
             relationship was accepted as genuine.  The FTTJ  was  entitled
             to find this remained an issue for the  appellant,  upon  whom
             the burden of proof lay,  to  address.   The  FTTJ  found  the
             appellant failed to meet the definition  of  'partner'  within
             the [Immigration Rules] and the evidence was inadequate.

         4.   However the materiality of the above is  clearly  informed  by
             the fact that the FTTJ nonetheless went  on  to  consider  the
             requirements of 276ADE(1)(vi) and a  'Razgar'  proportionality
             assessment with due regard to Section 117B and  found  removal
             was not a proportionate interference for  the  cogent  reasons
             given, even were the relationship genuine."

 8. I take each ground in turn.  The judge was required to make  a  finding
    on the genuineness of the relationship. The challenge is that judge had
    failed to give any or sufficient reasons for reaching  the  finding  it
    was not.  The fact that it was a short relationship did not mean it was
    not genuine.  The judge had failed to  make  any  finding  or  adequate
    findings on whether the appellant's partner's  evidence  was  reliable,
    plausible and credible.  These  aspects  were  material.   It  is  also
    argued there was a failure to look at the evidence in the round.

 9. Mr Winter observed that Mr Govan had indicated  to  him  prior  to  the
    hearing that he considered the judge's reference to the genuineness  of
    the relationship was in fact a reference to  the  requirements  of  the
    rule,  in  particular  E-LTRP.1.7.   This  led  to  discussion  of  the
    correctness of the Secretary of State's  approach  since  the  evidence
    indicated the couple had started living together on 28 August 2017  and
    thus some way short of the two years  for  the  definition  of  partner
    which in GEN.1.2. which (relevant to this case) provides:

         "(iv)    a person who has been living together with  the  applicant
             in a relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership  for
             at least two years prior to the date of application, unless  a
             different meaning of partner  applies  elsewhere  within  this
             Appendix."

10. The application was made on 11 January 2018.  Both  Mr  Winter  and  Mr
    Govan accepted that without this gateway requirement being met, none of
    the rules were in play including EX.1.  As  to  why  the  Secretary  of
    State had considered these, Mr Govan suggested that  it  was  simply  a
    "belt and braces" approach.

11. To an extent this is distraction  from  the  issue  I  am  required  to
    address under this ground.  The structure of the judge's  decision,  as
    will be seen from  the  passages  cited  above,  indicates  a  detailed
    consideration of the circumstances of  the  relationship  and  how  the
    couple might be able  to  continue  it  abroad  until  the  mention  of
    insufficiency of evidence in paragraph 43 as to its genuineness.  It is
    not  entirely  clear  whether  the  judge  was  concerned   about   the
    credibility of the relationship itself or whether the  requirements  of
    the rules which in any event  were  inapplicable  could  be  met.   Her
    decision contains a detailed record of all the evidence, including that
    given by the appellant's partner, and so it cannot be  said  the  judge
    failed to take that into account.  It is therefore difficult to see why
    she considered there was insufficient evidence.   In  my  judgment  the
    judge failed to make a clear reasoned finding on a key aspect  of  this
    case which is at the heart of the appeal  with the risk that  this  may
    have undermined the correctness of her proportionality assessment.

12. As to ground 2, a number of factors are raised including:

      i) The irrelevancy of the possibility of the appellant  going  to  the
         UAE and the absence of sufficient evidence to find that  she  could
         get a residence permit.


     ii) A failure to assess whether the appellant would be able  to  get  a
         good job in the United Kingdom and thus be financially independent.


    iii) A failure to assess whether the appellant's  partner  could  go  to
         India in the absence of ties and not speaking the language.


     iv) A failure to adequately assess that the  appellant  speaks  English
         and is not a financial burden.


13. In my judgment, the judge took all these factors into account and  gave
    adequate reasons on each in deciding that the couple could like outside
    the UK.   I  consider  it  was  permissible  of  her  to  identify  the
    possibility of relocation to the  UAE  where  the  appellant  had  been
    before as an alternative to India; Article  8  considerations  are  not
    simply fixed with the removal destination where alternatives may  apply
    which may be in prospect or present an opportunity.  It is correct that
    the judge did not refer specifically to the factors in Section 117B  as
    to language competence  and  financial  independence.   However,  these
    aspects are neutral.  There is no dispute that they are met but they do
    not add significant weight to the proportionality  exercise.   Although
    the judge's reasoning over the possibility of the  appellant's  partner
    living in India was brief, her survey of  all  the  evidence  indicates
    that all the relevant factors were taken into account.  I find no error
    on this ground.  An aspect Mr Winter added in his submissions  was  the
    disadvantage to the appellant's partner of relocating to India since he
    would lose the possibility of indefinite leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom which would be available after 22 March 2021.  It is not  clear
    whether this was argued before the judge but in any  event,  I  do  not
    consider it relevant to  whether  the  family  life  can  be  continued
    abroad.

14. Turning to ground 3, Mr Winter argued that the judge had failed to  ask
    the correct question which was whether there was a sensible reason  for
    the appellant to return and apply for entry  clearance.   Reference  is
    made in the grounds to the decision in SSHD v Hayat & Treebhowan [2013]
    Imm AR 15.  In particular, the appellant and her partner would have  to
    meet the minimum financial  requirements.   Mr  Winter  explained  that
    although in employment, the appellant's  partner  could  not  meet  the
    current threshold, and furthermore the Entry Clearance Officer was  not
    in  the  best  position  to  assess  matters,  including  whether   the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting with reference to Chikwamba.

15. I invited the parties to have regard to the decision in SSHD  v  R  (on
    the application of Kaur) [2018] EWCA Civ  1423  in  which  Holroyde  LJ
    reviewed  the  jurisprudence  that  flowed  from  Chikwamba.   He  also
    referred to the Tribunal decision Hayat v SSHD [2011]  UKUT  444  (IAC)
    which gave guidance as to the approach to be taken in these terms:


         "23. Since the decision of the  Deputy  Judge  in  this  case,  the
             meaning of "insurmountable obstacles"  has  been  definitively
             stated by the Supreme Court in Agyarko.  Lord Reed, with  whom
             the other Justices of the Supreme Court  agreed,  referred  to
             Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17, GC, saying:


                  "42.  In   Jeunesse,   the   Grand   Chamber   identified,
                      consistently with earlier judgments of the  court,  a
                      number  of  factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in
                      assessing the proportionality under article 8 of  the
                      removal of non-settled migrants  from  a  contracting
                      state in which they have  family  members.   Relevant
                      factors were said to  include  the  extent  to  which
                      family life would effectively be ruptured, the extent
                      of the ties in the contracting state,  whether  there
                      were "insurmountable obstacles" in  the  way  of  the
                      family living in the country of origin  of  the  non-
                      national concerned, and whether there were factors of
                      immigration  control  (for  example,  a  history   of
                      breaches of immigration  law)  or  considerations  of
                      public order weighing in favour  of  exclusion:  para
                      107.


                  43.  It appears that the European court intends the  words
                      "insurmountable obstacles"  to  be  understood  in  a
                      practical  and  realistic  sense,  rather   than   as
                      referring solely to obstacles which make it literally
                      impossible for the family to  live  together  in  the
                      country of origin of the non-national concerned.   In
                      some cases, the  court  has  used  other  expressions
                      which   make   that   clearer   ...   'Insurmountable
                      obstacles' is, however, the  expression  employed  by
                      the Grand Chamber; and the court's application of  it
                      indicates that it is a stringent test.  In  Jeunesse,
                      for example, there were said to be no  insurmountable
                      obstacles  to  the  relocation  of  the   family   to
                      Suriname, although the children, the eldest  of  whom
                      was at secondary school, were Dutch nationals who had
                      lived  there  all  their  lives,  had  never  visited
                      Suriname, and would experience a degree  of  hardship
                      if forced to move, and the applicant's partner was in
                      full-time employment in the  Netherlands:  see  paras
                      117 and 119.


         24.  Lord Reed went on to refer, at paragraph 44, to the fact  that
             the July 2012 version of the Rules (which  was  applicable  in
             that case, and is applicable  in  this)  did  not  define  the
             expression "insurmountable obstacles".  With effect from  July
             2014, however, Appendix FM was  amended  by  the  addition  of
             paragraph EX.2, which states -


                  "For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  'insurmountable
                  obstacles' means the very significant  difficulties  which
                  would be faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                  continuing their family life together outside the  UK  and
                  which could not be overcome or would entail  very  serious
                  hardship for the applicant or their partner.""


16. Holroyde LJ observed after quoting the above passage:

         "With every respect to the Upper Tribunal,  I  do  not  think  Lord
         Brown's words in  Chikwamba  justify  the  inclusion  of  the  word
         "usually" in paragraph  23  of  their  decision.   He  went  on  to
         conclude:


             45.  I have quoted in paragraph 26 above the passage in  which
                  Lord Reed (at paragraph 51 of  his  judgment  in  Agyarko)
                  referred to Chikwamba.  It is relevant  to  note  that  he
                  there spoke of an applicant who was "certain to be granted
                  leave to enter" if an application were made  from  outside
                  the UK, and said that in such a case  there  might  be  no
                  public interest in removing the applicant.   That,  in  my
                  view, is a clear indication that the  Chikwamba  principle
                  will require a fact-specific assessment in each case, will
                  only apply in a very clear case, and even  then  will  not
                  necessarily result in a grant of leave to remain."


17. It is correct the judge did not cite  any  of  the  above  authorities.
    However, I am not persuaded that even if she had done so,  the  outcome
    could have been any different.  On no basis could this be described  as
    a "very clear case" particularly  in  the  light  of  the  acknowledged
    difficulties by the appellant's partner meeting the financial criteria.
     I do not find error on this ground.

18. I return to the first ground.  The question I must ask is  whether  the
    judge's proportionality exercise was undermined by her lack of  clarity
    over the credibility of the relationship.  In my judgment, the  judge's
    error was not confined to the credibility of the relationship but  also
    to other aspects of the proportionality  exercise.   Her  reference  in
    [38] to the parties' knowledge that the situation was  precarious  when
    they entered into a relationship fails to take into  account  the  fact
    that the appellant had lawful leave when the relationship  began.   The
    appellant continues to have s. 3C leave under the Immigration Act  1971
    and the relationship is not  therefore  caught  by  s.117B(iv)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 even if she were  able  to
    demonstrate that her partner was a qualifying partner.   It  is  to  be
    noted that the fact of his  refugee  status  does  not  disqualify  him
    however from being a partner under the Immigration Rules Appendix FM  -
    Family Members.

19. The parties were content for  me  to  re-make  the  decision  if  I  am
    satisfied there was error  based  on  their  submissions  and  the  new
    evidence filed, which  Mr  Govan  did  not  challenge.   That  evidence
    includes updated witness statements by the appellant and  her  partner,
    details of their accommodation and photographs.

20. The appellant explains why it would be difficult for  her  to  move  to
    India with reference to her relationship and the risk  of  an  arranged
    marriage.  She refers also to her concerns over obtaining employment in
    a country where there are many with postgraduate degrees,  as  well  as
    her absence of financial support.  She refers also  to  the  challenges
    her partner would face in India  as  a  foreigner.   Reference  to  UAE
    difficulties is explained by reference to her father having retired and
    is no longer sponsoring her.

21. The appellant's partner refers to his current  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom for electrical engineering and the  challenges  that  he  would
    face in moving to India, which would have a negative  impact  on  their
    relationship.

22.  I  am  readily  satisfied  on  the  unchallenged  evidence  that   the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting.  It was formed at a  time  when
    the appellant had lawful leave.  Both the appellant and her partner are
    in a position to make a contribution to the United Kingdom economy  and
    both evidently have competence in English.

23. It is clear that the couple will find it difficult to adjust to life in
    India but  not  unreasonably  so.  Having  regard  to  the  appellant's
    partner's salary, any entry clearance application would be  faced  with
    difficulties.  There is no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    findings as to the circumstances the appellant will face on  return  to
    India and it remains open to her partner to join her should he wish  to
    do so in the event that an  application  for  entry  clearance  is  not
    successful.  Despite their objections to such an eventuality, it is one
    that they could reasonably embrace  despite  their  apprehensions.  The
    parties will have been aware when the relationship was  formed  of  the
    uncertainty of where their future might lie.  That is a factor relevant
    to the proportionality consideration.

24. The Secretary of State has set out her policy in the Immigration  Rules
    and that is, where she is concerned, the  public  interest  lies.   The
    financial criteria is the only sticking point for the couple.  In  [81]
    of MM (Lebanon) v SSHD & Ors [2017] UKSC 10 their Lordships observed:

         "But the fact that a Rule causes hardship to many,  including  some
         who are in no way to blame for the situation in which they now find
         themselves,  does  not  mean  that  it  is  incompatible  with  the
         Convention rights or otherwise unlawful at common law.  As  far  as
         the  Convention  rights   are   concerned,   the   arguments   have
         concentrated on Article 8, the right to  respect  for  private  and
         family life, either alone or in conjunction with  Article  14,  the
         right to enjoy the Convention rights without discrimination, rather
         than on Article 12, the right to marry and found a family.  The MIR
         does not, as such, prevent a couple marrying.   It  does,  however,
         present a serious obstacle to their enjoying family life  together.
         Further, unlike the temporary impediment held  to  be  unlawful  in
         Quila, the MIR  may  constitute  a  permanent  impediment  to  many
         couples, because the sponsor will never be able to earn  above  the
         threshold and the couple will  not  be  able  to  amass  sufficient
         savings to make good the  shortfall.   Female  sponsors,  who  have
         constituted as many as a third of the total, are disproportionately
         affected, because of the persisting gender pay gap, as are sponsors
         from certain ethnic groups whose earnings tend  to  be  lower,  and
         those from parts of the country where wages are depressed."

25. Having regard to the qualifications that  the  appellant's  partner  is
    seeking as an electrician, I think it more likely than not he will soon
    reach, once employed, the minimum income threshold.  If the decision is
    reached that he remains in the United Kingdom, the expectation is  that
    their separation, pending a  successful  entry  clearance  application,
    will not be a lengthy one.  Accordingly, I am  not  satisfied  in  this
    case that there are exceptional circumstances  that  can  justify  this
    appeal succeeding on Article 8 grounds.

26. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error  of  law.
    I re-make the decision but come to the same conclusion and dismiss  the
    appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                         Date 3 June 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

