
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/15028/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 June 2019                          |On 25 June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                     DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY SITTING AS A
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                         Sameer Shahabuddin Samnani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Roberts, Counsel instructed by Cromwell Wilkes
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manyarara promulgated on 21st  February  2019.   At  the
    appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal today the Appellant  has  been
    represented by Mr Roberts of Counsel, and the Secretary  of  State  has
    been represented by Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. Permission to appeal in  this  case  has  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on 2nd May 2019, who found that it  was  arguable
    that the judge did not refer to the correct date for  consideration  of
    the evidence before him.

 3. I am grateful to the helpful submissions by  both  Mr  Roberts  and  Mr
    Bramble.

 4. Mr Bramble conceded that although the First-tier Tribunal had  to  look
    at it through the prism of the Immigration Rules  as  mandated  by  the
    Supreme Court in the case of MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 10, it also had to consider  whether  there
    are any compelling or exceptional circumstances outside  of  the  Rules
    which may justify the appeal being granted and that as this is a  human
    rights appeal under Section 85(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as now worded, the Tribunal can consider evidence  that
    postdates the Secretary of State's decision  as  the  Tribunal  had  to
    consider the case as at the date of the hearing.

 5. Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State concedes that the First-
    tier Tribunal should have taken account as to the evidence of the CT600
    and the Sponsor's new employment in considering whether  or  not  there
    was a breach of human rights for the purposes of Article 8  outside  of
    the Rules. On that basis obviously he concedes that there is a material
    error of law I do  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manyarara and remit the  case  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara.  I do not  have  any  up  to  date
    documentary evidence regarding the position today in order to  be  able
    to remake the decision and therefore the case is to be remitted.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does contain  a  material
    error of law and is set aside and the case is to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and reheard before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    therefore there will be no anonymity direction in this case.


Signed District  Judge  McGinty                                   Date  23rd
June 2019


District Judge McGinty sitting as a
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
