
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15467/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2019                             |On 5 November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                NAWAZISH [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Ell, counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 23 December 1986.  He
first came to     the UK on 27 July 2010 as a student and was granted
further periods of leave until  29th November 2016. This leave was,
however, curtailed on the basis that he had  obtained an ETS certificate
fraudulently. On 18 January 2015, the Appellant had an

                                    Islamic marriage to a British citizen.
He made an unsuccessful application for leave    to remain as the spouse of
a British citizen.

2.   The Appellant then applied for further leave on the basis that  he  had
a British child,  who was born on 2 April 2016.  This application  was  also
refused on 14 June 2016.   The Appellant appealed against that decision  and
his appeal came before Judge of     the First-tier Tribunal Boylan Kemp  for
hearing on 29 April 2019.

3.   In a decision and reasons promulgated on 4 June 2019,  the  appeal  was
dismissed.    Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis that  the
judge had erred in her     approach to the  fact  that  there  were  ongoing
Family Court proceedings and thus in    determining the appeal whilst  those
were  ongoing  was  disproportionate  as   the   judge     was   essentially
predetermining  the  outcome  of  the  Appellant's  application  for  direct
contact with  his  child.   Reliance  was  placed  on  the  decision  in  RS
(Immigration and  Family Court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218  and  MS
Ivory Coast [2007]     EWCA Civ 133.  It  was  further  submitted  that  the
judge had erred in regarding what   the  Family  Court  Order  had  said  as
imposing a minimum requirement when it is    clear  from  the  Family  Court
judgment that no contact activity condition was  imposed.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted in a decision dated 8 August  2019  by
Upper    Tribunal Judge Kamara on the basis that it  is  arguable  that  the
judge was wrong to     find that the Family  Court  had  imposed  a  minimum
requirement  for  the  Appellant  to      complete   a   domestic   violence
perpetrator's programme before direct contact with  his     child  would  be
considered.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

     Hearing

5.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  Ell  for  the  Appellant
submitted that the     judge had fallen into error at [26] by stepping  into
the shoes of the Family Court   Judge and concluding, having carried out  an
assessment of the merits  of  the      application  for  contact,  that  the
Family Court proceedings were not material to the     immigration case.   It
is clear that this is contrary to the  principles  set  out  in  RS  (India)
(op. cit.) and that the question posed  by  the  judge  as  to  whether  the
proceedings were  likely to be  material  could  only  be  answered  in  the
affirmative  given  that  they      concern  the  relationship  between  the
Appellant and his child, thus the judge's    approach was incorrect.

6.   In relation to the second ground of appeal, the judge erred at [27]  in
proceeding on     the basis that  the  Appellant  must  undertake  the  DVPP
course.  It is clear that the   Order made by the District Judge did not  go
that far in that it stated that there were   no  conditions  but  rather  an
expectation that the Appellant would undertake  some    courses  to  show  a
change in circumstances or a willingness to engage in  order  for     direct
contact with his child to be granted going forward.  Mr Ell  submitted  that
this     was a material error because the judge was  seeking  to  go  beyond
what in fact was  found by the Family Court Judge.  There were no  mandatory
requirements that the  Appellant had failed to  comply  with  and  thus  the
judge's finding at [27] was     predicated on an  incorrect  factual  basis.
Mr Ell confirmed that there  were  ongoing      proceedings  in  the  Family
Court and the next hearing date was on 23 December 2019.

7.   In his submissions, Mr Mills stated  that  [55]  of  the  Family  Court
judgment is relevant   and  that  this  challenge  is  just  a  question  of
semantics.  Mr Mills accepted that the  judge was not imposing  the  minimum
legal requirement, but in reality the  First-tier       Tribunal  Judge  was
simply  reflecting  what  the  Family  Court  Judge  had   set   out.    The
Appellant has not undertaken the domestic violence course because the  first
step  that      would  necessitate  is  for  him  to  admit  that  he  is  a
perpetrator and he denies this.   The     Appellant  has  not  appealed  the
finding by the Family Court Judge that  he  had     subjected  his  wife  to
domestic violence and the Appellant cannot go behind the fact  that  another
judge has found that he is "an abuser".

8.   In that scenario Mr Mills submitted that it was open to the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge    to find that  nothing  would  change  in  respect  of  any
application for direct contact  because  the  Appellant  has  not  made  the
progress he was expected to make.  Mr Mills  submitted it was  plainly  open
to the judge to make this finding on the basis that  it     would  not  make
any material difference and that the Appellant could apply  for  visits   to
return to the UK to visit his child once  he  had  been  removed.   Thus  Mr
Mills    contended there was no material  error  and  that  the  grounds  of
appeal were a     misunderstanding of what  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
was actually finding.  Mr  Mills submitted  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
was aware of the somewhat nebulous  relationship between  the  Tribunal  and
the Family Court as RS makes clear and the    judge  was  entitled  to  find
that it would not make a difference.

9.   Mr Mills further submitted that a  relevant  factor  for  a  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is      whether the application was made late in the day  for
immigration advantage and the   Family Court Judge found that  that  was  an
issue.  In essence, the First-tier  Tribunal   Judge  had  asked  the  right
question and found that the Family Court proceedings  would not have made  a
difference thus the decision should be upheld.

10.  In reply, Mr Ell submitted that as lawyer's words are important and  it
is clear from     [26] and [27]  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
making reference to what was    described as a  requirement  by  the  Family
Court, however that is not what was      actually  said.  The  Family  Court
Judge made reference to the types of things that       were  required  which
were more in the form of hurdles  that  had  to  be  crossed  before      an
application for direct contact could be successful.  He submitted  that  the
First-tier    Tribunal Judge was not in a position to properly make  a  best
interests consideration    but in fact  that  it  was  what  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge did and it was important  that      the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge had the correct facts in mind when making the decision    but  had  in
fact made material errors in relation to the factual  understanding  of  the
case.

11.  I reserved my decision which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and Reasons

12.  I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did, in fact,  fall
into  error  in      essentially  second  guessing  the  outcome  of  future
proceedings in the Family Court as  to whether or not  the  Appellant  would
be given direct contact with his child.  I find  that in so doing the First-
tier  Tribunal  Judge  could  be  seen  to  have  stepped  outside       the
immigration jurisdiction into  that  best  conducted  by  Specialist  Family
Court    Judges.  Whilst it is, of course, material that the  Appellant  has
failed to date to accept   that he has been found by  the  Family  Court  to
have been responsible for domestic  violence against  his  former  wife  and
indeed until such time that he either   successfully  appeals  that  finding
or accepts his responsibility, it is probably unlikely    in  light  of  the
findings of  the  Family  Court  Judge  that  he  will  be  provided  or  be
permitted direct contact with his child that is  a  matter  for  the  Family
Court to decide   in light of all the evidence before them including e.g.  a
CAFCASS Report.  This is not    a matter that is before the Tribunal in  the
current immigration proceedings.    Therefore the appeal needs to  be  heard
in order to determine  the  nature  of  the       relationship  between  the
Appellant and his child and whether  the  relationship  they       currently
share  can  properly  be  seen  as  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
relationship cf. RS (op. cit.).

13.  I remit the appeal for a hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   This
hearing should    take place in early January 2020 after  the  Family  Court
have had  the  opportunity  to      determine  any  application  for  direct
contact between the Appellant and his child.

14.   I note that the "ETS" issue is no  longer  live,  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge    Law having    previously found against the Appellant on that  point
and no appeal was lodged in      that  respect.   Therefore  the  only  live
issues are that relating to section 117B(6) of the    NIAA  2002  and  EX.1A
of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of  ECHR.

     No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 1 November 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
