
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15018/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2019                           |On 30 January 2019            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr M M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Nicholson, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-Tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent"  and  Mr  M  M  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his private life in the  United
    Kingdom. That application was subsequently varied to one of  indefinite
    leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years  long  residence.  The
    Respondent refused it and subsequently the Appellant appealed.

 3. Following a hearing at North Shields, and in a decision promulgated  on
    5 July 2018, Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bircher  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Froom on 20 September 2018. His reasons  for
    so granting were: -

         "1.  The application is in-time.

         2.   The FtTJ arguably erred in finding at [19] that the  appellant
             had accrued more than ten years' lawful continuous  residence.
             The appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 2 October 2014
             and did not submit his current application  until  29  October
             2014. The FtTJ makes no explicit finding  as  to  whether  the
             requirements of paragraph 276B have been met.

         3.   Any error regarding the ETS point may prove immaterial if  the
             FtTJ was entitled to find the respondent  had  not  discharged
             the legal burden in this case. However,  all  grounds  may  be
             argued."

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 6. At the hearing I was handed a Rule 24 response prepared by Mr Nicholson
    on behalf of the Appellant.

 7. Mr Diwnycz relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal.

 8. Both representatives agreed that the two  issues  before  me  were,  as
    identified by Judge Froom, at paragraphs 2 and 3 of his above-mentioned
    decision. Albeit, that it was the one at paragraph 2 which was  at  the
    nub application before me today.

 9. Mr Nicholson referred me to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. It
    states: -

         "276B.   The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:


             (i)(a)   he has  had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
             residence in the United Kingdom.


             (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons
             why it would be undesirable for him  to  be  given  indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence,  taking  into
             account his:


                  (a)  age; and


                  (b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and


                  (c)   personal  history,  including  character,   conduct,
                  associations and employment record; and


                  (d)  domestic circumstances; and


                  (e)  compassionate circumstances; and


                  (f)  any representations received on the person's  behalf;
                  and


             (iii)    the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the
             general grounds for refusal.


             (iv) the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of
             the English language and sufficient knowledge  about  life  in
             the United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.


             (v)  the applicant  must  not  be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
             immigration laws, except that, where paragraph  39E  of  these
             Rules applies, any  current  period  of  overstaying  will  be
             disregarded.  Any  previous  period  of  overstaying   between
             periods of leave will also be disregarded where-


                  (a)  the previous application was made before 24  November
                  2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or


                  (b)  the further application  was  made  on  or  after  24
                  November 2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied."


10. In particular he relied on Rule 276B (v) (a).

11. Mr Diwnycz accepted the chronology as referred to in paragraph 2  above
    of the grant of permission to appeal. Namely, that the Appellant became
    appeal rights exhausted on 2  October  2014  and  did  not  submit  his
    current application until 29 October 2014.

12. Mr Nicholson argued that in light of that,  which  was  an  application
    made prior to 24 November 2016 and within 28  days  of  the  expiry  of
    leave the Appellant's appeal should* succeed. In any  event  the  Judge
    was entitled to find that Article 8 was in play and  her  finding  that
    removal would be disproportionate to the pursuit of legitimate aims was
    one she was entitled to come to.

13. Having considered Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules alongside the
    decision, Mr Diwnycz conceded that there was no material error  of  law
    within Judge Bircher's decision and it should stand.

14. That is an analysis that I share.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard                     15 January 2019

