
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15401/2017
                                                               HU/00055/2018
                                                               HU/00058/2018
                                                               HU/00059/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2018                          |On 7 March 2019               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                        nargis [a] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                       mohammad [a] (second appellant)
                        waazda [t] (third appellant)
                          [a f] (fourth appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Singer of Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Lucas promulgated on 3 August  2018  in  which  the  Appellants'
      appeals against refusals of entry clearance were dismissed.


   2. The Appellants are citizens of India.   The  First  Appellant  is  the
      mother of the other three Appellants.  The First Appellant was born on
      10 June 1971, her oldest child - her son - was born on 1 August  1999,
      and her two daughters were born on 10 December 2000 and 6  March  2009
      respectively.  The First Appellant is the wife of the UK-based British
      citizen sponsor [MS] (date of birth 25 March 1970).  The Sponsor,  has
      been present in the United Kingdom from  January  2004,  is  also  the
      father of the other three Appellants.


   3. The Appellants applied for entry clearance to join the sponsor in  the
      United Kingdom for the purposes of settlement.  The  applications  for
      entry clearance were each refused for reasons set  out  in  respective
      decisions dated 4 November 2017.  The Respondent considered  that  the
      First Appellant failed to meet the financial requirement of the  Rules
      and also failed  to  meet  the  English  language  requirements.   The
      children's applications were refused 'in- line'  with  their  mother's
      refusal.


   4. The Appellants appealed to the IAC.


   5. Before the First-tier Tribunal  it  was  conceded  by  the  Presenting
      Officer on behalf of the Respondent that  the  financial  requirements
      were met: see paragraph 4 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's 'Decision
      and Reasons'.  Accordingly the only  outstanding  matter  between  the
      parties in respect of the Immigration  Rules  was  the  issue  of  the
      English language requirement.  It is clear that the proceedings before
      the First-tier Tribunal focused on  that  particular  issue:  see  for
      example, again, paragraph 4 of the Decision, and also the  submissions
      of the parties set out at paragraphs 18-20).


   6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeals  for  the  reasons
      set out in the Decision and Reasons promulgated on 3 August 2018.


   7. The Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey on 12 August 2018.


   8. The grant of permission to appeal identifies that it is arguable  that
      the Judge "failed to consider the  appeal  under  Article  8",  and/or
      applied inappropriately an exceptionality test in the context  of  the
      possible grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.


   9. In addition to these two particular matters that are referenced in the
      grant of permission  to  appeal,  the  grounds  of  challenge  to  the
      decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  drafted  in  support  of  the
      application for permission to appeal  also  include  in  part  further
      grounds pleading a failure to consider an unreported  authority  which
      was properly cited  before  him  (Ground  4,  paragraphs  22-27),  and
      failure to consider and apply the principles of the case  of  Ali  and
      Bibi [2015] UKSC 68 (Ground 5 paragraphs 28-31).


  10. As noted  above  the  'live'  issue  between  the  parties  under  the
      Immigration Rules before the First-tier Tribunal was in respect of the
      English language requirement.  Before me it is common ground that this
      was not an appeal under the Immigration Rules but  was  essentially  a
      human rights  appeal.   Necessarily  though,  it  is  trite  that  the
      Immigration Rules may form a  framework  for  consideration  of  human
      rights appeals - in particular as potentially relevant in  considering
      public interest - and thereby proportionality.


  11. In the early part of the Skeleton Argument reference was  made  to  an
      unreported case - Hameed v ECO (ref. HU/01283/2017) - being a decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon QC promulgated on  23  October
      2017 following a hearing on 18 October 2017 at Taylor  House.  It  was
      requested that the Appellants be permitted to rely on  the  unreported
      decision (paragraph 2).  The Skeleton Argument  recites  a  number  of
      paragraphs from the Practice Direction in respect of citing unreported
      authorities (paragraph 4), and then at paragraph 5 states:

         "It is respectfully  submitted  that  the  Hameed  case  is  highly
         relevant to the issue whether the inability of the first  Appellant
         to meet the English language requirement due to living in a  remote
         area with few opportunities to learn English and  practice  it  and
         having to travel a long distance to the test centre  and  having  a
         low  level  of  education  in  general  where  a   combination   of
         circumstances that be  described  as  sufficiently  exceptional  to
         amount to an unjustified interference with Article 8 ECHR rights."




  12. The next paragraphs of the Skeleton  Argument  address  the  financial
      issues (paragraphs 7-12) - which in the event  were  conceded  by  the
      Respondent.  Paragraph 13 sets out Article 8 of the ECHR; paragraph 14
      submits that the application should have been allowed under Article 8,
      and asserts  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  amounts  to  an
      unjustifiably harsh  interference  such  as  to  be  disproportionate;
      paragraph 15 asserts that the Respondent failed to consider Article  8
      in the decision  letters.  Paragraph  16,  returning  to  the  English
      language requirement, pleads: "The children should not be  blamed  for
      their mother's level of linguistic ability".   It  is  also  submitted
      that it is in the  children's  best  interests  that  they  should  be
      granted entry clearance to live in the UK with both their parents  and
      that that should be a primary consideration in the balancing  exercise
      under Article 8 (paragraph 17).


  13. The oral submissions made on behalf of the Appellants  are  summarised
      at paragraph 18 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  in  the
      following terms:

         "Submitting to the Tribunal (as there was no evidence  called),  Mr
         Singer relied upon his detailed Skeleton Argument - most  of  which
         was directed to the issues of  finances  and  therefore  no  longer
         relevant.  He relied heavily upon the decision before the  Tribunal
         -  Fitzgibbon QC LJ - Hameed and Hameed (heard at Taylor  House  on
         18 October 2017) for the assertion that exceptional circumstances -
         such as low level of education, long distance  to  travel  -  could
         succeed in mitigating the  effect  of  the  Rules  with  regard  to
         English Language (the determination in turn relied on the  decision
         in Bibi).  He stated that it was  necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to
         strike a fair balance in all of the circumstances of this case.  He
         pointed out that this Appellant had a limited education  and  lived
         in a remote part of India.  If she was granted entry clearance  she
         would have access to more appropriate language skills  in  the  UK.
         He added that there were also three children in the case".




  14. I pause to note that the reference to there being "no evidence called"
      is not strictly accurate: the Judge records in the decision  that  the
      sponsor attended the hearing and  adopted  his  witness  statement  as
      evidence-in-chief,  and  was  assisted  in  so  doing  by  a   Punjabi
      interpreter (paragraph 15).  To that extent evidence was called before
      the First-tier Tribunal - albeit that there was  no  cross-examination
      (paragraph 16) and accordingly the oral evidence before the First-tier
      Tribunal went no further than the contents of the  witness  statement.
      The appeal hearing proceeded by way of submissions thereafter.


  15. It seems to me that nothing of  substance  turns  on  the  technically
      inaccurate reference to there being no evidence called, but I  mention
      it for completeness because it was a matter to which Mr Singer drew my
      attention as being an inaccuracy in the Decision.


  16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the Appellants'  submissions,
      and indeed the Appellants' case, in the following terms at  paragraphs
      22-31 under the heading 'Findings':

         "22. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant and the standard  of
             proof is of the balance of probabilities.


         23.  It is a requirement of the Rules that potential  residents  of
             the UK from  other  countries  should  have  English  language
             skills.  There is a clear public interest in such a Rule since
             it is an aid to integrate within this country.


         24.  The Appellant has  attempted  to  pass  the  English  language
             requirement of the Rules and  has  failed  on  three  separate
             occasions.  It is said that her own circumstances and the fact
             that she has failed  the  exam  on  three  separate  occasions
             amounts to exceptional circumstances such as to mitigate,  but
             not strike down this Rule.


         25.  The Tribunal has noted the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  upon
             which Mr Singer now relies.  It is not bound by it and it does
             not amount to guiding or even persuasive authority.


         26.  The fact is that the English language ability of the Appellant
             is very low and has on three occasions been described as below
             A1 standard.  It is fair to conclude  therefore  that  she  is
             largely unable to communicate in English.   It  was  precisely
             this situation which the Rule intended to address.


         27.  It is of note that the sponsor who has been in the UK for many
             years continued to rely upon a  Punjabi  interpreter  at  this
             Hearing.


         28.  The sponsor states that he is  in  work  and  earning  a  good
             salary.  There is no indication at all from  the  papers  that
             either he or the Appellant has sought any  meaningful  tuition
             in respect of her  language  studies  or  that  she  has  ever
             attempted to relocate to a large city to achieve the necessary
             standard of English.  Simply sitting and failing the  exam  on
             three separate occasions does not amount, in the view of  this
             Tribunal, to an exceptional  circumstance  sufficient  to  set
             aside this Rule.


         29.  It is acknowledged that the status of the child Appellants are
             dependent upon the success or otherwise of the main  Appellant
             in this case.  It is indeed unfortunate that the eldest of the
             children may not be able to reapply again as  a  dependant  of
             his mother.  However this Tribunal does not consider that  any
             of  the  matters  put  forward  by  Mr  Singer  amount  to  an
             exceptional circumstance.


         30.  The Tribunal repeats that without  more,  simply  failing  the
             exam on three occasions does  not  amount  to  an  exceptional
             circumstance.  There is no evidence of any  additional  effort
             or work  by  the  Appellant  to  improve  or  seek  access  to
             resources to enable her to pass the exam.  Simply  sitting  an
             exam on three occasions which, it  appears,  she  was  clearly
             destined to fail, makes little sense in  having  the  Rule  at
             all.


   31.   The appeal is therefore dismissed."


17.  I  pause  to  note  that  the  references  therein   to   'exceptional
    circumstances' echo the submission advanced in  the  Skeleton  Argument
    and repeated in the oral submissions, which pleaded  the  existence  of
    exceptional   circumstances   for   relaxing   the   English   language
    requirement: "... a combination of circumstances that he  described  as
    sufficiently  exceptional..."   (Skeleton   at   paragraph   5);   "...
    circumstances  which  are  sufficiently   compelling   (and   therefore
    exceptional)..." (Skeleton at paragraph 14); "...  the  assertion  that
    exceptional circumstances... could succeed in mitigating the effect  of
    the Rules with regard to English language..."  (Decision  at  paragraph
    18). (It is also an echo of the wording of  paragraph  E-ECP.4.2(c)  of
    Appendix FM of the Rules,  which  provides  for  an  exception  to  the
    English language requirements.)




18. It is to be acknowledged that there is no express reference to  Article
    8 in the foregoing passages which form  the  totality  of  the  Judge's
    findings in the appeal, and there is no evaluation of  the  Appellants'
    cases with reference to the five Razgar questions.  However  I  am  not
    persuaded that that is in and  of  itself  fatal  to  these  particular
    linked decisions.




19. Once the financial issue had been  conceded  the  whole  focus  of  the
    Appellants' submissions in the case was on the  English  language  test
    and the guidance that was available as to circumstances  in  which  the
    rigours of the test might be relaxed,  by  way  of  the  Supreme  Court
    decision in Ali and Bibi, and - as suggested by the Appellants - by way
    of the decision of  another  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  It  was  the
    Appellants' case: that in principle -  as  identified  by  the  Supreme
    Court in Ali and Bibi - there may be some cases in which  the  language
    obstacle does not strike a fair balance  in  terms  of  proportionality
    when interfering with family life; and, on the  particular  facts,  the
    First Appellant's circumstances were such that reliance on the language
    requirement did indeed fail to strike a fair balance.




20. In this context it is instructive to bear in mind  the  nature  of  the
    challenge and the discussion in Ali and Bibi. It was contended  therein
    that the Rule imposing the English language requirement was  in  itself
    incompatible with human  rights  (Articles  8  and  14).  The  argument
    failed. Nonetheless in the course of discussion,  and  with  particular
    focus on the Respondent's Guidance as it existed at that time,  it  was
    recognised that the imposition  of  the  requirement  might  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences in individual cases depending on their
    facts. Particular concerns were  expressed  in  respect  of  access  to
    tuition and test centres.  I  note  in  particular  the  following  key
    passages:


    Per Lady Hale (with whom Lord Wilson agreed):


         "53. The problem lies not so much in the Rule itself,  but  in  the
         present Guidance, which offers  little  hope,  either  through  the
         "exceptional  circumstances"  exception  to  the  English  language
         requirement (see paras 17, 18 above), or through the  even  fainter
         possibility of entry clearance  outside  the  Rules  (see  para  20
         above). Only a tiny number achieve leave  to  enter  through  these
         routes. This is not surprising given the way in which the  Guidance
         is drafted. The impracticability of acquiring the necessary tuition
         and practice or of accessing a test centre is not enough. Financial
         impediments are not enough. Furthermore, all  applications  for  an
         exception to be made will be considered on a case  by  case  basis.
         This means that the considerable expense of making  an  application
         has to be risked, even though, on the current Guidance, the chances
         of success are remote.


         54. It is not enough to say (see para 7.2 of the Guidance  at  para
         18 above) that partners are expected to be self-sufficient  without
         recourse to public funds when they come to  this  country  and  can
         therefore  be  expected  to  find  the  resources  to   meet   this
         requirement. It is one thing to expect that people coming here will
         not be dependent upon public funds for their support. It  is  quite
         another thing to make it  a  condition  of  coming  here  that  the
         applicant or sponsor expend what for him or her may be unaffordable
         sums in achieving and demonstrating a very basic level of  English.
         Given  the  comparatively  modest   benefits   of   the   pre-entry
         requirement,  when  set  against  the  very  substantial  practical
         problems which some will face in meeting it, the only conclusion is
         that there are likely to be a significant number of cases in  which
         the present practice does not strike a fair balance as required  by
         article 8.


         55. This does not mean that the Rule itself has to be struck  down.
         There will be some cases in  which  the  interference  is  not  too
         great. The appropriate solution would be to recast the Guidance, to
         cater for those cases where it is simply impracticable for a person
         to learn English, or to take the test, in the  country  of  origin,
         whether because the facilities  are  non-existent  or  inaccessible
         because of the distance and expense involved. The  guidance  should
         be sufficiently precise, so that anyone for whom  it  is  genuinely
         impracticable to meet the requirement can predictably be granted an
         exemption. As was originally proposed, those granted  an  exemption
         could be required  to  undertake,  as  a  condition  of  entry,  to
         demonstrate the required language  skills  within  a  comparatively
         short period after entry to the UK."




    Per Lord Hodge (with whom Lord Hughes agreed):


         "73. To my mind the principal problem which the evidence adduced by
         the appellants suggests is that within certain states,  with  which
         many  UK  citizens  have  a  close  connection,  there  are  areas,
         including  rural  areas,  from  which  it  may  not  be  reasonably
         practicable for the incoming spouse or partner to obtain the needed
         tuition without incurring inordinate cost, for example by having to
         travel long distances repeatedly  or  to  reside  for  a  prolonged
         period in an  urban  centre  in  order  to  complete  the  relevant
         language course. Dr Geoffrey Jordan suggested in Dr  Helena  Wray's
         second report that preparation for the A1  test  could  involve  90
         hours of tuition (para 40). In principle, it is not unreasonable to
         expect some level of expenditure by the spouse/partner who  aspires
         to live in this country or by  the  presently  resident  sponsoring
         party; the potential financial benefits  of  life  in  the  UK  are
         significant. But in a particular case the  potential  cost  may  be
         shown to be inordinate, undermining the fair balance which  article
         8 requires. Dr Jordan also stated that some testing centres offered
         the A1 speaking and listening test  but  required  English  reading
         skills in order to take it and others offered the test only when it
         was combined with tests involving reading skills. If that is  still
         the case and it creates a significantly higher hurdle than  the  A1
         test which the UK Government requires, that also might  affect  the
         fair balance in an individual case. It is impossible at the  moment
         to predict what level of provision of testing centres will be made,
         or what identification of sources of tuition.  Travel  to  a  major
         city is  likely  to  be  an  inevitable  part  of  obtaining  entry
         clearance or of eventual travel to the UK in  any  event.  But  the
         central issue is the accessibility of both  tuition  providers  and
         approved testing centres which offer the  stipulated  test  without
         additional language requirements.  This  will  no  doubt  call  for
         examination on the facts of specific cases."


    Per Lord Neuberger:


         "101. However, I have concerns about the Guidance. It  does  appear
         virtually certain that there will be a significant number of  cases
         where application of the Guidance  will  lead  to  infringement  of
         article 8 rights. By way of example, it may be impossible,  in  any
         practical sense, for a potential applicant to obtain  access  to  a
         tuition and/or to a test centre. In particular, it appears that, in
         some countries, a person in a remote rural home either  would  have
         to travel repeatedly to and from a tuition centre many hundreds  of
         miles away, or would have to find the money to rent a place to live
         near the tuition centre. Depending  on  the  circumstances  of  the
         potential applicant, this may well  render  reliance  on  the  Rule
         disproportionate. And, as Lady Hale points  out,  reliance  on  the
         absolute exclusion  in  the  Guidance  of  "[l]ack  of  or  limited
         literacy  or  education"  from   the   category   of   "exceptional
         circumstances", and the broad statement that "it is  reasonable  to
         expect that [applicants] (or their sponsor ...) will  generally  be
         able  to  afford  reasonable  costs  incurred   in   making   their
         application"  could  easily  lead  to  inappropriate  outcomes   in
         individual cases.


         102. Accordingly, I share Lady Hale's concerns  expressed  in  para
         53, and it is also right to say that I also agree  with  what  Lord
         Hodge says in para 73."




21. Lady Hale identifies likely disproportionality in  cases  where  it  is
    'genuinely impracticable' to learn English or  access  a  test  centre;
    Lord  Hodge  and  Lord  Neuberger  refer  to  cases  where  it  is  not
    'reasonably practicable' to meet the requirement of  the  Rule  without
    inordinate expense  -  which  might  arise  in  cases  of  geographical
    remoteness from tuition facilities.




22. The decision in the unreported  case  of  Hameed  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellants was informed by just such considerations. See in  particular
    at paragraph 14:


         "In my judgement, the  difficulties  that  face  the  appellant  in
         acquiring necessary proficiency in English were  very  substantial.
         She lives in a remote village with few opportunities to  learn  and
         practice the language. She has to travel a long distance to  attend
         the test centre, something that can only  add  to  her  stress  and
         anxiety. A low level of education  will  make  the  learning  of  a
         foreign  language  all  the  more  difficult.  In  my   view,   the
         combination of the  circumstances  can  properly  be  described  as
         exceptional. A refusal to admit [the Appellant] to the UK on  these
         grounds will amount to an unjustified interference with her  rights
         under Article 8..."




23. It seems to me  that  it  was  clear  and  obvious  that  the  case  on
    proportionality advanced by and on behalf of the Appellants was exactly
    that the First Appellant's circumstances were such that  her  inability
    to pass the English language test  was  for  exceptional  circumstances
    that made it disproportionate to rely upon it as the  sole  reason  for
    denying the Appellants entry to the United Kingdom.




24.  Indeed  there  is  nothing  else  identified  either  in  the  written
    submissions or the oral submissions before the First-tier Tribunal, and
    there is nothing identified as evident on the facts of the  case,  that
    would set this family apart from any other family seeking to join a  UK
    based  sponsor  who,  save  in  respect  of  the  language  requirement
    otherwise meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The language
    requirement and the plea to be exempted from it were the  crux  of  the
    case under Article 8 as advanced by the Appellants.




25. It seems to me that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  engaged  with  the
    argument that was put to him. In those circumstances the failure of the
    Judge further to articulate the case with reference to the five  Razgar
    questions, and indeed the failure to make any express reference to best
    interests of the children is not fatal.  In the latter  regard  it  was
    inherent in the appeals that it was being asserted that it was  in  the
    children's best interests  to  be  with  both  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Equally it was inherent in  the  case  that  the  family  had
    arranged their family life for the last fourteen years or so to protect
    the interests of their children by  having  the  sponsor  work  in  the
    United Kingdom whilst the children were looked after and brought up  by
    their mother in Bangladesh. In my judgement any  issue  in  respect  of
    best interests add nothing of substance to the primary  question  posed
    by the parties to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and does  not  in  any
    way detract from the real focus of the  issues  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  That real focus - and  indeed  the  substance  of  the
    complaint advanced before this Tribunal - is the approach of the  Judge
    to that very question.




26. I turn then to a consideration of the facts-specific issue that was the
    core of the Appellants' arguments before the First-tier Tribunal.




27. In my judgement there is a fundamental  difficulty  in  the  Appellants
    continuing to pursue this point in the way it was put before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The submission were premised  on  a  clear  and  obvious
    factual misconception as to the residence of the Appellants.




28. It was at the forefront of both the written and  oral  submissions  (as
    may be seen from the  quotations  above)  that  the  First  Appellant's
    ability to satisfy the English language requirement was impeded  to  an
    extent that it amounted to an exceptional circumstance in primary  part
    "due to living in a remote area with few opportunities to learn English
    and practice it and having to  travel  a  long  distance  to  the  test
    centre" (paragraph 5 of the Skeleton  Argument).  This  submission  was
    made in line with, and relied upon support from,  the  observations  in
    Ali and Bibi via the ratio in Hameed.




29. However,  whilst  the  First  Appellant's  witness  statement  and  the
    sponsor's witness statement refer to the First  Appellant  having  been
    born in a small village, on closer  perusal  of  the  papers  the  visa
    application form makes it plain  that  the  First  Appellant  had  been
    living for the  last  six  years  at  the  same  address  in  Calcutta.
    Necessarily this means that she was not 'living in a remote village' as
    pleaded. Further, bearing in mind that Calcutta is  one  of  the  major
    cities in India, it seems to me without more that it was  not  open  to
    the Appellants make the submission that that  tuition  would  not  have
    been available to the First Appellant within her own town or  city,  or
    that she would have had to travel a long distance to a testing centre.




30. In my judgement such a circumstance renders  any  potentially  arguable
    error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal ultimately immaterial. The
    crux of the Appellants' case was misconceived in fact to such an extent
    that  once  the  error  is  identified  the  argument  collapses.   The
    Appellants' proportionality argument was placed squarely on  the  basis
    of the speeches in the Supreme Court and the decision  in  Hameed;  the
    real facts of the instant case could not make good those arguments.




31. For completeness I note the following in respect of the Ground  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal  pleading  that  the  Judge's  failed  to  consider  an
    unreported case which it is contended was "properly cited before  him".
    Mr Singer acknowledged in the course  of  discussion  that  Hameed  was
    really  no  more  than  an  illustration  of  the  application  of  the
    principles in Bibi to a particular case, and further acknowledged  that
    there was nothing apparent in  the  Practice  Direction  that  made  it
    appropriate to cite an unreported case simply by way of illustration of
    the application of a principle where that  principle  itself  could  be
    supported by quotation of the authoritative decision that set  out  the
    principle.   In  such  circumstances  there  is  no  substance  in  the
    suggestion that the Judge failed to consider  an  unreported  authority
    which was "properly" cited before him, because it was not  properly  so
    cited.




32. Be that as it may, and bearing in mind that the decision was before the
    First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate and relevant that I say something
    further briefly about the facts in that case.  I have already  cited  a
    passage above to illustrate how it was informed by the decision in  Ali
    and Bibi. I note the following as regards the particular facts:


         "... in order to take the test she had to travel  to  Chennai  from
         her village near Ramanathapuram in Southern Tamil Nadu a round trip
         of about 1,400 kilometres.  [The sponsor] said that the  travelling
         exhausted and  stressed  her  and  must  have  contributed  to  her
         inability to pass the test". (paragraph 10).




33. Bearing in mind the factual misconceptions in the  submissions  it  can
    readily be seen that the attempt in the Skeleton Argument and the  oral
    submissions to equate the Appellant's case with the case of Mrs  Hameed
    was misconceived.


34.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  seemingly  wrong-footed  by  the
    misconceived submission: at paragraph 28 he refers to an absence of any
    indication as to attempts to relocate to a large city.  Be that  as  it
    may the Judge noted that otherwise the evidence as to attempts to learn
    English was extremely limited, and  on  that  basis  concluded  to  the
    effect that the failure to pass the exam on three occasions did not  in
    itself establish an exceptional circumstance  such  that  the  language
    requirement should in effect not stand in the way of the family  living
    together in the United Kingdom.


35.  In my judgment the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  observations  do  not
    offend against any of the guidance to be derived  from  Ali  and  Bibi.
    There is nothing in the speeches in the Supreme Court that suggest that
    geographical remoteness is in itself sufficient  to  establish  a  case
    under Article 8. It is not suggested that meeting the English  language
    requirement is thereby  inevitably  rendered  genuinely  impracticable;
    rather it gives rise to a theoretical possibility that must  be  tested
    on the evidence of the particular case applying the civil  standard  of
    proof. It seems to me the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that more was required by way of evidence as to what steps had
    been taken to overcome  the  supposed  remoteness  of  the  Appellants'
    location.


36.  The Judge also seems to have had in mind the suggestion that the  First
    Appellant might subsequently - if permitted to enter the UK  -  acquire
    adequate command of English such that it would not act as  an  obstacle
    to integration, was speculative and perhaps unrealistically optimistic,
    in that he observed that the sponsor still required the  assistance  of
    an interpreter in the hearing notwithstanding fourteen years'  presence
    in the United Kingdom (paragraph 27).


37.  I find no error of law in the Judge's approach to the Appellant's  case
    as it was put to him. The Judge's conclusion that the  First  Appellant
    had  not  shown  any  exceptional  circumstances  such  as  to  warrant
    disregarding the English language requirement did  not  offend  against
    the guidance to be derived from in Ali and Bibi. The Judge reached this
    conclusion on a misconceived factual premise: however the misconception
    of fact was very greatly  in  favour  of  the  Appellants.  Indeed,  as
    discussed above, once the  misconception  of  fact  is  identified  the
    reality is that the substance of the submission relied upon  collapses.
    Moreover, once that  submission  collapses,  the  Appellants'  case  on
    Article 8 proportionality also collapses - because this  was  the  only
    submission of substance put at the core of the appeals. The  continuing
    separation of the Appellants from the sponsor, and thereby minors  from
    their  father,  and  the  concomitant  effect  upon   children's   best
    interests, were an intrinsic part of this consideration -  and  in  the
    absence of any particular or peculiar factors did not  require  further
    exposition on the facts herein.


38.  In all the circumstances I find  no  material  error  of  law  and  the
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stand.


Notice of Decision

39.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
of law and stands.


40.  Each of these linked appeals remains dismissed.


41.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 4 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

