
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/15509/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rdApril 2019                    |On 29th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 PRAKASH [G]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Woodrow, of Counsel, instructed by JBR Morgan
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Kenya. He probably arrived in the UK in
       2004 shortly before his 18th birthday having been granted  leave  to
       enter to accompany his parents who were settled in the  UK.  He  was
       granted indefinite leave to remain on 20th September  2006.  He  was
       convicted of a series of criminal offences between January 2008  and
       March 2018 which  include  six  offences  against  the  person,  two
       offences against property and three  public  order  offences.  As  a
       result he received a number  of  community  orders  but  also  three
       sentences of imprisonment, the longest being for 20  weeks.  He  was
       served with a notice  to  provide  reasons  why  he  should  not  be
       deported in April 2018, and a decision was made that  he  should  be
       deported on 17th July 2018 which set out why  it  was  not  accepted
       that he had human rights  grounds  for  resisting  deportation.  His
       appeal against the decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
       O'Hagan in a determination promulgated on the 7th November 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       O'Keeffe on 21st November 2018 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to  consider
       whether very compelling  circumstances  existed  when  allowing  the
       appeal.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal set out that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal found  the  claimant  was  a  persistent  offender  at
       paragraphs 62 and 63, and so his deportation  is  conducive  to  the
       public good. It was not accepted that he had subsisting relationship
       with his partner at  paragraphs  76  to  77.  His  appeal  therefore
       depended on his private life ties with the UK. It was accepted  that
       he could not meet the requirements of s.117C(4) of the 2002  Act  or
       paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules as the claimant had not been
       legally present in the UK for half of his life. It is argued firstly
       by the Secretary of State that the First-tier  Tribunal  misdirected
       itself in applying a test of whether his deportation would be unduly
       harsh at  paragraph  88  of  decision,  and  in  finding  that  very
       significant obstacles to integration sufficed alone to find that the
       claimant's deportation was disproportionate.

    5. Secondly it is argued in the grounds of  appeal  that  there  was  a
       failure to give adequate reasons as to why the claimant  would  have
       problems re-integrating into Kenyan society when  it  was  found  he
       would  be  familiar  with  the  culture,  society  and  language  at
       paragraph 84. The expertise of the social worker  to  conclude  that
       the claimant does not function as an adult is questioned, and it  is
       argued that the report in any case gives no reasons as to  why  this
       is the case, and consideration  is  not  given  as  to  whether  the
       claimant simply needs to stop drinking alcohol as  the  evidence  is
       that whilst he was in prison he was able to do work and found to  be
       trustworthy, see paragraph 11 of the decision. There was  a  failure
       to consider whether the claimant would address  his  alcoholism  and
       lead a productive life in a new environment. It was wrong  to  treat
       the visit to Kenya as evidence that the claimant would not find work
       as the claimant may have viewed the trip as a  holiday  and  had  no
       incentive to find work. Even if the claimant is immature this  might
       not be reason in itself why he would become destitute in Kenya as it
       might not mean he would not find work. Further, insufficient reasons
       are given for the finding that being a single man without family and
       having epilepsy (which is  said  to  be  linked  to  accusations  of
       witchcraft in Kenya) would make him stand out  and  constitute  very
       significant difficulties to integration, particularly as  there  was
       no evidence that he would not be able to access  the  medication  he
       uses to control his epilepsy in Kenya.

    6. Mr Clarke made further oral submissions that the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge erred in law by failing to look  at  the  possibility  of  the
       claimant  giving  up  alcohol  or  having  therapy  to  address  his
       alcoholism if he were returned to Kenya as this had been possible in
       prison.  He  submitted  that  this  was  an  issue  which   required
       consideration before it could be  concluded  that  there  were  very
       significant obstacles to integration on return to Kenya.

    7. Ms Woodrow argues, in summary, in her  skeleton  argument  and  oral
       submissions that there is no material error of law as the First-tier
       Tribunal applied the correct test in  substance  as  importance  and
       weight was given to the public interest in deportation and a balance
       sheet Hesham Ali  approach  was  conducted  to  assess  whether  the
       claimant's deportation was proportionate, and there was reference to
       the "very compelling circumstances" test under the Immigration Rules
       in the record of the submissions of the parties. It is  argued  that
       it was clearly correct that the  circumstances  the  claimant  would
       find himself in if returned to Kenya went  beyond  very  significant
       obstacles to integration  because  he  would  be  destitute  without
       family support and ostracised due to prejudicial  attitudes  to  his
       epilepsy, his Indian ethnicity and his lack of family support. He is
       suffering from 8 to 10 epileptic seizures a  month  on  his  current
       medication, and has needed hospital admission  and  been  unable  to
       work as a result of this medical problems in the past.  This,  added
       to his alcohol addiction, learning  difficulties  and  other  mental
       health problems which include admission to hospital  for  overdoses,
       depression and anxiety lead to a conclusion  that  he  is  a  deeply
       vulnerable young man and  not  a  functioning  adult,  and  in  turn
       entirely justify allowing the appeal as there  are  very  compelling
       circumstances over and above those set  out  in  the  exceptions  to
       deportation.

    8. I informed the parties that I found that the First-tier Tribunal had
       erred in law by applying the wrong legal test but had not  erred  in
       law in making any of the factual findings.  My  reasoning  for  this
       decision is set out below. As a result it was agreed that  we  would
       remake the appeal by way of submissions based on the findings of the
       First-tier Tribunal. It was agreed that there  were  no  significant
       factual  changes  in  the  claimant's  situation:   the   only   new
       development was one which only had potential  peripheral  importance
       to the decision-making and related to the claimant's mother having a
       diagnosis of lung fibrosis. The parties were  given  15  minutes  to
       prepare for making submissions for the remaking hearing.  I have not
       set out their submissions but have dealt with the points made in  my
       "Conclusions - Remaking" section of this decision.



Conclusions - Error of Law

    9.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  correctly  makes  findings   about   the
       seriousness of the offences the claimant was convicted of, and makes
       an unchallenged finding that they  are  at  the  lower  end  of  the
       spectrum,  see  first  guidance  point  in  MS   (s.117C(6):   "very
       compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122.

   10. However, there is a failure to make it clear that a  test  of  "very
       compelling circumstances over and above  those  in  the  Exceptions"
       applied from the point at paragraph 79 of the decision where it  was
       found that  the  claimant  could  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
       exceptions/ s.117C exceptions to deportation. Instead  an  erroneous
       "unduly harsh" test is employed, and this is set out  again  in  the
       conclusion at  paragraph  88.  I  find  that  this  was  a  material
       misdirection of law, and as a result the  appeal  will  need  to  be
       remade as it cannot be certain that the outcome of the appeal  would
       be the same if the correct test was applied to the findings of fact.

   11. I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal has  erred  in  the  ways
       contended in the second ground of appeal,  where  it  is  said  that
       there was a failure to give  adequate  reasons  for  findings  in  a
       number of contexts.  The  assessment  of  social  work  evidence  at
       paragraphs 80 to 81 is very  fair,  astute,  and  well-reasoned  and
       ultimately the First-tier Tribunal only accepts the picture  in  the
       social work report as it is the same that has emerged from the other
       evidence. The First-tier Tribunal Judge makes  a  fair  and  careful
       assessment of the claimant's likely understanding of life  in  Kenya
       at paragraph 84. It was undoubtedly reasonable, in  the  context  of
       the evidence, for the First-tier Tribunal to find that the  claimant
       is an immature man who is alcohol dependent but has  family  support
       in the UK but not in Kenya at paragraph  85  of  the  decision.  The
       assessment of the expert report of Mr Aguilar at paragraph 86 of the
       decision is also  reasoned,  particularly  in  the  absence  of  any
       challenge to the reliability of that report in the submissions  made
       by the respondent at the First-tier Tribunal, and it was  rationally
       found that the appellant would  be  vulnerable  to  threats  due  to
       witchcraft as a result of his being  epileptic  particularly  as  he
       would be likely to be living with poorer and less educated people in
       Kenya due to his destitution.

   12. There  was  no  reason  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
       considered that being returned to Kenya would be equivalent to being
       in prison, and that it would prevent the claimant having  access  to
       alcohol and thus induce him to address his addiction and improve his
       ability to cope with life. This was not a  submission  made  by  the
       Secretary of State at the First-tier Tribunal.  It was in  fact  the
       submission of the Secretary of State that the claimant  remained  an
       alcoholic who was not addressing his condition  through  therapeutic
       programmes in the four months after being released from prison,  and
       this was the finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  set  out  at
       paragraph 54 of the decision.

   13. The  findings  regarding  the  claimant's  epilepsy  are  very  well
       reasoned at paragraph 47. There is reference to the medical  letters
       and records at pages 54 to 339 of the appellant's bundle,  and  good
       reasoning for the finding that his medication had been  doubled  and
       that as a result that the epilepsy was not well controlled, and that
       this had a likely relationship with the  alcoholism.  The  claimant,
       who gave his own evidence about his medical condition, said  he  has
       between 8 and 10 seizures a month and  was  found  to  be  an  open,
       candid and generally honest witness at paragraph 42 of the decision.



   14. In the context where the claimant is found, with reasons, to  be  an
       immature alcoholic suffering from badly controlled epilepsy  without
       any Kenyan family support and with his memory and  cognition  having
       been impaired by his alcohol abuse, and where it is found  that  his
       family could not afford to support him in  any  substantial  way  in
       Kenya the finding that  the  claimant  would  be  likely  to  become
       destitute if returned to his country of origin was  a  rational  and
       reasoned one.  There  was  no  evidence  that  since  he  became  an
       alcoholic in  the  UK  in  approximately  2008  he  had  managed  to
       accommodate and support himself in  this  country,  and  so  despite
       having knowledge of  Kenyan  society  acquired  by  his  life  there
       between the age of 4 and 17 years, as set out at paragraph 84 of the
       decision, there was no reason to think he would  be  able  to  avoid
       destitution on return given a lack of any state safety  net  system.



   Conclusions - Remaking

   15. The issue of whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
       and above those described in the exceptions to deportation is not  a
       "hard-edged test" but a  "wide-ranging  evaluative  exercise"  which
       must ensure that the result of an appeal is compatible with the UK's
       obligations under Article 8 ECHR, see paragraph 16 of MS. As set out
       in NA (Pakistan) & Anor v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at paragraph  33,
       there is no requirement  of  exceptionality  but:  "The  commonplace
       incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in poor  health  or
       the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not   be
       sufficient." It is a very demanding test. As set out by the  Supreme
       Court in Hesham Ali  the best approach to determine an appeal is one
       employing a balance sheet setting out  the  factors  in  favour  and
       against the deportation of the  appellant,  and  then  coming  to  a
       conclusion on the proportionality of his deportation, in  this  case
       applying the test of requiring "very  compelling  circumstances"  to
       make his deportation disproportionate.

   16. I start by setting out the  factors  in  favour  of  the  claimant's
       deportation. I place the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       that the claimant's offending is at the lower end  of  the  spectrum
       and is likely to remain at that level and not escalate (a fact which
       is supported by the claimant not having any further convictions over
       the past 11 months since he  was  released  from  prison)  into  the
       balance, as the  seriousness  of  his  convictions  are  clearly  of
       relevance to whether very compelling circumstances  exist,  see  the
       first reported finding in MS. It was also found  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  that  the  claimant  is  a  persistent  offender  with   a
       particular disregard for the law who is likely  to  recommit  public
       order offences due to his alcoholism, and his deportation remains in
       the public interest for reasons of  the  protection  of  the  public
       against his criminality, as a deterrent to others, and  to  maintain
       public confidence in the immigration system. It has been found  that
       the appellant has  familiarity  with  Kenyan  society,  culture  and
       languages as someone who has lived in that country until he  was  17
       years old, and so does not have any  disadvantage  linked  to  these
       factors in re-integrating himself. He has no family  life  with  his
       girl-friend in the UK as that relationship was found to be  volatile
       and dysfunctional, and whilst it may be a  genuine  relationship  it
       has not been shown to be unduly harsh for the couple to be separated
       by  the  claimant's  deportation.  The  claimant  no  longer  has  a
       relationship with his child who was taken into care. The  fact  that
       he is financially independent as he is supported by his parents  and
       not by the state (see paragraph 55 of Rhuppiah v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC
       58) and speaks English are neutral matters.

   17. On the other side I place into the balance  that  the  claimant  has
       lived in the UK for entire adult life, a period  of  14  years,  and
       held indefinite leave to remain for 11 years until it was removed in
       these deportation proceedings. It has been found that he would  have
       very significant obstacles to integration in Kenya  because  of  his
       being an immature alcohol dependent man without family support whose
       medical condition, epilepsy, may make  him  a  figure  of  dangerous
       suspicion in the poor, less  educated  echelons  of  Kenyan  society
       amongst whom he is likely to live if returned due  to  his  lack  of
       ability to support and accommodate himself. His parents in the UK do
       not have funds to send to support him  in  any  substantial  way  in
       Kenya, and as a result of his alcoholism  he  is  likely  to  become
       destitute in Kenya and fail to take any medication for his epilepsy,
       if he manages to source this, which is not well controlled  even  in
       the UK with proper medication.

   18. Mr Clarke argued that the claimant  could  make  better  choices  if
       returned to  Kenya,  for  instance  to  undertake  therapy  for  his
       addiction as he did in prison, and that as it would appear from  the
       medical notes at least some of his  seizures  relate  to  alcoholism
       that this would  place  the  claimant  in  a  position  to  use  the
       university degree that he appears to have obtained in the  UK  prior
       to becoming an alcoholic and obtain work. However, I find that  that
       the First-tier Tribunal found the claimant to be someone who was not
       capable of making such a choice as his  memory  and  cognition  were
       found to be damaged by his alcoholism and epilepsy, see paragraph 42
       of the decision, and the  evidence  was  that  since  released  from
       prison despite the desire of his father that he  stop  drinking  the
       claimant continues to drink large quantities of  alcohol  every  day
       and lacks the capacity to exercise control over this, see  paragraph
       54 of the decision. The evidence of the expert on which  the  First-
       tier Tribunal place reliance, Dr Aguilar,  is  that  medication  for
       epilepsy would be available but would have to be paid for  and  that
       many medications available are poor  quality  ones  from  India  and
       China, see paragraphs 15 to 18 of the report. In the context of  the
       finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the claimant would be likely
       to be destitute, as his parents cannot  afford  to  support  him  in
       Kenya and he is not capable of doing so either, I find  that  return
       to Kenya would also probably leave the claimant  without  medication
       and with only limited assistance from state medical services for his
       epilepsy when and if he became acutely unwell.

   19. I find that the claimant's circumstances go beyond a finding that he
       would  have  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in   the
       following ways. There is the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that
       he would be likely to be destitute if returned; there is the finding
       that the claimant as a person, now aged 32 years, who has needed and
       had loving family support all of his adult life due  to  a  lack  of
       maturity, would have no family at all to turn to in Kenya; there  is
       a finding that he would face social ostracization  and  difficulties
       in Kenya due to not having a family in a society  where  it  is  the
       overwhelming norm to be part of one and due to  his  epilepsy  which
       has associations with witchcraft (Dr Aguilar's view is that there is
       a risk of violence to the claimant if he is seen as a witch  due  to
       his fitting, and the finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  that
       reliance can be placed on that report and that such a risk would  be
       more likely amongst the poorer, less educated  sections  of  society
       where the claimant is likely to have to live  due  to  his  lack  of
       means); there is a finding that the claimant  has  health  problems,
       primarily alcohol addiction but  also  poorly  controlled  epilepsy,
       having two or more seizures a  week  (and  with  his  medical  notes
       making clear he also has a history of some hospital  admissions  for
       this and that he has also has made suicide attempts in  the  context
       of anxiety and depression at  points  of  crisis  in  2015,  and  an
       assessment by the DWP that he was not fit for  work)  and  that  the
       claimant has impaired memory and  cognition  due  to  this  and  his
       alcoholism.

   20. In the context of the above findings; the claimant's previous lawful
       permanent residence in the UK with indefinite leave to  remain;  and
       the finding relating  to  his  having  a  relatively  low  level  of
       offending, whilst giving significant weight to the likelihood of the
       claimant recommitting public order offences and the public  interest
       in his deportation, I find the claimant has  shown  very  compelling
       circumstances over and above the  exceptions  to  deportation  which
       make  his  deportation  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
       private life ties to the UK.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal but preserved  the
      findings of fact.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   23rd April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
