
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15596/2016
                                                               HU/15599/2016
                                                               HU/15603/2016
                                                               HU/15607/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2017                        |On 2 November 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Fathimath [f]
                                  Abdul [M]
                                 Aishath [m]
                                 Asiyath [m]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Peter Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Abdul Basith, Solicitor of Taj Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The claimants are a husband and wife and their two minor children  from
    the Maldives.  They appealed successfully to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    (First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid) against the decision of the Secretary
    of State refusing them leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State challenges that decision in the following terms:-



         "(i) At paragraph 27 of  the  decision  the  Tribunal  allows  this
         appeal.  It is not clear what has been allowed here but it  appears
         to have been a decision made on Article 8 grounds.  It is submitted
         that the Tribunal has failed to either make a clear decision on the
         outcome of the appeal and more importantly to give any reasons  for
         such findings.

     ii) It would  appear  that  this  failing  is  characteristic  of  this
         particular Tribunal Judge.  As interesting  as  it  may  be  to  be
         informed about Saddam Hussain, Tony Benn, Sir Frederick  Lawton  or
         Lord Leicester,  it  is  submitted  that  these  are  not  adequate
         substitutes for an assessment of the evidence and recent  findings.
         In this determination there are  absolutely  no  findings.   It  is
         therefore  submitted  that  this  decision  is  unsustainable   and
         permission to appeal is requested."

    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on
    all grounds.

 3. Since the grant of permission to appeal, the Upper Tribunal has  issued
    the decision in MM &  Ors  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, The Secretary of State & Ors AA/06906/2014  (AA069062014  &
    Ors. [2017] UKAITUR on BAILII).  That decision,   although  unreported,
    is relevant to the circumstances of this appeal  since  it  contains  a
    comprehensive criticism of the decision style  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid:

         "It seems to us  that  the  complaints  made  about  Judge  Majid's
         decisions are entirely  well-founded.  Nobody  reading  them  could
         detect how the judge reached the conclusion he did,  acting  within
         the law and applying the relevant substantive law to the  facts  as
         found. That is partly because the law and the facts are  never  the
         subject of any detailed reference, disputes on the  facts  are  not
         identified, and there are next to no  findings  of  relevant  fact;
         more  seriously  it  is  because  the  Judge's  statements  in  his
         decisions, either by direct assertion or  by  disquisition  on  the
         irrelevant, give real reason to suppose that he is not even  trying
         to act within the law and apply the relevant substantive law to the
         facts as found.

         47.          We regard the body of his work that we have  examined
         in the course of these  appeals  as  wholly  failing  to  meet  the
         standards that are demanded by the office of a judge  and  expected
         by the parties. As a result,  every  one  of  the  decisions  under
         appeal shows error of law, in most cases  serious  error,  in  most
         cases multiple serious errors. Whether the decisions are looked  at
         together or separately, they show that nobody  should  assume  that
         Judge Majid has an adequate knowledge of the law or of his task  as
         a judge. If his decisions continue to have  the  features  we  have
         identified in the foregoing examination, they are clearly  open  to
         criticism."

 4. Even without that criticism, I am satisfied that the reasoning of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Majid in this appeal is unsound  and  his  decision
    unsustainable.   There is no alternative to setting the decision  aside
    and remaking it afresh.

Conclusions

 5. For the foregoing reasons, my/our decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  The appeal will be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal before a Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Majid.

    Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Dated:   1 November 2017
             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
