
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|                                     |Appeal number HU/15016/2019          |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 27 May 2021                       |
|On 14 May 2021                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                I R (Albania)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Abdul Kader Yusuf, an Immigration Executive with
                    Kingswood Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Susana Cunha, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of I R who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him, his children, his former partners or  of  any  member
of his family in connection with these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   22 August 2019 to refuse him leave to remain on Article  8  ECHR  private
   and family life grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Albania.

2. Error of law decision. Following a hearing on  2  February  2021,  I  set
   aside the decision of the First-tier Judge for  perversity  and  directed
   that the decision in this appeal be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a
   date to be fixed.

3. Mode of hearing.  The hearing today  took  place  remotely  by  Microsoft
   Teams.  There were no technical difficulties.  I am  satisfied  that  all
   parties were in a quiet and  private  place  and  that  the  hearing  was
   completed fairly, with the cooperation of both representatives.

4. Evidence and submissions.   Following  triage  directions  given  in  the
   light of the Covid-19 pandemic, both parties provided  written  and  oral
   submissions. I heard  oral  submissions  from  both  representatives  and
   reserved my decision, which I now give.  I have had  regard  to  all  the
   evidence which was before the First-tier Judge, whether or  not  referred
   to expressly in this decision,  as  well  as  the  evidence  and  written
   submissions prepared for this appeal hearing. I have given  the  two  new
   witness statements such probative weight as they will bear,  as  no  oral
   evidence was given by either the appellant or his former partner.

5. New matter. The appellant and his former partner  have  two  children,  a
   son born in 2016 and a daughter born in December 2019.  The elder child's
   paternity was confirmed by a  DNA  test.    The  respondent  accepts  the
   paternity of the younger child. Although the existence of that child is a
   'new matter', Ms Cunha did not object to the Upper Tribunal engaging with
   it in these proceedings. The elder child is not a qualifying child, since
   he is only 5 years old.   The younger daughter is 2 years old now.

Background

6. The appellant entered the United Kingdom unlawfully on 1  February  2013,
   aged  27.   He  is  now  35  years  old.   The  appellant  has  had   two
   relationships since coming to the United Kingdom.   He  has  not  married
   either of  his  partners.   Since  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the
   appellant has not worked, although both his current and  former  partners
   have done so.  His former partner works as  a  cleaner  and  his  current
   partner is a bank nursing assistant.

7. On 22 May 2017, he made a private and family life  application  based  on
   his relationship with his former partner, an Israeli citizen with refugee
   status, and their son born in 2016.  The application was refused.  He was
   appeal rights exhausted on that application on 30 April 2019, around  the
   time the relationship with his former partner broke down.

8. The appellant's former partner  had  refugee  status  based  on  domestic
   violence by her former husband, and a fear of him and of retribution from
   her family members in Israel, who also abused her when she  lived  there.
   As a recognised refugee, the  appellant's  ex-partner  is  understandably
   unwilling to travel to or live in any other country, having found herself
   safe in the United Kingdom, and is not willing for her  child  to  go  to
   meet his father in Albania or a third country.

9. The appellant's former partner ejected him from their home in April  2019
   when she discovered that his current partner was pregnant, and  that  the
   child was probably the appellant's.  The appellant's former partner was 8
   weeks pregnant then with their daughter.   The  appellant  became  street
   homeless for a  time,  and  his  former  partner  was  hospitalised  with
   depression and suicidal ideation.  The appellant looked after  their  son
   while she was in hospital.

10. The appellant and his former partner parted on bad terms, by  reason  of
   the appellant's infidelity with his current partner, but after  mediation
   in July 2019, she agreed to a contact arrangement, on the basis that  the
   appellant would not take her child outside the United Kingdom.   She  did
   so reluctantly, but in the best interests of her small son, to  whom  she
   accepted that the appellant had always been a  good  father.    A  letter
   dated 31 July 2019  from  Dr  A  Ali  at  St  Helier's  Medical  Practice
   confirmed that the appellant was still registered at  that  practice  and
   that he accompanied his son to medical appointments there.

11. On 30 June 2019, the appellant made the present  application,  based  on
   his private and family life with his current partner, a British  citizen.
    The appellant's current partner's father helped to broker the settlement
   which led to the contact arrangement.  The father  built  a  relationship
   with  the  appellant's  former  partner,  on  the  assumption  that   his
   daughter's child would be a sibling to the appellant's children with her.
     In the event, that child, born in March 2020, has been  established  by
   DNA evidence not to be this appellant's child.  His current  partner  and
   her father provided no evidence for the Upper Tribunal  remaking  hearing
   and took no part in the hearing.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. First-tier Judge Ford correctly took the decision  of  First-tier  Judge
   O'Hagan in December 2018 as her Devaseelan starting point.  She relied on
   the  finding  by  Judge  O'Hagan  that  the  appellant  would  not   face
   significant obstacles in re-integration in Albania,  and  held  that  the
   appellant's private and family life did not outweigh the public  interest
   in controlling immigration.  She found the appellant's former partner  to
   be a frank and honest witness and accepted that  there  was  family  life
   between the appellant and his son.

13. The First-tier Judge found that the  appellant's  former  partner  would
   not bring their child to Albania to see him.  She noted 'the difficulties
   within their relationship and the possible impact on [the appellant's ex-
   partner  and  the  child's]  status  if  she  was  to  leave  the  United
   Kingdom"[1].  They would not be returning to  Albania  as  a  family,  as
   Judge  O'Hagan  had  found  they  would,  because  in  the  meantime  the
   relationship between the  adults  had  irretrievably  broken  down.   The
   appellant's ex-partner no longer qualified  as  his  partner  within  the
   Immigration Rules.

14. The appellant's current partner did not attend the  First-tier  Tribunal
   hearing; her father did, and gave evidence on her behalf that he had  not
   particularly wanted her to have a child by the appellant but that now she
   had, he would support the couple,  wherever  they  lived,  and  'pay  for
   everything'.  The appellant's current partner had  difficulty  conceiving
   with her previous partner and the  baby,  expected  to  be  that  of  the
   appellant, was 'a miracle'.

15. The appellant's  evidence  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  his
   current partner was very supportive of him, 'more than anyone  else'  and
   that when they discussed where he should live, he said he  did  not  know
   what to do, but told her that 'it was in her hands to decide'.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

16. There was new evidence before me  from  the  appellant  and  his  former
   partner, as well as medical and independent social worker evidence, which
   was not before the First-tier Tribunal.  There was  no  further  evidence
   from  the  appellant's  current  partner  or  her  father:  although  the
   relationship is said to continue, there may have been a shift because the
   child she is raising is not the appellant's child.

17. The appellant made an updated witness statement on 1 May 2021.  He  said
   that he was still in a relationship with his British citizen partner, but
   that they had 'recently discovered that  I  am  not  the  father  of  her
   child'.  He had discovered that his former partner was pregnant following
   their separation and that she gave birth to his daughter on  30  December
   2019.  The appellant said he was continuing to comply with the July  2019
   contact agreement plan and that his former partner had allowed him to see
   his daughter as the same time as his son, without the need for a  further
   contact agreement.  He was grateful  that  she  continued  to  allow  him
   parental involvement in this way.  The appellant  felt  it  necessary  to
   remain in the United Kingdom 'so that I can continue  to  be  a  part  of
   [both children's] life and play the role of the father which our children
   will require throughout their life to  ensure  their  proper  and  normal
   development'. The appellant was not  called  to  give  evidence  and  his
   witness statement was not tested in cross-examination.

18. On 21 August 2020, the appellant's ex-partner made a witness  statement,
   confirming that under no circumstances would she  take  the  child  to  a
   third country (in context, Turkey), nor allow  him  to  travel  there  to
   visit the appellant:

         "... 4.       I do not wish to be difficult,  but  I  have  already
         fled my home country as a  refugee  and  do  not  trust  any  other
         country to protect my safety, and that of my  son,  as  the  United
         Kingdom who have been tremendously generous to make  me  feel  safe
         with my son.

         5.   I have since had a video call with  a  family  solicitor,  who
         have advise me that I am the resident parent and am allowed to take
         out a prohibited  steps  order  if  I  feel  unsafe  about  my  son
         travelling and I wish to state to the court that  I  am  more  than
         willing to go down this road if need be. ...  "

19. The appellant's ex-partner made another statement on  5  February  2021.
   She said that she  genuinely  believed  that  there  would  be  a  severe
   psychological impact on her son  if  the  appellant  were  removed.   The
   appellant and her son had a very special bond, closer than the boy's bond
   with her.   During the period after she ejected the  appellant  from  the
   family home, and separated the boy from his  father,  he  threw  constant
   tantrums and struggled to  sleep  at  night.   Following  mediation,  she
   decided to allow contact and saw the improvement in the child's behaviour
   when he was seeing his father again.

20. The appellant's ex-partner had no other family  members  in  the  United
   Kingdom, because she came here as a refugee.  There  was  no  one,  apart
   from the appellant, to help her look after her son  and  she  was  'truly
   grateful  to  know  that  [the  boy]  has  a   father   who   loves   him
   unconditionally'. The appellant's former partner said she had  a  history
   of depression and felt that her son's father  was  the  only  person  who
   could care for him in her absence.  She had  always  worked  long  hours,
   trying to put food on her family's  table,  and  keep  her  small  family
   financially secure, and she needed the appellant to care  for  the  child
   while she worked.

21. The appellant's ex-partner was not called to give evidence  and  so  her
   statements are untested by cross-examination.

Medical evidence

22. An updating letter from St Heliers Medical Practice in Birmingham on  24
   February 2021 from Dr T Collum is brief and largely hearsay.   He  stated
   that the appellant's ex-partner had given oral consent for  a  letter  to
   support the immigration case of the appellant.  He said that  the  former
   partner had depression, anxiety and obsessive compulsive  disorder.   She
   was receiving oral anti-depressants, under the care of the Birmingham and
   Solihull Perinatal Mental Health Team.   That was the  only  fact  in  Dr
   Collum's letter of which he had direct knowledge.

23. Dr Collum repeated the assertion by the appellant's ex-partner that  the
   appellant was a great emotional support to her in continuing recovery and
   stability of her mental issues and that she feared that  in  his  absence
   her mental health might deteriorate.  The appellant offered  child  care,
   enabling her to work and support her family 'as is required financially'.
    When the appellant had no access to their children  'during  medication'
   she perceived that as having a significant  effect  on  the  older  boy's
   mental  health:  the  child  had  anger  and  behavioural   difficulties,
   according to his mother.

24. A letter dated 18 December 2020 from the Birmingham and Solihull  Mental
   Health  NHS  Foundation  Trust  (Perinatal  Mental  Health  Services   in
   Edgbaston)  to  the  appellant's  solicitors  confirmed  that  they  were
   monitoring the appellant's ex-partner's mental health.  The diagnosis was
   one of  recurrent  depressive  disorder,  and  her  current  episode  was
   described as 'moderate'.  The writer considered that if  the  appellant's
   ex-partner was not  granted  'settled  citizenship'  for  which  she  had
   applied on 28 January 2021, she might not be able to  keep  herself  safe
   and might make plans to harm herself.

25. The appellant's ex-partner had experienced physical and emotional  abuse
   in Israel from her own mother, and sexual abuse from a maternal uncle and
   from her cousins, between the ages of 8 and 12 years old. She had come to
   the United Kingdom in 2014 with her then husband who  was  a  student  in
   Exeter.  She was then 21 years old.  The marriage  was  an  abusive  one,
   with frequent sexual abuse: she had been forced to marry her  much  older
   husband when she was only 16, and the marriage had lasted 3� years.

26. In the United Kingdom, the appellant's  ex-partner  had  claimed  asylum
   and the Home Office provided accommodation. Her abusive husband found and
   assaulted the appellant's ex-partner; he was deported to Israel for that.
    The appellant's ex-partner was in  constant  fear  of  being  found  and
   harmed by her family.  She  had  provided  newspaper  reports  of  honour
   killings close to her home town in Israel.

27. The  appellant's  ex-partner  had  been  known  to  the  Birmingham  and
   Solihull Mental Health Team since January 2019,  having  first  contacted
   them for issues around forced marriages and honour  killings.   By  April
   2019, she was 'under Crisis Team' and her clinical notes referred to  her
   being a refugee from Israel, with a history of 'physical abuse and other'
   and a long history of  depression  and  post-traumatic  stress  disorder,
   including suicidal ideation and low mood.

28. In May 2019, she was referred to the Perinatal Mental Health  Team:  she
   was then 8 weeks pregnant.   She  now  had  two  children  for  whom  she
   provided care: her well being was paramount so that she could look  after
   her children and have security to remain in the United Kingdom.  She  was
   still under the regular care of the South Perinatal  Mental  Health  Team
   'due to frequent depressive  episodes'.   There  is  no  mention  of  the
   appellant's  involvement  with  the  children  or  his  support  for  the
   appellant's ex-partner.

Independent social worker report

29. Ms Nasreen Rashid provided an independent social worker report dated  15
   February 2021.  She had met the family on 9 February 2021 at their family
   home in Birmingham.  She had interviewed the appellant's ex-partner,  but
   not the appellant or his current partner.

30. During her visit, the  appellant  was  in  another  room  with  the  two
   children and Ms Rashid observed him with his children  from  a  distance.
   She thought he was patient: both children were hanging on him and pulling
   his hair, and clearly enjoying playing with the appellant.   He  did  not
   get agitated, which Ms  Rashid  was  glad  to  see.   From  these  'short
   observations and experience' Ms Rashid considered  it  'abundantly  clear
   that both these children share a very close bond with [the appellant] who
   loves them dearly'.   That appears to have been the extent of Ms Rashid's
   interaction with the appellant or the children.

31. Ms Rashid then set out the ex-partner's account  of  her  circumstances,
   of her difficult childhood, and of  her  gratitude  for  the  appellant's
   support.  At [28]  she  noted  that  the  appellant's  ex-partner  had  a
   diagnosis of recurrent  depressive  disorder  and  post-traumatic  stress
   disorder, and had been  admitted  to  hospital  for  treatment  following
   suicidal ideation and low mood.   The appellant had stepped in to provide
   their son with his basic care needs (the daughter was not  yet  born,  it
   seems), allowing the appellant's ex-partner to  focus  on  her  recovery.
   The appellant, according to the appellant's ex-partner, was 'so  in  tune
   with [the boy's] needs that the impact of any change  is  likely  to  not
   only disrupt his stability but also has the potential to destabilise [the
   appellant's ex-partner's] mental health'.

32. The appellant's ex-partner was reluctant to form positive  relationships
   for fear of being located by her birth family and punished for the  shame
   she had brought upon them by leaving her husband  and  not  returning  to
   Israel, where she had been abused by her family as well as  her  husband.
   The appellant's ex-partner felt she  could  not  access  support  in  the
   United Kingdom and being without the appellant would be the  last  straw.
   There is no mention in the  report  of  the  support  being  provided  by
   Birmingham and Solihull Mental  Health  Services,  to  which  the  former
   partner was referred 18 months earlier.

33. Ms Rashid considered that if the appellant were  not  there  to  support
   the appellant's ex-partner, the children were likely  to  be  taken  into
   care.  He was described by the appellant's  ex-partner  as  a  'hands  on
   father', who took the older child to school and after school  activities,
   made home cooked healthy meals, and had daily walks with the family  dog.
     Ms  Rashid  considered  that  the  boy  would  be  at  risk  of  severe
   psychological and behavioural difficulties if he experienced  not  having
   his father as part of his life.

34. Ms Rashid considered that, on the basis of the situation as reported  to
   her, and having regard to Article 8 ECHR

         "45. ...it would seem to be a reasonable decision to make  in  [the
         appellant's] best interests and those of his son that he remains in
         the United Kingdom'.

         46.  The permanent relocation  of  [the  appellant]  is  likely  to
         impact on the stability that currently exists for  [the  child]  as
         well as on ability to form a loving relationship with their primary
         care giver [the appellant's ex-partner].   [The  appellant]  should
         therefore have the right to remain with his family with whom he has
         formed emotional connections."

35. There is no  mention  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  new
   partner and her child.  She was not interviewed and it is unclear whether
   Ms Rashid was aware of her existence as part of this complex and shifting
   family situation.

Other evidence

36. Copies of the appellant's  ex-partner's  and  the  children's  residence
   permits show that they were granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  14
   April 2021, the appellant's ex-partner for 'refugee settlement'  and  the
   children simply  for  'settlement'.   The  daughter's  short  form  birth
   certificate confirms her date of birth but not her parentage.

37. There is a letter from Mrs Gilbert-Silver, the Early  Years  Manager  at
   Priory School in Edgbaston, saying that the appellant's son, who was  now
   attending school, spoke positively of his father and memories  of  family
   activities, including building and woodwork which they did  together.  If
   the father 'were to be separated' Mrs Gilbert-Silver considered  that  it
   was  have  a  significant  impact  on  the   child's   current   positive
   relationship with his father and the child's wellbeing.  It is not  clear
   whether Mrs Gilbert-Silver knew that the  separation  had  already  taken
   place, in April 2019, or whether she was aware that the appellant  had  a
   new partner now.  There is no mention  of  the  appellant  collecting  or
   dropping the child off for school, attending parents' evenings, or  other
   direct school involvement.

Appellant's submissions

38. In his written  submissions,  Mr  Yusuf  appeared  to  accept  that  the
   appellant could not bring himself within the Rules.  He asked  the  Upper
   Tribunal to apply a structured approach to proportionality, balancing the
   need for immigration  control against the effect on  the  appellant,  his
   former partner, and their son  and  now  baby  daughter.   The  appellant
   relied  on  the  emotional  dependency  between  the  appellant  and  his
   children; the close bond developed between  father  and  son  during  the
   appellant's residence in the United Kingdom;

39. At the hearing, Mr Yusuf described the  appellant's  former  partner  as
   'stuck in the United Kingdom'.  He reminded me of  the  contents  of  the
   independent social worker's report, which was recent.  Ms Rashid had  met
   the family to make that report.  In 2019, following their separation, the
   appellant's ex-partner had been hospitalised under the Mental Health Act.
    Mr Yusuf could not point to evidence of which section  of  the  Act  had
   been applied to her.

40. The only support the appellant's ex-partner had was the appellant:  they
   were cordial with each other in the best  interests  of  their  children.
   There  was  a  genuinely  strong  father-son  relationship  between   the
   appellant and his older boy, who would probably have  to  go  into  local
   authority care if the appellant were removed.  The crisis team  had  been
   involved and the appellant's ex-partner was  on  a  high  dose  of  anti-
   depressant medication.  If the children were taken into care, that  would
   place a further burden on the United  Kingdom's  post-pandemic  financial
   position which was unnecessary in the circumstances.

41. Mr Yusuf relied on Zoumbas, Razgar and on KO (Nigeria) and  argued  that
   leave to remain should have been  granted  on  Article  8  grounds.   The
   appellant's breach of immigration  laws was only indirectly  relevant  to
   the best interests of the children.

42. The appellant would rely on the observation of Lady Hale JSC (with  whom
   Lord Neuberger PSC, Lord Kerr JSC and Lord Sumption JSC agreed) in P  (by
   his litigation friend the Official Solicitor) v Cheshire West and Chester
   Council & Anor [2014]  UKSC  19  (19  March  2014)  that  deprivation  of
   physical liberty,  guaranteed  by  Article  5  ECHR,  was  the  same  for
   everyone, whether or not they have physical or  mental  disabilities:  'A
   gilded cage is still a cage'.   It is not entirely clear to me  what  the
   relevance of Article 5 is to this appeal.

Respondent's case

43.  For  the  respondent,  Ms  Cunha  relied  on  her  skeleton   argument.
   Permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted  on  the  limited   basis   of
   consideration of the elder child's best interests if the  appellant  were
   removed.  The appellant had not sought to challenge any other element  of
   the decision.

44. In oral argument, Ms Cunha said that there was no  evidence  before  the
   Upper Tribunal to support a finding that the appellant's  ex-partner  had
   been sectioned under the MHA and Mr Yusuf was not in a position  to  give
   evidence on that.  The evidence was that the appellant's  ex-partner  had
   anxiety, depression,  obsessive-compulsive  disorder  and  post-traumatic
   stress disorder.  The appellant's ex-partner had thrown the appellant out
   of their home when she discovered his affair and that his British citizen
   partner was pregnant.

45. During her time in  hospital  in  2019,  the  appellant  had  been  more
   involved with the children. There  was  no  material  in  the  bundle  to
   indicate  whether  the  appellant's  ex-partner  had  approached   social
   services for help, or about what support  she  received.   There  was  no
   indication that  there  had  been  any  interference  with  her  parental
   responsibility.  The appellant was not back in his ex-partner's life: his
   evidence was that he is still  with  his  new  British  citizen  partner,
   although as it turned out, the child she had was not his child.

46. The best interests of the  appellant's  children  were  to  remain  with
   their mother, his former partner.  They all now had indefinite  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom and were on the  route  to  British  citizen
   status.  There was not insufficient evidence to show  that  removing  the
   appellant would be a  disproportionate  breach  of  the  children's  best
   interests.  Ms Cunha asked me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

47. The appellant has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  leave  since
   February 2013.  Any private  life,  or  family  life  with  a  qualifying
   partner, developed during that period, can be given  little  weight:  see
   section 117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as
   amended).  Neither of his children is a qualifying  child  under  section
   117D, so the 'reasonableness' test in section 117B(6) is  not  applicable
   here.

48. I am concerned, on the facts,  only  with  the  best  interests  of  the
   appellant's two children with his former partner, who came to the  United
   Kingdom as a refugee  but  now  has  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
   appellant's current relationship is with his new British citizen partner,
   not with his former partner.

49. The appellant's former partner  has  a  recurrent  depressive  disorder,
   anxiety, and obsessive compulsive disorder,  as  well  as  post-traumatic
   stress disorder. She takes oral antidepressants.  When she  came  to  the
   United Kingdom in 2014, the appellant's former partner was able to detach
   herself from her abusive husband and successfully seek asylum  here,  and
   she has worked and supported her family,  apart  from  when  she  was  in
   hospital in April 2019.

50. I note that in the appellant's witness statement, he  acknowledges  that
   he is grateful to  his  former  partner  for  allowing  him  to  see  his
   children.  He gave practical support by looking after the  children  when
   his former partner was in hospital in 2019 following their separation.  A
   contact arrangement has been in place since July 2019, which now  extends
   to both children of that relationship.  Things are  calmer  between  them
   now.  The appellant and his son are close, and his son  talks  at  school
   about what they do together.

51. The evidence from Mrs Gilbert-Silver at Priory School does  not  mention
   the appellant dropping the  child  off  for  school  or  collecting  him,
   contrary to the ex-partner's account. Her  account  of  the  relationship
   between father and son is derived only from what the child  says  in  his
   reception class about activities with his father which he enjoys.

52. I have considered the medical and independent  social  worker  evidence.
   Dr Collum, the ex-partner's  GP,  repeats  the  appellant's  ex-partner's
   account of her circumstances.  Apart from confirming the  medication  she
   takes, his letter is hearsay.

53. The evidence of Miss Rebecca Hamblin from the  Birmingham  and  Solihull
   Mental Health Trust (Perinatal Services) confirms that the ex-partner was
   suicidal in April 2019 when she  had  ended  the  relationship  with  the
   appellant.  Miss Hamblin's qualifications are not  given,  nor  her  role
   within the Trust.  The letter seems to have been written to  support  the
   application for 'settled citizenship' made in  January  2021  and  it  is
   striking for not mentioning the appellant  at  all.   The  ex-partner  is
   described as having two children 'that she provides care for'. The  Trust
   is monitoring and reviewing his ex-partner's health regularly because she
   has frequent depressive episodes.

54. The independent  social  worker's  report  records  that  the  appellant
   stepped  in  to  help  his  former  partner  when  she  was  hospitalised
   'following suicidal ideation and low mood'.  She saw the  appellant  with
   the children in the distance for a few minutes,  but  did  not  interview
   him, and she seems completely unaware that far from  being  a  'hands  on
   father' he is living with his new  partner  and  her  baby,  albeit  with
   access to the children.  Her report focuses on the account given  by  the
   appellant's ex-partner: she did not speak to the elder child, nor to  the
   new partner.  I am unable to place much weight on this report, although I
   do accept that the appellant has a role in the life of his  children  and
   that family life continues between them.

55. The question for the Tribunal is whether it  would  be  disproportionate
   to remove the appellant to Albania, having regard to the  best  interests
   of his children with his  former  partner.  The  best  interests  of  his
   children are a primary  consideration  in  the  proportionality  balance,
   because he has family life with them which is  not  affected  by  section
   117B of the 2002 Act.

56. There is no question of those children going  to  live  in  Albania,  or
   anywhere else, because they are settled in the United Kingdom and on  the
   path to citizenship.  They live with their mother, who is  their  primary
   carer and who has the support of the Perinatal Mental  Health  Team,  who
   clearly regard her as fragile and likely to  be  badly  affected  if  her
   right to  stay  in  this  country  is  not  confirmed  by  the  grant  of
   citizenship.  They make no mention of her dependence  on  the  assistance
   which the appellant provides.  The school letter  goes  no  further  than
   recording that the appellant's small son enjoys his activities  with  his
   father and is proud of him.  They do not confirm that he takes the boy to
   and from school.

57.  The  appellant's  relationship  with  his  new  partner  has  not  been
   consistent  across  the  various  hearings.    That   relationship,   her
   pregnancy, and her father's  support,  were  'the  entire  focus  of  the
   evidence' before the First-tier Tribunal.  At the error of law hearing in
   the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Yusuf  said  that  he  was  not  relying  on  the
   relationship at all.

58. In submissions and in his witness statement for the remaking hearing  in
   the Upper Tribunal, Mr Yusuf and the appellant said  that  he  was  in  a
   relationship with his current (British) partner still, although the child
   born to her in March 2020 was  not  his  child.   The  current  partner's
   father took no part in the remaking hearing,  whether  by  letter  or  in
   person.  There is no evidence before me about the best interests of  that
   child.

59. I find that the best interests of all three children  affected  by  this
   appellant's removal are to be with their respective  mothers.   They  are
   all very young and although family life between the appellant and his  5-
   year old son is accepted, that is not sufficient where a child is  not  a
   qualifying child.

60. The appellant is not a refugee.  He has been in the United  Kingdom  for
   9 years without leave.   He accepts that he cannot meet the  requirements
   of  the  Rules.   The  question  is   whether   there   are   exceptional
   circumstances for which he ought to be given leave to remain outside  the
   Rules.   In contrast to the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  the  hearing
   before the Upper Tribunal relies on the mental state of  the  appellant's
   former partner, but I note that apart from her hospitalisation  in  April
   2019, she has been able to keep working, and that she is under  the  care
   of the Perinatal Mental Health Team.  If further help  is  required,  she
   would be able to approach social services for increased support.

61. There are no exceptional circumstances in this appeal  for  which  leave
   to remain should be given outside the Rules.

62. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


DECISION

63. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.


   I remake the decision  in  this  appeal  by  dismissing  the  appellant's
   appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     17 May 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



   -----------------------
[1] Emphasis added

