
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15885/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 12 November 2020                  |On 16 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          VICTORIA DOMINGO BALENTE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge James ('the Judge') promulgated the 3 December 2019 in
       which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by a judge of the Upper
       Tribunal, the operative part of the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:

           "The only ground of appeal available to the appellant  was  that
           the respondent's decision is unlawful  under  s6  of  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998. Although the appellants ability to satisfy  the
           Immigration Rules was not the question to determine by  the  FtT
           Judge,  it  was  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
           determinative, factor when  deciding  whether  such  refusal  is
           proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
           control. The focus of the respondent's decision and the  hearing
           before FtT Judge  was  the  appellant's  relationship  with  her
           partner. Although the appeal was not advanced in this way, it is
           at least arguable that the appellant met  the  requirements  for
           indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence  set
           out in paragraph 276B of the immigration rules. A  finding  that
           the rule was met at least  arguably,  may  have  resulted  in  a
           different outcome.  The remaining grounds appear to have  little
           merit if considered as freestanding grounds, but I do not  limit
           the grant of permission.

    3. In accordance with the  Covid-19  protocol  published  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal directions were sent to  the  parties  indicating  that  the
       question of whether the Judge had made an error of  law  material  to
       the decision to dismiss the appeal could be considered on the  papers
       without a hearing, inviting views upon such a proposal, and providing
       an opportunity for further submissions to be made. Both parties  have
       responded, and their submissions have been carefully considered.
    4. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    6. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34.-


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper
                Tribunal to-


                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an application for permission to bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)    make a consent order disposing of proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

    7. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to  exercise  the
       discretion provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of law  question
       to be determined on the papers.  Nothing on the facts or in law makes
       consideration of the issues on the  papers  not  in  accordance  with
       overriding objectives at this stage.

Background

    8. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on  the  16  April
       1979 who entered the United Kingdom lawfully as a Tier 4 student  and
       who was subsequently granted leave to remain as a spouse valid to  18
       November  2018.  On  15  October  2018,  the  appellant  applied  for
       Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) as a  spouse.  The  application  was
       refused by the respondent for the reasons  set  out  at  [4]  of  the
       Judge's decision.
    9. The Judge sets out his findings of fact from [10]. At [12] the  Judge
       records "The main issue to address during this  hearing  was  whether
       the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  subsisting  relationship  with   her
       husband". The Judge records in the same paragraph that the  appellant
       appeared either unable or unwilling to provide basic  information  to
       simple questions, despite being given repeated opportunities to do so
       on the same topic.
   10. At [26] Judge writes:

           "In summary not a single question posed  to  the  wife  and  the
           husband married  up.  These  contradictions  and  discrepancies,
           together with the lack of easily available evidence not  adduced
           in support, and also the lack of any  witnesses  to  attend  the
           hearing in support of their relationship, wedding  ceremony  and
           marriage, and lack of witness statements, materially  undermines
           the assertions made by the Appellant and her husband  that  this
           was a genuine marriage, that was ongoing and  subsisting.  I  do
           not accept that it is. Therefore this appeal fails."

   11. At [28] the Judge finds that neither witness was a witness of truth.
   12. The Judge finds the appellant had not established she has family life
       in the United Kingdom recognised by article 8 ECHR  and  went  on  to
       consider the  appellant's  private  life  in  a  properly  structured
       manner. Having done so the Judge concludes the decision to remove  is
       proportionate leading to the appeal being dismissed.

The written submissions

   13. The appellant's submissions are written  by  Lara  Simak  of  12  Old
       Square Chambers,  who  was  not  the  advocate  who  represented  the
       appellant before the Judge.
   14. It is contended on the appellants behalf that an examination  of  her
       immigration history show she completed  10  years  continuous  lawful
       leave in the United Kingdom on 9 September 2019 and that at the  date
       of the refusal of the application for ILR as a spouse  of  a  British
       citizen, on 10 September 2019, the appellant was entitled to a  grant
       of leave pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  It  is
       asserted on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  she  met  all  the  long
       residence requirements for such a grant.
   15. Whilst expressing disagreement with the finding  she  was  not  in  a
       subsisting marriage the appellant asserts her entitlement to  ILR  on
       the basis of long residence is not dependent upon the  continuity  or
       quality of her marriage as her leave continued pursuant to section 3C
       Immigration Act 1971 for the duration of the appeal process.
   16. The appellant seeks to rely on the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
       OA [2019] UKUT 65, by reference the first headnote, although the full
       headnote reads:

           "(1)   In a human rights appeal under section  82(1)(b)  of  the
                Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, a finding that
                a person (P) satisfies  the  requirements  of  a  particular
                immigration rule, so as to be entitled to leave  to  remain,
                means that (provided Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged),  the
                Secretary of  State  will  not  be  able  to  point  to  the
                importance of maintaining immigration controls as  a  factor
                weighing  in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
                proportionality balance, so far as that  factor  relates  to
                the particular immigration rule that the judge has found  to
                be satisfied.


           (2)    The fact that P completes ten  years'  continuous  lawful
                residence during the course of P's human rights appeal  will
                generally constitute a "new matter" within  the  meaning  of
                section 85 of the 2002 Act. The  completion  of  ten  years'
                residence will normally have a material bearing on the  sole
                ground of appeal that can be  advanced  in  a  human  rights
                appeal; namely, whether the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
                State to refuse P's human rights  claim  is  unlawful  under
                section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998.  This  is  because
                paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules  provides  that  a
                person with such  a  period  of  residence  is  entitled  to
                indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, so long as
                the other requirements of that paragraph are met.


           (3)    Where the judge concludes that the ten years' requirement
                is satisfied and there is nothing to indicate an application
                for indefinite leave to remain by P would be  likely  to  be
                rejected by the Secretary of State, the judge  should  allow
                P's human rights appeal, unless the judge is satisfied there
                is a discrete public interest factor which would still  make
                P's removal proportionate. Absent such factors, it would  be
                disproportionate to remove P  or  require  P  to  leave  the
                United Kingdom before  P  is  reasonably  able  to  make  an
                application for indefinite leave to remain.


           (4)    Leaving aside whether P has any other Article 8  argument
                to deploy (besides paragraph 276B) and in the absence of any
                policy  to  give  successful  human  rights   appellants   a
                particular period of limited leave,  all  the  Secretary  of
                State is required to do in such a case is grant P  a  period
                of leave sufficient to enable P to make the application  for
                indefinite leave to remain. If P subsequently fails to  make
                such an application, P will continue to be subject  to  such
                limited leave as the  Secretary  of  State  has  granted  in
                consequence of the allowing of the human rights appeal."

   17. The appellant asserts it was readily ascertainable  to  a  reasonably
       informed decision maker, and clearly known to  the  respondent,  that
       the appellant had entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 10 September
       2009,  indicating  potential  entitlement  to  long  residence  on  9
       September 2019. The appellant asserts that the application  made  was
       for ILR and that on no reasonable assessment can it be said that  her
       assertion of an entitlement to leave on the basis of  long  residence
       is a new matter.
   18. The appellant asserts the only reasonable outcome of the human rights
       appeal was that it should have been allowed.
   19. For the Secretary of State Mr Tan submits in relation to the  10-year
       ILR point, that it is accepted the decision under appeal  before  the
       Judge dated 10 September 2019 did not consider paragraph 276B. It  is
       submitted the application for ILR was on the  basis  of  marriage  on
       application form SET(M) and not an application for a grant of ILR  on
       the basis of long residence for which form SET(LR) is relevant.
   20. It is  submitted  that  at  no  point  did  the  appellant  vary  her
       application or request that the application include consideration  of
       paragraph  276B,  which  would  have  required  a  consideration   of
       different issues to those relating to an application  under  Appendix
       FM or paragraph 287 including, for example, consideration of  whether
       such residence was continuous.
   21.  The  respondent  asserts  any  application  to  vary   an   existing
       application would also have to satisfy the requirements of  paragraph
       34E and F with reference to paragraph 34.
   22. The Secretary of State asserts that despite being represented at  all
       stages the appellant failed to vary her application or submit further
       grounds or at the appeal stage to  ask  the  Secretary  of  State  to
       consider whether she was entitled to ILR on the  basis  of  10  years
       continuous lawful residence, which was at that stage a "new matter".
   23. The respondent also notes that at the date  of  the  application,  15
       October 2018, not only was  the  application  not  made  pursuant  to
       paragraph 276B but the appellant had not acquired 10 years continuous
       lawful residence which would have required the appellant  to  make  a
       specific request to vary the application to  take  into  account  the
       different aspect that had subsequently arisen.
   24. The respondent asserts the Judge cannot be criticised for failing  to
       consider a matter that was not considered and  decided  upon  by  the
       Secretary of State, nor asked to do so by the appellant,  nor  raised
       as a new matter before the Judge.

Error of law

   25. The question that this stage is not whether the appellant is entitled
       to a grant of ILR on the basis of  long  residence  but  whether  the
       Judge erred in law in a manner material to the  decision  to  dismiss
       the appeal on human rights grounds.
   26. If no arguable legal error is made out the appeal must  be  dismissed
       although it may  remain  open  to  the  appellant  to  make  a  fresh
       application if she believes she is entitled to ILR on  the  basis  of
       long residence.
   27. I find the claim to be entitled to ILR on that basis  to  be  a  'new
       matter' as it was not an issue raised by the appellant and her SET(M)
       application form, there is no evidence that the appellant  sought  to
       amend the application or  to  ask  the  respondent  to  consider  any
       additional entitlement on the basis the 10 year period had  allegedly
       been acquired on 9 December 2019, there was no application  to  amend
       the grounds of appeal or to ask the Judge, with the permission of the
       respondent, to consider and make findings  upon  this  issue  at  the
       hearing. Whilst a  representative  who  had  no  involvement  in  the
       proceedings prior to the determination dismissing the appeal may take
       a view the appeal should have been allowed, that does not  alter  the
       factual matrix set out above.
   28. In Mahmud (S85 NIAA 2002 - "new matters") [2017] UKUT  488  (IAC)  it
       was held that (i) Whether something is or is not a 'new matter'  goes
       to the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and  the
       First-tier Tribunal must therefore determine for  itself  the  issue;
       (ii)     A 'new matter' is a matter which  constitutes  a  ground  of
       appeal of a kind  listed  in  section  84,  as  required  by  section
       85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting a ground of appeal means that
       it must contain a matter which could  raise  or  establish  a  listed
       ground of appeal.  A matter is the factual substance of a  claim.   A
       ground of appeal is the legal basis on which the facts in  any  given
       matter could form the basis of a  challenge  to  the  decision  under
       appeal; (iii)    In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which
       has not previously been considered by the Secretary of State  in  the
       context of the decision in section 82(1) or a statement made  by  the
       appellant  under  section  120.   This  requires  the  matter  to  be
       factually distinct from that previously raised by  an  appellant,  as
       opposed to further or better evidence of  an  existing  matter.   The
       assessment will always  be  fact  sensitive.   Examples  were  given.
       Where a relationship had previously been relied on and considered  by
       the SSHD then the fact the couple had married would be  new  evidence
       but not a new matter.  Conversely the fact the couple had a child was
       likely to be a new matter.  Actual consideration in a decision letter
       of the new factual matrix relied upon is required for a matter not to
       be a "new matter".
   29. The Upper Tribunal in OA found that the fact an  appellant  completes
       ten years' continuous lawful residence during  the  course  of  their
       human rights appeal will generally constitute a "new  matter"  within
       the meaning of section 85 of the 2002 Act.
   30. There is nothing submitted on behalf of the  appellant  to  establish
       that any entitlement to ILR on  the  basis  of  10  years  continuous
       lawful residents does not constitute a "new matter" on the fact  that
       this appeal. The appellant's submissions appear to be an  attempt  to
       circumvent the requirements  of  section  85  by  arguing  that  just
       because this fact arose it should have been considered by  the  Judge
       despite the fact it was a new matter and there was no request for the
       Judge to do so or variation of the application for leave.
   31. Headnote 3 of OA records the finding that "Where the judge  concludes
       that the ten years' requirement is satisfied and there is nothing  to
       indicate an application for indefinite leave to remain by P would  be
       likely to be rejected by the Secretary of  State,  the  judge  should
       allow P's human rights appeal, unless the judge is satisfied there is
       a discrete public interest factor which would still make P's  removal
       proportionate.." A Judge might conclude the  10-year  requirement  is
       satisfied if this arises in a situation in which the Judge  is  asked
       to make such a finding.  That  will,  of  course,  include  not  only
       consideration  of  the  period  of  stay  but  also  whether  it  was
       continuous. That does not assist the appellant in this  case  as  the
       Judge was not asked to make any such a finding and did not  therefore
       conclude that the 10 years requirement was satisfied.
   32. I agree with the submission of  Mr  Tan  that  the  Judge  cannot  be
       criticised for failing to consider a matter that was not raised as an
       issue in the decision under challenge before  the  Judge,  and  which
       neither the Judge nor Secretary of State was asked to consider by the
       appellant; nor raised as a new matter before the First-tier Tribunal.
        No arguable legal error material to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal arises on this point.
   33. The appellant also seeks to challenge the  factual  findings  of  the
       Judge, but that challenge is without  arguable  merit  and  fails  to
       establish material legal error.
   34. The Judge had the benefit of seeing and hearing oral  evidence  being
       given in addition to the documentary evidence and attached the weight
       to  that  evidence  that  was  considered  appropriate  in  all   the
       circumstances. The Judge considered the article  8  assessment  in  a
       properly structured manner. The first question to be  considered  was
       whether the appellant had established the existence  of  a  protected
       right. The Judges conclusion that the appellant had  not  established
       the existence of family life recognised by article 8  is  a  decision
       within the range of those open to the  Judge  on  the  evidence.  The
       Judge  sets  out  findings  leading  to  that  conclusion  which  are
       supported by adequate reasons. The weight to be given to the evidence
       was a matter for the  Judge.  Thereafter  the  Judge  considered  the
       appellant's private life.
   35. It is not made out the Judge failed to consider all  relevant  aspect
       of  the  proportionality  exercise,  in  relation  to  ties  to   the
       Philippines noting at [30]:

           "30.   The Appellant confirmed that she retains close  links  to
                her home country, due to the  concerns  about  the  father's
                health and that she is  close  to  her  brother  there.  The
                Appellant  has  sufficient  funds  and  skills  learned  and
                acquired in the UK, to return to her home  country,  and  is
                able to be supported  in  family  accommodation,  until  she
                obtain a job in her own country. There are no  letters  from
                NGO's, religious institutions, family or friends in the  UK,
                other than the mother in law,  which  I  do  not  accept  is
                credible in light of the above adverse finding  and  failure
                to attend  to  be  subject  to  cross-examination.  It  thus
                appears that the Appellant works  long  hours  at  her  care
                assistant job, and has little other  life,  other  than  her
                studies which she fails to provide evidence of,  other  than
                the mandatory language tests."

   36. There was nothing before the Judge or in the grounds of  appeal  that
       establishes there are any very significant obstacles  to  integration
       for  the  appellant  in  her  home  state.  The  appellant  left  the
       Philippines aged 30, is  familiar  with  the  language  and  culture,
       retains links, and did not establish the  appropriate  threshold  has
       been crossed, let alone reached, on the facts.
   37. The Judge also considered the appellant's ties to the United  Kingdom
       and clearly undertook a proper balancing exercise.  Having  done  so,
       the Judge concluded  the  respondent's  decision  was  proportionate.
       Whilst the appellant disagrees with that and wishes to remain in  the
       United Kingdom, the ground's  fails  to  establish  the  decision  is
       outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge  on  the
       evidence. No arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss
       the appeal on human rights grounds is made out sufficient to  warrant
       the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this appeal.




Decision

   38. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   39. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed..................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 12 November 2020

