
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15711/2019 (V)
                                                           HU/15712/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2020                   |On 5 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                             Mr Md Ibrahim Jahan
                             Mrs Sabina Yeasmin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Saint Martin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  They are a married couple with
two children who were born in the UK in September 2015 and June 2017.  The
first appellant came to the UK on 9 October 2009 as a student.  He was
joined by the second appellant, whose appeal is dependent on his, in June
2014.

On 14 February 2019 the appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK on
the basis of their private lives.  The application was refused on 9 October
2019.  They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where their appeal was
heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Widdup. In a decision promulgated
on 27 November 2019 Judge Widdup dismissed their appeal.  The appellants
are now appealing against that decision.

At around the same time as appealing against the decision of Judge Widdup,
the first appellant made separate submissions to the respondent maintaining
that the conditions of Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules were
satisfied as he had accrued ten years' continuous lawful residence in the
UK.  The respondent refused that application.  The ensuing appeal was heard
- and dismissed - by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James on 20 February
2020. Permission to appeal against the decision of Judge James was refused
and the first appellant is now appeals right exhausted in respect of that
appeal.

The Decision of Judge James

The first appellant conceded in the appeal before Judge James that he had
not accrued ten years lawful continuous residence and therefore did not
meet the requirements of Paragraph 276B. Before me, Mr Slatter did not seek
to go behind this concession. I pause to note that after the hearing (on 22
October 2020) Hoque & Ors v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2020] EWCA Civ 1357 was promulgated. This Court of Appeal judgment
clarifies the interpretation and construction of Paragraph 276B. Applying
this judgment, it is clear that the conditions of Paragraph 276B were not
met by the first appellant. I am satisfied, therefore, that the concession
was properly made.

Judge James found that it would not be disproportionate under Article 8(2)
for the first appellant and his family to be removed from the UK.  The
decision contains a detailed assessment of the first appellant's (and his
family's) circumstances, including the best interests of his children.
Judge James found at paragraphs 32 - 33 that:

"32. The wife and  the  appellant  retain  their  family  networks,  social,
religious and linguistic  ties  to  Bangladesh,  with  their  immediate  and
extended family members on an ongoing  basis,  further  bolstered  by  their
links to the Bangladesh Diaspora in UK.

         33.  Both children's best interests are met by remaining with their
         parents their mother being their primary carer at the ages of 2 and
         4 years of age.  The eldest may have  commenced  attending  nursery
         school recently in 2019 however the child  is  not  at  a  critical
         juncture in her educational pathway.   It  is  not  claimed  either
         child has healthcare or other issues  and  their  private  life  is
         minimal at this age being centred around their  primary  carer  and
         their life being within the home  and  domestic  sphere.  That  the
         majority of their  peer  group  tend  to  be  from  the  Bangladesh
         Diaspora and that it is not claimed they do not speak their  mother
         tongue, the children have retained a sense of  their  heritage,  as
         well as their linguistic and cultural background.  To  be  reunited
         with their extended family members in Bangladesh is a positive, and
         they will have the support of their parents to integrate into their
         home country where they will have all the rights  and  benefits  as
         citizens  of  that  country  including  access  to  healthcare  and
         education."

The Decision of Judge Widdup

Judge Widdup did not consider Paragraph 276B, as the respondent did not
consent to the issue (it being a "new matter") being considered.

Judge Widdup assessed whether there were very significant obstacles under
paragraph 276ADE(I)(vi) to appellants' integration into Bangladesh and
concluded that there were not.

Judge Widdup did not assess the best interests of the appellants' children
or whether removal would be disproportionate under article 8(2) ECHR. At
paragraph 50 he stated:

"I do not find that Article 8 is engaged.  No removal directions  have  been
issued  and  there  is  therefore  no  interference  or  imminent  risk   of
interference with the  appellants'  family  life.   The  dismissal  of  this
appeal will also not bring to an  end  the  lawfulness  of  the  appellants'
right to reside in the UK by reason of the application which has  been  made
under 276B in respect of which a decision is pending."

Analysis

The grounds of appeal argue that Judge Widdup erred by not carrying out a
sufficiently detailed assessment of obstacles to integration in Bangladesh
and by failing to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.

Permission to appeal was granted only in respect of the latter: that is,
that Judge Widdup arguably erred in not assessing proportionality outside
the Immigration Rules.

On 21 August 2020 the respondent submitted a Rule 24 response stating that
whilst the assessment of very significant obstacles was sound it was
accepted that it was an error of law to fail to consider Article 8.  The
respondent also gave consent to consideration of the appellants' claim
under Rule 276B.

I heard submissions from Mr Slatter on behalf of the appellant and Mr
Whitwell on behalf of the respondent.

At the outset of the hearing, I raised with the parties that in the light
of the Rule 24 response there had been a concession that the judge
materially erred and it was now appropriate for me to hear submissions in
respect of the remaking of the appeal.  Mr Whitwell agreed. Mr Slatter
proposed that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. The
directions dated 6 August 2020 state that there is a presumption that in
the event of the Upper Tribunal deciding that the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is to be set aside as erroneous in law the remaking of the
decision will take place at the same hearing.  No reason has been given as
to why this presumption should not apply. I therefore proceed to remake the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Mr Slatter accepted that the decision of Judge James must be a starting
point for my decision, in accordance with the principles in Devaseelan
(Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT
00702. He acknowledged that he was in difficulty because no further
evidence had been filed or served since the decision of Judge James.  I
asked Mr Slatter if, given the absence of any new evidence, there was a
basis upon which I could reach a decision contrary to that of Judge James.
He accepted that there was not. This is clearly correct because it is made
plain in Devaseelan at [39] that a previous decision (in this case, the
decision of Judge James) stands as an authoritative assessment of the
appellant's status at the time it was made. Therefore, in order for me to
depart from the conclusion of Judge James there must be at least some
evidence that was not before, or was not considered by, Judge James.
However, there is no such evidence before me.  Accordingly, reaching a
different conclusion than Judge James would be inconsistent with
Devaseelan. It follows therefore that the appellants' appeal must be
dismissed.

In any event, even if (which it is not) it were open to me to ignore the
decision of Judge James and reach my own conclusion, I would have reached
the same conclusion as Judge James for the reasons he gave in paragraphs 32
and 33 of his decision (see paragraph 5 above).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is set
aside. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal.


Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan   29 October 2020
