
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15875/2017
     HU/00215/2018
     HU/00216/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 20 June 2019                      |
|Prepared 10 June 2019                |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                          Mrs D A (FIRST APPELLANT)
                      MASTER S Sh S (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       MASTER S Sa S (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Dolan, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Aston
                    Bond Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellants appeal with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Fowell who, in a determination  promulgated  on
    17 August  2018,  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the  appellants  against
    decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse them leave to  enter
    under the provisions of the Immigration Rules  and  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

2.    The first appellant, who was born on 24 December 1978, is  the  mother
    of the second and third appellants who were born on 18 May 2001 and  15
    August 2002. They  are  citizens  of  Afghanistan  who  are  living  in
    Pakistan.  The first appellant's husband and the father of  the  second
    and third appellants is missing and presumed dead: he was last seen  in
    2016. The first appellant applied for entry clearance as the  dependent
    relative of her brother, Dr T A, who is settled here as are  their  two
    brothers and their parents. All of  the  first  appellant's  family  in
    Britain now have British citizenship, and they wish the first appellant
    and her children to join them.

3.     The notice of refusal of the first appellant's application stated:-

           . "You have not made any statement or provided any evidence  you
             require long term personal care to perform everyday tasks.   I
             therefore refuse your application under  Appendix  FM  to  the
             Immigration Rules paragraph E-ECDR.1.1(E-ECDR.2.4).


           . I have considered your rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
             Article 8 of the ECHR is a qualified right proportionate  with
             the need to  maintain  an  effective  immigration  and  border
             control and decisions under the Immigration Rules  are  deemed
             to be compliant with human rights legislation.   Although  you
             may have a family life with the sponsor  I  am  satisfied  the
             decision is proportionate under Article 8(2).   I note that no
             satisfactory reason has been put forward as to why the sponsor
             in the UK is unable to travel to Pakistan to be with  you.   I
             am therefore satisfied the decision is justified by  the  need
             to maintain an effective immigration and border control.


           . It has also been considered whether the application raises any
             exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to
             respect for private and family life contained in Article 8  of
             the ECHR, might warrant a grant  of  entry  clearance  to  the
             United Kingdom outside the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.    You   have   not   raised   any   such   exceptional
             circumstances, so it has been decided  that  your  application
             does not fall for a  grant  of  entry  clearance  outside  the
             rules".

4.   The first of the brothers to  come  to  Britain  entered  in  2000  and
    although his  application  for  asylum  was  unsuccessful  he  obtained
    indefinite leave to remain and in due course became a British  citizen.
     He has worked in Britain undertaking intelligence work  and  has  also
    worked on behalf of the  International  Security  Assistance  Force  in
    Afghanistan.  His parents were attacked and threatened in 2012  and  on
    that basis his two brothers, who were in Britain  as  students,  sought
    and were granted asylum.   Their parents and therefore the  parents  of
    the first appellant entered as elderly dependent relatives.  The  judge
    described the three brothers as talented and successful individuals who
    had made an important contribution to society in Britain.  In paragraph
    9 of the determination, having set out the basis of the claim the judge
    stated that:-

         "It is not enough however for Mrs A to show that the rules  are  or
         were met ... the only right of appeal is on human rights grounds".

    The judge then set out the terms of Article 8.   The  judge  noted  the
    evidence of the sponsor who stated that the  first  appellant  suffered
    from  depression,  anxiety  and  anorexia  and  had  been  seen  by   a
    psychiatrist. She was always tearful and anxious about  her  future  in
    Pakistan and was on medication.   His evidence was  that  she  was  now
    living in Peshawar and  spoke  Farsi  and  basic  Pashtu,  but  it  was
    recognisable that she was not from Pakistan.   It  was  submitted  that
    the children would come within the provisions of paragraph 297  of  the
    Immigration Rules but  in  any  event  the  principal  appellant  could
    succeed as a dependent relative given her illnesses. It was  emphasised
    that the three brothers would be at risk if they returned to  Pakistan.
    Reference was  made  to  the  position  of  single  women  in  Pakistan
    including a Home Office Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  headed
    "Women fearing gender based harm/violence, Pakistan, February 2016".


5.   From paragraphs 19 onwards of the determination the judge set  out  his
    findings and conclusions.  In paragraph 20 he stated that "the decision
    of the Home Office can only be  overturned  on  human  rights  grounds.
    This requires there to be family life between  the  appellant  and  her
    brother".   The judge then set out relevant case  law  before  pointing
    out that the principal appellant had  never  shared  a  home  with  her
    brother or any of  her  brothers  since  childhood  and  that  although
    financial support was accepted, the judge pointed out that there was no
    evidence of visits by any of the brothers  and  stated  that  there  is
    nothing to indicate a real risk of harm to them if they visited her  in
    Peshawar.    He  accepted  that  the  first  appellant  was   receiving
    counselling before concluding that  the  medical  treatment  which  the
    first appellant was receiving was not  a  real  basis  to  suggest  the
    original decision was incorrect under the Immigration Rules.  The judge
    then considered the position of the children, but pointed out that they
    would not be entitled to come to Britain without their mother and there
    was no evidence of extreme circumstances which  would  mean  that  that
    would be appropriate in any event.   The judge  pointed  out  that  the
    family had moved to Peshawar in 1993 long before the children were born
    and that they were now aged 16 and 17.


6.   The ju6dge noted difficulties faced by lone women in Pakistan and  then
    said that the dependent relative Rules applied only to parents  of  the
    sponsor and therefore that route was not open to  her.    Having  again
    referred to the application of Article 8 of the ECHR the  judge  stated
    that the appellant could not be said to be exercising family life  with
    the sponsor and therefore could not meet  the   basis  requirements  of
    Article 8.1.  He then dismissed the appeal.


7.   The grounds of appeal firstly pointed out that the judge had  erred  in
    stating that the Rules only applied to elderly dependent relatives  and
    had ignored the fact that paragraph ECDR.2.1 of the  Rules  had  stated
    that an applicant must be:-

         "(a) parent aged 18 years or over;


         (b)  grandparent;


         (c)  brother or sister aged 18 years or over;


         (d)  son or daughter aged 18 or over of a  person  ("the  sponsor")
             who is in the UK."

    It was argued that as the judge had completely missed out  sub-Sections
    (b), (c) and (d) of the Rules submitted that the error in omitting sub-
    Section (c) had led the judge into error  when  the  judge  had  stated
    that:-

         "Since Mrs A is not the parent of her sponsor  that  route  is  not
         open to her, even if the other conditions were satisfied".

    It was stated that that error had led the judge to fail to engage  with
    the  material  which  was  produced  at  the  hearing   regarding   the
    appellant's health conditions, her inability to perform everyday  tasks
    and the precarious and dangerous situation she found herself  in  as  a
    lone Afghan woman in Pakistan.


8.   The second ground of appeal related to the application of  the  country
    guidance  in  SM  (Lone  Women  -  Ostracism)  Pakistan   [2016]   UKUT
    00067(IAC).  It was submitted  that  any  assessment  of  international
    protection required a specific assessment of  the  nature,  source  and
    scope of the risk to the applicant at the date of the  hearing,  taking
    into account whether the woman in question would have family support or
    a male protector, was educated, wealthy or older or capable of internal
    relocation to one of the larger cities.   The grounds also argued  that
    the judge  had  not  properly  taken  into  consideration  the  medical
    evidence relating to the appellant and the difficulties the appellant's
    brothers would have in visiting her in Pakistan.

9.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blundell granted permission stating:-

         "2.  This is an unusual case.   The  first  appellant  seeks  entry
             clearance to join her brothers in  the  UK.   The  second  and
             third appellant's - her sons - seek to accompany her.  It  was
             submitted that  the  first  appellant  could  meet  the  Adult
             Dependent Relative ("ADR") Requirements of Appendix  FM;  that
             the second and third appellants met paragraph  297;  and  that
             their continued exclusion was in breach of Article 8 of ECHR.


         3.   It is clearly  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  the  way
             suggested in ground one. He proceeded at [31] - [32],  on  the
             basis that the ADR provisions only apply to  parents,  whereas
             paragraph E-ECDR2.1 is not so confined. I consider  the  other
             grounds to be  less  meritorious  but  nevertheless  arguable.
             Notwithstanding the apparent merit in ground one, it  is  only
             with circumspection that I have granted permission.  The judge
             concluded at [24] that there is no family  life  in  existence
             between the first  appellant  and  the  sponsors  in  the  UK.
             Applying the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Charles  [2018]
             Imm AR 911, it might legitimately be suggested that any  error
             in relation to the Rules was immaterial as a  result  of  that
             finding.    The  remaining   grounds   might   bear   on   the
             sustainability  of  that   finding,   however,   and   it   is
             consequently appropriate to leave the question of  materiality
             for the Upper Tribunal".

10.  This appeal first came before  Deputy  UT  Judge  Peart  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 14 December 2018.   He adjourned  the  appeal  but  in  his
    directions stated that family life was still of relevance and  directed
    that  the  appellant's  representatives  serve  a   skeleton   argument
    addressing how it was that given acceptance that there  was  no  family
    life at present Article 8 family life was still relevant.   The  appeal
    again came before Judge Peart and was again adjourned  by  him  because
    the skeleton argument had not  been  submitted.  At  that  hearing,  he
    stated that there would have to be a decision on whether or  not  there
    should be a wasted costs order.   I confirm for the avoidance of  doubt
    that I do not consider that a wasted costs order would  be  appropriate
    in the circumstances of this case.


11.  At the hearing before me, Mr Dolan stated that he wished to argue  that
    the appellant should succeed both within and outside  the  Rules.    He
    pointed to the error of law that the judge had made in stating that  an
    adult sister could not meet the requirements of the Rules.   He  stated
    that dependency was an element of family  life.   He  stated  that  the
    first appellant was a lone female and head of the  household  and  that
    she was in danger in Pakistan because of her family associations.   Her
    husband had been abducted in February 2016 and that she was living in a
    rented house in  Huydabad.   He  stated  that  there  were  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances in this case particularly  because  of  her
    brother's previous employment and the fact that he would not be able to
    return to Pakistan.


12.  Mr Melvin relied on a Rule 24 statement stating that Article  8(1)  was
    not engaged and there was nothing to show the Rules could be  met.   It
    was impossible to see how any appeal could  succeed.   He  stated  that
    there was nothing to state that the appellant's brothers could  not  go
    to Pakistan to see her and there was nothing  to  indicate  exceptional
    and compassionate circumstances.  There was in effect  no  family  life
    with which there could be interference.  He stated that the finding  in
    the determination that there were nothing more than normal family  ties
    between adult siblings had  not  been  challenged  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.



Discussion


13.  When granting permission, Judge at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Blundell
    correctly  pointed  out  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  his
    consideration of paragraph ECDR.2.1 of the Rules.   It is possible  for
    a sister of a sponsor to qualify as a dependent relative.   The central
    issue before me, however, is whether or not that error was material and
    that the first appellant could qualify for leave  to  enter  under  the
    dependent relative provisions of the Rules and under the provisions  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  While I consider  that  the  judge  could  have
    considered in greater detail the circumstances of the  first  appellant
    and her sons in Pakistan, the judge did consider the factors set out in
    paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of  the  Rules  and  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the first appellant did not require, as the  result  of
    age, illness or disability, long term personal care to perform everyday
    tasks in the country where she is living.  Other factors  to  be  taken
    into consideration would of course have been that the  first  appellant
    has lived in Pakistan since 1993 long before her  sons  were  born  and
    that her sons have grown up there. Indeed she was  living  in  Pakistan
    with her husband until 2016 when he disappeared.    She is not a person
    who is living in a camp but  is  living  in  a  rented  house  and  she
    receives funds from Britain which are sufficient for  her  to  have  an
    appropriate standard of living.

14.   In these circumstances I can only conclude that there was no error  of
    law in the judge's decision to conclude that the  appellant  would  not
    qualify for leave to enter as a dependent relative.   She  simply  does
    not meet the threshold required by the rules.   This  is  of  course  a
    human rights appeal and central to that issue is  whether  or  not  the
    appellants' rights under Article 8 are infringed by the decision.    It
    appeared to have been put to Judge Peart that there was  potential  for
    the first appellant's rights under Article 8 to  be  engaged,  but  the
    reality is that the judge was correct to  conclude  that  there  is  no
    interference with the rights of the first appellant under Article  8  -
    she has not lived under the same roof as her parents  or  siblings  for
    well over twenty years, having formed her  own  family  unit  with  her
    husband.  Her sons have never lived with their grandparents or  uncles.
    I can only conclude that the judge was correct to find that  Article  8
    was not engaged, but in any event the  judge  did  go  on  to  consider
    whether or not the decision was proportionate  and  concluded  that  it
    was.   Given all the facts of this case that was a conclusion which was
    fully open to him.  I would add that given the length of time that  the
    first appellant has lived in Pakistan the country guidance in SM  which
    applies to lone women being returned to Pakistan rather than women  who
    have always lived there or lived there  most  of  their  lives  is  not
    relevant to her particular situation.   Indeed,  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that this appellant's position in Pakistan is insecure.     It
    follows therefore that the first appellant cannot qualify for leave  to
    enter either under the Rules or under the provisions of  Article  8  of
    the ECHR outside the Rules.  Given that the second and third appellants
    are living with their mother in Pakistan it is simply not the case they
    could come within the provisions of paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and furthermore the reality is that they cannot qualify under the
    provisions of Article 8 outside the rules.  The  determination  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Charles [2018] IAR 911. is also clearly applicable. I
    therefore conclude that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  his
    decision dismissing this appeal shall stand.


Decision.

         This appeal is dismissed  under  both  the  immigration  rules  and
    under the provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]                      Date: 13 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

