
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15920/2019_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 9 September 2020                  |On 14 September 2020                 |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                               Mr Eduard Domi
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


This is a decision on the papers without a hearing. The appellant  requested
an oral hearing by remote means.  No  submissions  were  received  from  the
respondent on this issue. The documents described at paras  4  and  7  below
were submitted. A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing was not held  for
the reasons given at paras 9-26 below. The order made is set out at para  53
below. (Administrative Instruction  No.  2  from  the  Senior  President  of
Tribunals).


Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, of Counsel, instructed by Malik &  Malik
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    (No submissions received)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Albania born  on  16  July  1982,  appeals
    against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  Lodge
    (hereafter the "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated  on  10  January
    2020 following a hearing on 30 December 2019, dismissed his  appeal  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8) against a decision of  the  respondent
    of 5 September 2019 to refuse his application of 6  December  2018  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  in
    a decision signed on 7 April 2020 and sent to the parties by  email  on
    an unknown date.

 3. On 23 June 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent to the  parties  a  "Note  and
    Directions" issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley dated 22 June 2020.
    Para 1 of the "Note and Directions" stated that, in light of  the  need
    to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, Judge Lindsley  had
    reached the provisional view, having reviewed the file  in  this  case,
    that it would be appropriate to determine questions (a) and (b) set out
    at para 1 of her "Note & Directions", reproduced at my para 8(i)(a) and
    (b) below,  without  a  hearing.  Judge  Lindsley  gave  the  following
    directions:

         (i)  Para 2 of the "Note and Directions"  issued  directions  which
         provided  for  the  party  who  had  sought  permission   to   make
         submissions in support of the assertion of an error of law  and  on
         the question whether the decision of the FtT should be set aside if
         error of law is found, no later than 14 days after  the  "Note  and
         Directions" was sent to the parties; for any other  party  to  file
         and serve submissions in response, no later than 21 days after  the
         "Note and  Directions"  was  sent;  and,  if  such  submissions  in
         response were made, for the party who sought permission to  file  a
         reply no later than 28 days after the  "Note  and  Directions"  was
         sent.

         (ii) Para 3 of the "Note and Directions" stated that any party  who
         considered that despite the  foregoing  directions  a  hearing  was
         necessary to consider questions (a) and (b) may submit reasons  for
         that view no later than 21 days after the "Note and Directions"  is
         sent to the parties.

 4. In response to the directions in the "Note and Directions",  the  Upper
    Tribunal  has  received  the  following  documents  submitted  on   the
    appellant's behalf under cover of an email 7 July 2020 timed at 21:21:

         (i)  a document entitled: "Appellant's Written Submissions "  dated
         7 July 2020 by Mr Dhanji; and

         (ii) a copy of a Child Arrangements Order ("CAO") dated 17 February
         2020  made  by  the  Family  Court  at  Luton  in  respect  of  the
         appellant's children, a boy hereafter referred to as "E", born on 8
         June 2016, and a girl hereafter referred to as "M", born on 28 July
         2017.

 5. No evidence has been submitted to show that the consent of  the  Family
    Court was obtained in  order  to  submit  the  document  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the instant appeal.

 6. In any event, as the CAO post-dates  the  decision  of  the  Judge,  it
    cannot be relied upon in order to establish that the  Judge  materially
    erred in law.

 7. No submissions  have  been  received  on  the  respondent's  behalf  in
    response to the directions in the "Note  and  Directions",  whether  in
    relation to questions (a) and (b) or in relation to whether  the  Upper
    Tribunal should proceed to decide  questions  (a)  and  (b)  without  a
    hearing.

The issues

 8. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

         (i)  whether it is appropriate to decide  the  following  questions
         without a hearing:

             (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the making  of
             an error on a point of law; and

             (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be set aside.



         (ii) If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's appeal against
         the respondent's decision should be re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal
         or whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 9. As I said at para 7 above, no submissions have  been  received  on  the
    respondent's behalf in response to the  directions  in  the  "Note  and
    Directions", whether in  relation  to  questions  (a)  and  (b)  or  in
    relation to  whether  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  proceed  to  decide
    questions (a) and (b) without a hearing.

10. I do not rely upon the mere fact that the respondent has not  made  any
    submissions as a factor that justifies proceeding without a hearing.

11. At para 19 of his submissions, Mr  Dhanji  stated  that  the  appellant
    requests a hearing conducted remotely. At paras  20-24,  he  refers  to
    dicta at para 8 of R (Siddiqui) v Lord  Chancellor  and  others  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1040 to the effect that it is an  "undeniable  fact  that  the
    oral hearing procedure lies at the heart of English  civil  procedure";
    dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta and another v.  Holmes
    and others [2002] EWCA Civ 1104 to the effect, inter alia,  that  "oral
    argument is perhaps the most powerful force  there  is,  in  our  legal
    process, to promote a change of mind by a judge"; and dicta of Keene LJ
    at para 47 of  Sengupta  v  Holmes  concerning  the  impact  that  oral
    submissions may have on the decision-making process.

12. Mr Dhanji submitted that an oral hearing allows an  advocate  to  focus
    the arguments and affords the opportunity to "reflexively engage"  with
    the judge and with the arguments presented by each other in  real  time
    and to assist the Tribunal on issues that may arise during the hearing.
    He submitted  that  oral  argument  is  the  best  means  available  to
    effectively communicate with a Tribunal.

13. Mr Dhanji then submitted  that  the  instant  case  "would  undoubtedly
    benefit from these features of oral argument", which suggests  (in  his
    submission) that an oral hearing should take place,  unless  there  are
    sufficient countervailing reasons against it. He submitted  that  there
    is little reason against using  technology  to  provide  for  a  remote
    hearing.

14. I have carefully considered Mr Dhanji's submissions.

15. I take into account the force of the points made in the dicta  of  Laws
    LJ and Keene LJ at paras 38 and 47, respectively, of Sengupta v Holmes;
    the judgments of Lord Bingham and of Lord Slynn in Smith v Parole Board
    [2005] UKHL 1; the dicta at para 17(3) of Wasif v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ
    82 concerning the power of oral argument; dicta in the decision in R  v
    Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB 256 to the  effect  that
    justice must be done and be seen to be done; and the dicta at para 8 of
    R (Siddiqui).

16. I am aware of and take into account the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  in
    Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61.  I  have  applied  the
    guidance at para 2 of the Supreme Court's judgment.

17. The appeal in the  instant  case  is  straightforward.  Given  that  my
    decision is limited to the Issues, there is no question  of  my  making
    findings of fact or hearing oral evidence or considering  any  evidence
    at this stage.

18. In addition, I take into account the seriousness of the issues  in  the
    instant appeal for the  appellant.  The  appellant's  Article  8  claim
    before the Judge included his reliance upon his relationship  with  his
    two minor children, E and M. They were aged 3  years  6  months  and  2
    years 5 months as at the date of the Judge's decision. Accordingly, the
    outcome of the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  will  have  an
    impact on them, whether or nor he succeeds  in  establishing  that  the
    Judge's decision should  be  set  aside.  The  instant  case  therefore
    relates to an important matter.

19. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

20. In relation to Mr Dhanji's submissions concerning the appellant  having
    the opportunity at an oral hearing to  "reflexively  engage"  with  the
    respondent's submissions/arguments, the fact is that the respondent has
    not advanced any submissions. There is therefore  no  question  of  the
    appellant being denied the opportunity to "reflexively engage" with the
    respondent's submissions/arguments.

21. Taking a preliminary view at this  stage  of  deciding  whether  it  is
    appropriate and  just  to  decide  the  Issues  without  a  hearing,  I
    considered the Judge's decision, the grounds and the submissions before
    me. I was of the view, taken provisionally at this  stage,  that  there
    was nothing complicated at all in the assessment of the Issues  in  the
    instant case, given that the grounds are simple and straightforward and
    the Judge's decision straightforward. I kept the  matter  under  review
    throughout  my  deliberations.  However,  at  the  conclusion   of   my
    deliberations, I was affirmed in the view I had taken on a  preliminary
    basis. No issues arose during the course of  my  deliberations  that  I
    would have asked the parties to address if there had  been  a  hearing,
    whether a face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing. Thus, the appellant
    has not been denied the opportunity of "reflexively engaging" with  the
    Tribunal.

22. Mr Dhanji's submission that "the instant case would undoubtedly benefit
    from these features of oral argument" was not otherwise explained.

23. Whilst I acknowledge that the Tribunal is now listing  some  cases  for
    face-to-face hearings and using technology to hold hearings remotely in
    other cases where it is appropriate to do so, the fact is  that  it  is
    not possible to accommodate all cases in  one  of  these  ways  without
    undue delay to all cases.

24. Of course, it is impermissible, in my view, to proceed to decide a case
    without a hearing if that course of  action  would  be  unfair  in  the
    particular case. If it would be unfair to proceed to decide  an  appeal
    without a hearing, it would be unfair to do so whatever  the  delay  in
    convening a hearing or the consequent delay on other cases being heard.
    The need to be fair cannot be sacrificed.

25.  There  are  cases  that  can  fairly  be  decided  without  a  hearing
    notwithstanding that the outcome of the decision may not be  in  favour
    of the party  who  is  the  appellant.  In  the  present  unprecedented
    circumstances brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, it is my  duty
    to identify those cases that can fairly be decided without a hearing.

26. Having considered the matter with anxious scrutiny, taken into  account
    the overriding objective  and  the  guidance  in  the  relevant  cases,
    including those  I  have  mentioned  above,  I  concluded  that  it  is
    appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my discretion and proceed
    to decide the Issues without a hearing, for the reasons given  in  this
    decision.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether the Judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

27. The appellant's Article 8 claim was based, in  part,  on  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom since his claimed  illegal  entry  in
    September 2004 and, in part, on family life with his  two  children  (E
    and M). E and M are nationals of Albania.

28. I shall refer to the mother of the appellant's  children  hereafter  as
    "EM". EM is also a national of Albania. At paras  1-3  of  her  witness
    statement dated 30 December 2019 (AB/11), she  says  that  she  claimed
    asylum after her arrival in the United Kingdom but that she was granted
    leave to remain on the basis of human rights because she  had  come  to
    the United Kingdom as a minor. It therefore appears that she was  first
    granted leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor. According to her residence permit (AB/102),  she  has  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until 8 April 2021  and  is  permitted  to
    undertake work. She does not explain the outcome of her  asylum  claim.
    There was therefore nothing before the Judge to  suggest  that  EM  had
    been found to have a well-founded fear of persecution in Albania.

29. The appellant and EM began their relationship in 2015. They split up in
    2018. In oral evidence before the Judge, EM said  that  she  would  not
    return to Albania under any circumstances.

The Judge's decision

30. It was accepted on the appellant's behalf that he could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and also  that  he
    could not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Before the Judge, the appellant relied upon  Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules.

31. The Judge summarised the appellant's evidence about the role  he  plays
    in the lives of his children at para 16 of his decision. At para 17, he
    said that he accepted that the appellant played a parental role in  the
    lives of his children and he accepted that it was in the best interests
    of the children that he should continue to pay a role in  their  lives.
    He then considered the best interests of the children and concluded, at
    para 24, that the decision was proportionate.

32. Paras 13-24 of the Judge's decision read:

         "13. The appellant claims to have entered the UK in September 2004.
         He has been here illegally since that time and has never had  leave
         to remain.

         14.  It is accepted he  cannot  meet  the  Rules.  He  cannot  meet
         Appendix FM because his ex-partner and the mother of  his  children
         is not British, nor does she have indefinite leave to  remain.  His
         two children are in the same position. Mr Dhanji  further  conceded
         that the appellant cannot meet Paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi).

         15.  The appellant relies  on  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.  He
         asserts that the decision is disproportionate having regard to  his
         parental relationship with his two children.

         16.  The appellant and his ex-partner split up in 2018. Since  that
         time, the appellant has had contact with his children who  are  now
         aged 2 years and 3 years of age. On the evidence,  he  looks  after
         them overnight when his ex-partner is working nights.  In  evidence
         before me, she said that there could be as many  as  six  nights  a
         week. He also takes the children to nursery school and  picks  them
         up occasionally from nursery school. He sees them  at  weekends  as
         well.

         17.  I accept that the appellant is playing a parental role in  the
         lives of his children. I accept that it is, as it always is, in the
         best interests of the children that he should continue  to  play  a
         role in their lives.

         18.  If the situation was that the appellant and his former partner
         were in a subsisting relationship, there would be little difficulty
         in resolving this issue. The children are young and their focus  of
         interest must inevitably  be  on  their  parents.  Neither  of  the
         children have established any  significant  private  life.  Neither
         parent has indefinite leave to remain and  accordingly  they  could
         return as a family unit to Albania.

         19.  In this case however, the appellant and his ex-partner are not
         in a subsisting relationship. His ex-partner has limited  leave  to
         remain  and  indicates  that  she  will  not   return   under   any
         circumstances to Albania.

         20.  The ultimate question, as EV (Philippines) puts it is,  is  it
         reasonable to expect the child(ren) to follow the  parent  with  no
         right to remain to the country of origin?  In  this  case,  neither
         parent is British and neither has indefinite leave  to  remain.  If
         the appellant is removed, the mother will remain until her  limited
         leave expires in 2021? I  appreciate  of  course  that  it  may  be
         further renewed.

         21.  It is important to note that the appellant's ex-partner is not
         on the path to settlement, pace; GM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD 2019.

         22.  I am satisfied that this must be a matter of  choice  for  the
         appellant's ex-partner. Does she put the interests of the  children
         having contact with their father before her desire (no doubt for  a
         better economic and educational life) for herself and her children?
         If she puts the best interests of her children having contact  with
         their father first, she will follow him with the children  back  to
         Albania. If she does not, she will remain in the UK  should  he  be
         removed.

         23.  More generally, the appellant has never had leave  to  remain.
         Any private life he has established has been established whilst his
         immigration status is illegal. He does not speak English. He is not
         financially independent. He does not meet the Immigration Rules.

         24.  Looking at the matter in the round, and bearing in  mind  that
         the best interests of the children cannot in any event be  a  trump
         card, I am satisfied that the decision to remove the appellant  is,
         having  regard  to  the  maintenance   for   immigration   control,
         proportionate.[pic]"

The grounds

33. There are two grounds as follows:

         (i)  Ground 1 is that  the  Judge  erred  by  failing  to  consider
         whether it is in the best interests of E and M  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom.

         (ii) Ground 2 is that the Judge erred by failing  to  approach  his
         assessment of E's and M's best interests and the proportionality of
         the respondent's decision on the basis of the "real world in  which
         the children find themselves".

Submissions

34. In relation to ground 1, Mr Dhanji drew attention to the fact that  the
    Judge accepted the appellant's evidence, summarised at para  16,  about
    the role he plays in the lives of E and M and found at para 17 that  it
    is in E's and M's best interests that the appellant continues to play a
    role in their lives.[pic]

35. However, in Mr Dhanji's submission, the Judge then failed  to  consider
    the material question of whether it is in E's and M's best interests to
    remain in the United Kingdom. In this regard,  Mr  Dhanji  relied  upon
    para 58 of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  EV  (Philippines)  v
    SSHD [204] EWCA Civ 874 where the Court of Appeal said:

         "58  ... If one parent has no right to remain, but the other parent
             does, that is the background against which the  assessment  is
             conducted..."

36. The circumstances of the instant case were that the  appellant  and  EM
    were no longer in a relationship. EM has leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom in her own right. EM gave evidence, with which  the  Judge  did
    not take issue,  that  she  would  not  return  to  Albania  under  any
    circumstances.  Pursuant  to  para  58  of  EV  (Philippines),  it  was
    incumbent upon the Judge  to  consider  whether  to  was  in  the  best
    interests of E and M for the appellant to remain in the United  Kingdom
    with them.

37. Mr Dhanji acknowledged that the best interests of E and M  were  not  a
    trump card even if their best interests lay in their remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom. However, he submitted that their best  interests  would
    need to be afforded "significant weight". It was therefore critical, in
    his submission, that their  best  interests  were  properly  identified
    before the Judge embarked upon an assessment  of  how  a  fair  balance
    should  be  struck  between  the  public  and  individuals'   interests
    applicable in the instant case.

38. In relation to ground 2, Mr Dhanji relied  upon  KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2018] UKSC 53  at  para  19,  EV  (Philippines)  at  para  58  and  SA
    (Bangladesh) at para  22,  to  the  effect  that  it  is  necessary  to
    determine the proportionality of the respondent's decision by reference
    to the "real world in which the children find themselves".

39. In this regard, Mr Dhanji drew attention to  para  20  of  the  Judge's
    decision where he posed the following question, described by Mr  Dhanji
    as the determinative question:

         "is it reasonable to expect the child(ren)  to  follow  the  parent
         with no right to remain in the country of origin?"

    and that the Judge answered this question at para 22 by concluding that
    it is a matter of choice for the appellant's ex-partner.

40. In Mr Dhanji's submission, the Judge erred by failing to  approach  his
    assessment of E's and M's best interests and the proportionality of the
    respondent's decision on the basis of the  "real  world  in  which  the
    children find themselves".

41. In the instant case, the "real world" in which E and M find  themselves
    is that their father, the appellant, has no  leave  to  remain  whereas
    they and their mother do have leave to remain;  their  parents  are  no
    longer in a relationship; and their mother  gave  evidence,  which  the
    Judge did not take issue with, that she  would  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom with the children to follow the appellant to Albania.

42. Accordingly, in Mr Dhanji's submission, the "real world" consequence of
    the respondent's decision is that E and M would be separated from their
    father who the Judge found currently plays  an  active  role  in  their
    upbringing. In his submission, the Judge's task was  to  determine,  on
    these real world facts, whether this consequence was  proportionate  to
    the legitimate aim being pursued by the respondent but he failed to  do
    so.

43. Mr Dhanji submitted that it was insufficient for the  Judge  to  answer
    the question that he posed at para 20 of his decision by  stating  that
    it was a matter of choice for the appellant's ex-partner.

Assessment

44. It is clear from the Judge's decision that he  took  into  account  the
    fact that the appellant and EM were no longer in a  relationship,  that
    EM had said in evidence that she would not return to Albania under  any
    circumstances (para 19 of the Judge's decision), that EM had  leave  to
    remain until 2021, that there was a  possibility  of  her  leave  being
    renewed (para 20) but also that she was not on a  path  to  settlement.
    The Judge was  therefore  plainly  aware  that,  if  the  appellant  is
    removed, the children would be separated from the appellant  unless  EM
    chose, notwithstanding her evidence in court, to return to  Albania  so
    that the children could continue to have contact  with  the  appellant.
    Indeed, it is plain, from para 22 as a  whole  and  in  particular  the
    final sentence of para 22, that he had in mind that,  if  EM  chose  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, the children would be separated from  the
    appellant.

45. The Judge said at para 17 that it is  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children that the appellant should continue to play  a  role  in  their
    lives. I accept that the Judge did not state, in terms, that it  is  in
    the best interests of the children for the  appellant  to  continue  to
    play a role in their lives in the United Kingdom. However, the decision
    must be read as a whole. When the finding of the Judge at para 17, that
    it is in the best interests of the children that the  appellant  should
    continue to play a role in their lives, is read together with  para  22
    where the Judge referred  to  EM  and  the  children  having  a  better
    economic and educational life in the United Kingdom, it is plain, in my
    judgment, that he did implicitly find that the best  interests  of  the
    children were for the appellant to continue playing  a  role  in  their
    lives in the United Kingdom.

46. I therefore do not accept that the Judge erred by failing  to  consider
    whether it was in the best interests of the  appellant's  children  for
    them to remain in the United Kingdom and for the appellant to  continue
    to play a role in their lives.

47. Ground 1 is therefore not established.

48. Contrary to ground 2 and for the reasons given at para  44  above,  the
    Judge did consider proportionality by reference to the "real  world  in
    which the children find themselves". This much is abundantly clear from
    everything I have said at para 44 above.

49. It is not the case that the Judge answered the  question  he  posed  at
    para 20 simply by stating that it  was  a  matter  of  choice  for  EM.
    Notwithstanding her evidence that she would not return to Albania under
    any  circumstances,  the  Judge  was  right  to   consider   that   she
    nevertheless had a choice.

50. The choice that EM faces  was  plainly  part  of  the  Judge's  overall
    assessment of proportionality, given that it is clear that his  reasons
    for dismissing the appeal were set out not only at para 22 but in paras
    12-24 and that it is clear from para 24 that he reached his  conclusion
    on proportionality by "looking at the matter in the round".

51. I therefore reject ground 2.

52. For all of the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the  Judge  did
    not err in law. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



Notice of Decision

53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of  law.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is therefore dismissed.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  Date: 9 September 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
  a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such  application  must
  be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after
  this decision  was  sent  to  the  person  making  the  application.  The
  appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location  of  the
  individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision  was  sent:




2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
  United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to  appeal
  is made, and  is  not  in  detention  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  the
  appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice  of
  decision is sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
  Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7  working  days  (5  working
  days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
  the United Kingdom at the time that the  application  for  permission  to
  appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working  days,  if
  the notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
  Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
  letter or covering email

