
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15748/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th November 2019                        |On 27th November 2019         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                             Parveen Kaur Gosal
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, instructed by Maalik & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  14  December  1986.  She
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  Sullivan
    promulgated on 16 July 2019 dismissing her appeal against  the  refusal
    of indefinite leave to remain on human rights grounds.
2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen  Smith
    for the following reasons: "I consider it to be arguable that the judge
    based her rejection of aspects  of  the  Appellant's  claimed  innocent
    explanation on matters which were speculative or  not  founded  in  the
    evidence. For example, at paragraph 24(c) the judge considered it to be
    implausible that the TOEIC test centre would  write  to  the  Appellant
    using  a  letter  as  there  was  evidence  that  staff  used  SMS   to
    communicate.  Arguably that was irrational as the only  evidence  about
    SMS use concerned the communications between some staff and  the  proxy
    test takers. Similarly, the judge did not cite an evidential basis  for
    her finding that the test centre would not have taken a deposit, making
    it an arguably irrational finding of fact, see 24(d).
    Given the judge  accepted  many  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  claimed
    innocent explanation to  be  plausible  (see,  e.g.  [24(a)],  [24(b)],
    [24(g)]), it is arguable that her overall  rejection  of  the  innocent
    explanation was irrational, given the judge's arguable reliance on non-
    evidential speculation as part of her operative reasoning."


Submissions

3.   Ms Reid submitted the judge's findings at paragraph 24, in relation  to
    the Appellant's journey to the test centre, the letter she received and
    the failure to pay a deposit, were irrational findings.  She  submitted
    the judge had erred in law in finding against the  Appellant  in  areas
    which were not in evidence and where the Appellant had not  been  given
    an opportunity to explain. The Appellant did not have an opportunity to
    give an explanation for her journey to the test centre and the  judge's
    findings in relation to the letter and the deposit were speculative.

4.   Mr Singh agreed  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision. He also conceded that if these three challenged findings were
    removed  from  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  innocent
    explanation that resulted in a finding that  the  Appellant's  evidence
    was plausible and therefore the appeal should be allowed.


The Judge's Findings

5.   There was no challenge to  the  judge's  findings  that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy Appendix FM, paragraph 276B or Article 8. However, it
    was conceded by the Respondent that the Appellant had ten years' lawful
    residence.  Her  application  under  paragraph  276B  was  refused   on
    suitability grounds because she had submitted a false  ETS  certificate
    dated 5 June 2013 in a previous application. It has been accepted  that
    the judge's rejection of the innocent  explanation  was  irrational  in
    that it was based on findings that were not supported by  evidence  and
    about which the Appellant was not given the opportunity to explain.

6.   I find that the judge has made a material error of law. If the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 24(c), (d) and  (e)  are  removed  then,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, the Appellant has given a plausible  account.
    The judge accepted that the Appellant identified ETS as a test provider
    and contacted them to arrange the test. It was accepted she had given a
    plausible explanation of how she attended the test centre and took  the
    test.

7.   The judge's rejection  of  the  Appellant's  innocent  explanation  was
    irrational and the decision of 16 July 2019 is set aside. I remake  the
    decision on the  facts  found  by  the  judge  and  conclude  that  the
    Appellant has provided an  innocent  explanation  and,  therefore,  the
    Respondent has failed to show that she has submitted  a  false  English
    language certificate in a previous application.  Accordingly,  I  allow
    the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed

No anonymity direction is made.



              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 25 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid.



              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 25 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

