
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15217/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On November 22, 2017                  |On November 23, 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                mr SAJIID ALI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeetie, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I do not make an anonymity direction in this matter.

 2. The respondent in these proceedings was the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  From hereon I have referred to the parties as they were
    in the First-tier Tribunal so  that,  for  example,  reference  to  the
    respondent is a reference to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and on March 3, 2016 he  applied
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on family  and  private  life
    grounds. The respondent considered the application but  refused  it  on
    June 2, 2016.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on June 15, 2017  and  the  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lloyd-Smith  on  March  2,
    2017. In a decision promulgated on March 8, 2017 she allowed the appeal
    on human rights grounds.

 5. The respondent appealed that decision on March 13,  2017  arguing  that
    the Judge had erred in her approach. In short,  the  Judge  placed  the
    burden of proof on the respondent whereas she only  carried  the  legal
    burden of proof. On the basis of the generic evidence that  burden  was
    met and the appellant then had to rebut that presumption on the balance
    of probabilities. The respondent argued that the  Judge  erred  in  her
    approach at [14] by seemingly placing the  burden  on  the  respondent.
    Based on that error the respondent argued the Judge erroneously  looked
    at Section EX.1 of Appendix FM and it followed her approach to  article
    8 was also flawed.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bird considered the grounds of  appeal
    on September 18, 2017 and found there was an error of law.

 7. At the hearing before me  Mr  McVeetie  adopted  the  above  ground  of
    appeal. Ms Chaudry opposed the ground of appeal  arguing  [14]  of  the
    Judge's decision demonstrated she had the correct burden  of  proof  in
    her mind.

 8. Having heard submissions I indicated to the representatives that  there
    was a material error.

 9. Whilst the Judge had correctly identified that the respondent  carried,
    what has commonly been described, the legal burden of proof  the  Judge
    failed to demonstrate she was aware the burden of proof had switched to
    the appellant. Whilst she gave reasons for showing the appellant  could
    satisfy the burden placed on him, I am satisfied  she  approached  this
    assessment from the wrong position. At [14]  she  reiterated  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the legal  burden  of  proving  that  the
    TOEIC  certificate  was  procured  by  dishonesty.  That  finding   was
    materially incorrect because the generic evidence satisfies that burden
    and it seems the Judge, inadvertently, applied the wrong test.

10. That finding undermines the remainder of the decision as  that  finding
    forms part of her deliberations for both Section EX.1  of  Appendix  FM
    and article 8 ECHR.

11. I agreed to remit the case  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    further hearing in light of Part 3 Section 7.1 to 7.3 of  the  Practice
    Statement and that the appellant should  provide  statements  for  both
    himself and his partner along with any other  evidence  he  felt  would
    assist his case.

12. I direct that the case be re-listed for a de novo  hearing  before  any
    Judge other than Judge Lloyd-Smith.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I remit the appeal back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date     22/11/2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I revoke the earlier fee award and make no fee award as the  appeal  remains
outstanding.


Signed                              Date     22/11/2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

