
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15809/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2019                               |On 02 May 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                KKOTMUNI KIM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bustani of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  South  Korea.   She  was  born  on  23
    September 1975.

 2. She appealed against the respondent's decision dated 15  June  2018  to
    refuse her leave to remain and to refuse her human rights claim.

 3. The appeal was allowed by  Judge  Widdup  (the  judge)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 February 2019.

 4. The grounds claim the judge made a material error.  The judge relied on
    the case of Mansur (Immigration adviser's failings)  Bangladesh  [2018]
    UKUT 00274 that the appeal should be allowed as it  was  a  rare  case.
    See decision at [39]-[40].  The grounds claim that the judge  erred  in
    making that finding as the  appellant  had  failed  to  make  a  formal
    complaint to the OISC in respect of the allegation.  Further, the judge
    speculated as to the reasons that had not  happened  and  the  possible
    outcomes should that occur.  The grounds claimed that  the  appellant's
    circumstances could be distinguished from  those  in  Mansur  and  fell
    short of meeting the rare case.

 5. Judge Boyes granted permission on 4 March 2019.  He said inter alia  as
    follows:

         "3.  The grounds are arguable.  It is arguable that the  judge  has
             speculated as to the reasons why no application/complaint  has
             been made.  It was not for the judge to do this.

         4.   Secondly, the question remains whether this is  one  of  those
             'rare cases'.  The former solicitors have not ignored or  gone
             beyond instructions nor have they 'blatantly failed to  follow
             the appellant's specific instructions'".

 6. There was no Rule 24 response  nor  was  there  any  skeleton  from  Ms
    Bustani.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds.

 8. Ms Bustani relied upon the correspondence from Kothala & Company  dated
    15 January 2018 and Gillman-Smith Lee dated 21 January 2019.   Gillman-
    Smith Lee had acted for the appellant and wrote to Kothala & Company in
    their letter of 21 January 2019.  The letter was  signed  by  solicitor
    Siew S. Lee.  The history as recounted by Kothala & Company is complex,
    however, in essence, Kothala & Company was putting to Gillman-Smith Lee
    that the appellant's application for  indefinite  leave  was  submitted
    "out of time" due to errors and omissions on the part of  Gillman-Smith
    Lee, for which the appellant could not be  held  accountable.   Gillman
    Smith-Lee's response was that  they  did  not  have  a  record  of  the
    appellant enquiring as to the possibility of  applying  for  indefinite
    leave to remain under the long residence  Rule  around  November  2014,
    however, they did recall the appellant enquiring about the  possibility
    of her applying for indefinite leave to remain under the ten year Rule.
     Gillman Smith-Lee said they "roughly"  went  through  the  appellant's
    immigration history and that they "may have advised" that she had a gap
    in her leave to remain.  Ms Lee said that an omission on her  part  led
    to the appellant's application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  being
    submitted more than fourteen days after the expiry of S.3C  leave.   Ms
    Bustani submits that there was a clear admission from Ms Lee  that  she
    gave wrong advice.  That information was all before the judge.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. Save for the late submission of the application, Gillman Smith-Lee  did
    not concede any error on  their  part.   Their  letter  is  couched  in
    ambiguity.  Ms Siew Lee says "to the best of my recollection" she  "may
    have informed ...".

10. The judge noted that the only complaint made against Gillman  Smith-Lee
    was in correspondence, no proceedings had been issued against them  and
    no complaint had been made to the Solicitors Regulatory Authority or to
    the OISC.

11. The judge took into account  Mansur  (Immigration  adviser's  failings:
    Article 8) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 00274 (IAC), in particular, at  [30]-
    [41].  The judge was of the view that the combination of  circumstances
    brought it within the "rare class", a case identified by the  President
    and that in some way made disproportionate the  respondent's  decision.
    In my view, that is a misreading of Mansur and the other  case  law  in
    particular, FP (Iran) [2007] EWCA Civ 13 and in particular, Sedley LJ's
    explanation of the court's approach at [42] quoting Al Mehdawi [1990] 1
    AC 876 per Lord Bridge at [898].

12. I do not accept that the judge was entitled to come to  the  conclusion
    that the appellant's particular circumstances  brought  it  within  the
    rare class of case identified by the President.  I do not  accept  that
    an exchange of correspondence between two firms  of  solicitors  brings
    the appellant's circumstances within the definition of  a  "rare  case"
    notwithstanding the admission of error on the part of Ms Lee  that  the
    application was submitted late.

13. I find that the judge strayed into the area of speculation in terms  of
    why no application or complaint had not been made.  There is a world of
    difference between an exchange of correspondence and an  acknowledgment
    of responsibility as opposed to those considered in Mansur particularly
    bearing in mind the appellant's failure to make a formal  complaint  to
    the OISC or the Solicitors Regulatory Authority.  I find that Ms  Lee's
    negligence should not have affected the weight the judge  gave  to  the
    importance  of  maintaining  the  respondent's  policy  of  immigration
    control such that he erred in  finding  the  respondent's  decision  to
    dismiss the application was proportionate.

Notice of Decision

14. The judge's decision is set aside and will be re-made  following  a  de
    novo hearing in the First-tier.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         29 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


