
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15042/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2019                  |On 16 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  VASU DEV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kafim, instructed by AWS solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 4 September 1987 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    India. He first came to  the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2010  as  a
    student. When his visa expired, the appellant remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully. He met his wife in this  country  they  married  in
    June 2015. She is a British citizen. They have a child who was born  in
    June 2016. The appellant appealed against a decision of  the  Secretary
    of State dated 7 July 2018 refusing him leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 18 April
    2019, allowed the appeal on human  rights  (Article  8  ECHR)  grounds.
    Although he succeeded in his appeal, the appellant now appeals  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  wrongly
    decided to uphold the Secretary of State's decision that the  appellant
    had employed dishonesty in respect of an English language test in order
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. I find that the judge did err in law in determining that aspect of  the
    appeal. I find that the judge  made  a  legal  error  at  [29]  in  his
    analysis of the innocent explanation for the test  result  provided  by
    the appellant. First, the judge  has  not  engaged  at  all  with  that
    innocent explanation which is set out in some detail in the appellant's
    written statement. Moreover, the judge has overlooked the fact that the
    appellant was required only to provide an explanation; by finding  that
    the appellant had 'in reality... offered little or  no  explanation  or
    evidence to dispute the results' [my emphasis] the judge has  held  the
    appellant to a higher standard than the minimum level  of  plausibility
    required.

 3. For these reasons, I find that the judge's analysis is flawed in law. I
    have considered the question of disposal. Given  that  the  appellant's
    Article 8 appeal was allowed (on the basis  that,  notwithstanding  the
    judge's finding that deception had been used to  obtain  the  right  to
    remain in this country, it  would  nonetheless  not  be  reasonable  to
    separate the appellant from his child and wife) and  in  light  of  the
    fact that the Secretary of  State  has  not  sought  to  challenge  the
    judge's decision, I do not consider  it  to  be  in  the  interests  of
    justice to convene a hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision or to return the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  do
    likewise; neither course of action would represent a proper use of  the
    limited resources of the  IAC  nor  would  it  properly  represent  the
    interests of all court users, including those waiting for their appeals
    to be listed. I shall, therefore, direct no further hearing or disposal
    of the  appeal  and  make  no  finding  other  than  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant had employed deception cannot  stand.  To
    that extent, the appeal is allowed.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the  extent  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding that the appellant had used deception in  an  English  language
    test cannot stand and is set aside.




    Signed                              Date 31 December 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


