
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15522/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                            mr Charles Ndidi Ago
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Adebayo
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent refusing his further application
    for leave to remain as a spouse in the UK.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 15 August 1973.

3.   I shall set  out  the  chronology  of  the  applications  made  by  the
    appellant which was given to me in court by Mr Tuffan and agreed by  Mr
    Adebayo.

4.   The appellant made an application on 17 May 2012 in Nigeria  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse.  He was granted entry clearance  for  27  months
    from 19 July 2012 to expire on 19 October 2014.

5.   On 18 October 2014, the  appellant  made  an  in-time  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  paragraph  289  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Mr Tuffan said that for the appellant to be granted
    leave  under  paragraph  289,  paragraph  287  had  to  be   satisfied.
    Unfortunately, paragraph 287 was not satisfied  because  the  appellant
    did not possess a  knowledge  of  the  UK  test  and  consequently  the
    application was refused on 4 February 2015.

6.   In any event the respondent went on to say that where part 8  of  these
    Rules continue to apply, paragraph A277A of the Immigration  Rules  set
    out the requirements for  considering  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain.  As the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom under part  8  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the respondent accepted that the appellant was in  a
    genuine relationship and granted him  a  period  of  limited  leave  to
    remain for 24 months as the spouse of a person settled  in  the  UK  to
    expire on 4 February 2017.

7.   Before expiry of leave, the appellant made an  in-time  application  on
    27 January 2017 for  leave  to  remain  through  his  solicitors.   His
    solicitors made two assertions; the  first  was  that  the  appellant's
    original passport will be forwarded to the Home Office within  40  days
    of their letter.  The appellant's passport was being retained in  order
    for him to take the UK life test.  The second assertion  was  that  the
    appellant's English Language certificate will be forwarded to the  Home
    Office within 40 days of their letter.

8.   According to paragraph 16 of the judge's decision, the  next  event  as
    that the respondent wrote to the appellant's solicitors on 11  February
    2017, stating that the application was invalid because he had not  paid
    the IHS and had not provided his passport with the application.  On  17
    February 2017, the appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  respondent,
    confirming that the HIS had been paid and enclosing proof of the  same.
    Nothing further happened until 24 March 2017, when the respondent wrote
    to the appellant's solicitors, stating that it was going to take longer
    than the usual eight weeks to consider the application because they had
    requested further evidence from the appellant  and  the  appellant  had
    failed to provide it within the  given  timeframe.   On  8  June  2017,
    having  received  nothing   further   from   the   appellant   or   his
    representatives, the respondent wrote to confirm that  the  application
    was considered to be invalid because the appellant had not submitted  a
    valid passport.

9.   On 16 June 2017, the  appellant's  solicitors  issue  a  Letter  Before
    Acting indicating an intention to initiate judicial review proceedings.
     The respondent replied to the Letter Before  Action  on  3  July  2017
    maintaining her decision that the appellant's application  was  invalid
    because of his failure to submit a valid passport within the time frame
    proposed by the solicitors and despite being given ample time to do so.
     The appellant did  not  pursue  an  application  for  judicial  review
    preferring instead to submit a further application.

10.  On 5 July 2017 the appellant made a  fresh  application  for  leave  to
    remain, this time accompanied by a valid passport.  The application was
    refused by the respondent who  stated  the  appellant  had  to  satisfy
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  It was  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant could meet those requirements.

11.  Mr Adebayo submitted that the judge erred in law at paragraph 14.   The
    judge said as follows:

         "14.      Before  I  come  to  what  is  said  to  have  been   the
             respondent's error in this appellant's  case,  I  should  note
             that I have not been provided with sufficient  information  by
             the appellant  to  conclude  that  this  would,  but  for  the
             respondent's error, have been a transitional  case.   Two  key
             pieces of information are lacking in that regard.  Firstly, in
             order to  engage  the  relevant  transitional  provisions  (in
             paragraph A280(c)) of the Immigration Rules, I would  need  to
             be satisfied that the appellant made a successful  application
             for entry clearance on or before 9 July  2012.   Secondly,  in
             order to preserve the operation of that transitional provision
             beyond the initial period of leave to enter, I would  need  to
             be satisfied that the subsequent application was "in time" and
             that the appellant had been granted leave to remain under part
             8, and not under Appendix FM (paragraph A280 B refers).   None
             of this evidence has been provided, and I note that  even  the
             appellant's date of entry to the UK has never  been  precisely
             defined.  The application form and  all  subsequent  documents
             simply refer to the appellant  having  entered  the  UK  as  a
             spouse in 2012."

12.  Mr. Adebayo submitted that he understood from  paragraph  14  that  the
    judge was referring to the first application the appellant made  on  18
    October 2014 after he had entered the UK.  Mr. Adebayo  said  that  the
    application was made in-time  and  under  the  transitional  provisions
    under Part 8 and not  under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Relying on his grounds which argued that contrary to the view expressed
    by the judge that there was no  evidence  of  the  date  the  appellant
    entered the UK  and  the  dates  of  his  subsequent  applications,  he
    submitted that there was clear evidence placed before  the  judge  from
    which the judge quoted in the determination.

13.  I find, as submitted by Mr Tuffan,  that  the  judge  correctly  stated
    that the appellant had to show that he applied successfully  for  entry
    clearance on or before 9 July 2012.  I find it understandable that  the
    judge could not make definitive findings at  paragraph  14  on  crucial
    matters because he  did  not  have  the  precise  dates  of  the  entry
    clearance application and post-entry application that were made by  the
    appellant.  Nevertheless, the chronology indicates that  the  appellant
    did successfully apply for entry clearance on 17  May  2012,  before  9
    July 2012.  Therefore, the transitional provisions applied to him.

14.  I also accept Mr Tuffan's submission that  in  order  to  preserve  the
    operation of the transitional provisions,  the  appellant  did  make  a
    subsequent application in time on 18 October 2014 and was granted leave
    to remain for two years under part 8 and not under Appendix FM.

15.  I also accept that the application the appellant  made  on  27  January
    2017 was in-time and this was accepted by the judge at paragraph 15.  I
    find that this  application  would  have  come  under  Part  8  of  the
    transitional provisions if it was a valid application accompanied by  a
    valid passport.  I agree  with  the  judge  that  the  application  was
    properly rejected by the respondent as invalid because the  application
    was not accompanied by the appellant's  passport.   The  appellant  had
    retained his passport in order to take the English  Language  test.   I
    find that the judge was entitled to find that there was  no  obligation
    imposed on the respondent, whether by the Rules or any published policy
    for the respondent to write to the appellant to  remind  him  that  his
    application was on hold whilst she was waiting for his passport and the
    result of the English Language Test. Indeed, the judge noted  that  the
    appellant has never provided an English Language test.

16.  Mr Tuffan submitted that there was a gap  between  the  expiry  of  the
    appellant's leave to remain on 4 February 2017 and the subsequent valid
    application he made on 5 July 2017. I accept that because of this  gap,
    the transitional provisions under  Part  8  could  not  be  maintained.
    Subsequently the appellant  was  required  to  show  that  he  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.   Consequently, the judge's conclusions at
    paragraph 27 disclosed no error of law.

17.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose  an  error  of  law.
    The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  21 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
