
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15955/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2019                      |On 19 July 2019                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                SLYVANUS [E]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Iengar, instructed by SABZ Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Davison ('the Judge') promulgated on 1 March  2019  in
       which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.

Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  25  July  1983  who
       arrived in the UK on 27 December 2017 as a visitor. On 9  March  2018
       he made an FLR(FP) application which was refused on 16 July 2018. The
       appeal against that decision was considered by the Judge.

    3. The Judge records at [11] that the background  facts  to  the  appeal
       were not in dispute and records following salient facts:

         . The appellant was previously in a relationship with Ms [C]. They
           met each other in Nigeria in 2011 when Ms [C] was on holiday.


         . The couple had twins on 9 August 2016 '[Zy]' and '[Ze]'. Ms  [C]
           is British and the children are British citizens.


         . Ms [C] and the  children  went  to  Nigeria  to  live  with  the
           appellant.


         . Unfortunately, in July 2017 the  couple  separated  and  Ms  [C]
           returned to the UK with the children.


         . The appellant came to visit in December 2017.


         . The appellant is currently residing with an aunt in  London  but
           has unrestricted access to his children in Manchester.  He  sees
           them at least once a fortnight and spends 2 - 3 days  with  them
           during his visits. Ms [C] also brings the children to London  to
           visit the appellant on occasion.


         . The appellants aunt is supporting the appellant in  the  UK  and
           has assisted him in being able to fund various expenses  related
           to the twins.


    4. The Judge finds the appellant is highly involved in the life  of  his
       children. The appellant is currently unable to work in the UK due  to
       his status and is financially reliant upon his aunt. The appellant is
       training to  be  a  pilot  and,  if  successful,  hopes  to  move  to
       Manchester and work from the airport there so he can be closer to his
       children. It is found the appellant has a parental relationship  with
       the children. At [15] the Judge finds the appellant is the father  of
       the twins and is seeking to play an active role in their  lives,  the
       limiting factor currently being his status in  the  UK  and  need  to
       reside with his aunt which is some  distance  from  where  the  twins
       reside.

    5. At [17] the Judge finds the best interests of  the  children  are  to
       grow up knowing their father and it is accepted the appellant  has  a
       genuine parental relationship with them.  At [18]  the  Judge  states
       the real issue to be determined is whether  it  is  proportionate  to
       expect the appellant to return to Nigeria and seek entry clearance to
       maintain contact with his children.

    6. The Judge sets out finding between [20 - 28].

    7. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the  Judge  erred
       in law by failing to make any findings on whether the  appellant  met
       the requirements of Appendix FM paragraph EX.1.  The  grounds  assert
       the Judge was bound to consider the requirements as the  whole  basis
       of the appeal had been that he satisfied Appendix FM paragraph EX.1.

    8. The grounds assert the Judge erred for although  making  findings  on
       the parental relationship there was no reference to whether  it  will
       not be reasonable to expect the appellant's  children  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom. The grounds assert the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
       consider the evidence that  supported  the  claim  it  would  not  be
       reasonable to expect the children  to  do  so;  such  as  the  speech
       therapy the appellant's daughter is likely to  require  in  the  long
       term. The grounds assert the Judge failed to consider the  impact  on
       the children should the appellant be required  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom, albeit for  a  temporary  period.  The  grounds  assert  the
       Judge's assertion any separation will be for a short period  of  time
       fails to consider that the appellant is  financially  dependent  upon
       his aunt and would not be able to meet the financial requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules for entry clearance;  undermining  the  Judge's
       assertion that  a  short  period  of  separation  made  the  decision
       proportionate. The grounds also assert the statistics referred to  by
       the Judge for the  time  it  takes  to  process  a  Visa  application
       specifically exclude settlement visas which  would  not  normally  be
       decided within 15 days. The grounds assert the Judge's findings  with
       regard to proportionality, based upon a short period  of  separation,
       are arguably unrealistic.

    9. The grounds also assert the Decision is contrary to the  findings  in
       Chikwamba.

   10. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal but renewed to the Upper  Tribunal  directly  where  it  was
       granted on 11 June 2019. The relevant part of the grant being in  the
       following terms:

           "3.    The FTT arguably erred in  law  in  failing  to  consider
                section EX.1 appendix  FM  and  whether  it  would  'not  be
                reasonable' to expect the appellant's  British  daughter  to
                leave the UK. Not only was there  no  express  reference  to
                section EX.1, but the Decision does not  appear  to  include
                findings on that issue. That in turn potentially impacts  on
                the proportionality assessment of the appellant leaving  the
                UK and reapplying for entry clearance.


           4. Whilst the other ground of appeal appears to be weaker,  (the
                assertion  that  the  FTT  erroneously  assumed   that   the
                appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
                Rules, when it appears that the  appellant's  representative
                confirmed that compliance with the Immigration Rules was not
                relied on; nevertheless permission to appeal is  granted  on
                all grounds."


   11. There is no Rule 24 reply from the respondent.

Error of law

   12. At [6] of the decision the Judge writes:

           "the Appellant's representative conceded  that  the  Immigration
           Rules could not be met and were not therefore  relied  upon.  It
           was stated that the issue was Article 8 outside  the  Rules  and
           section 55 best interests considerations."


   13. The appellant was represented by Ms G Fama a barrister instructed  by
       SABZ before the Judge.

   14. Appendix FM EX.1. was raised in original grounds of appeal  where  it
       is stated at [8]:

           "the Appellant contends that he  met  all  the  requirements  of
           Appendix FM EX.1 because he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship with his  British  children  who  are  settled  and
           residing in the UK."


   15. EX.1, as a provision found within Appendix FM,  is  therefore  within
       the Immigration Rules and the challenge to the respondent's  decision
       under the Rules was not pursued before the Judge.

   16. In Sarkar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
       Civ 195, the Court of Appeal indicated that, although Article  8  and
       section 55 were mentioned in the Notice of Appeal, where no  evidence
       had been adduced or submissions made before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       to support a claim under Article 8 of the ECHR, it could  be  treated
       as abandoned.

   17. In NS  (India)  [2004]  UKIAT  00193  the  Tribunal  noted  that  the
       appellant had specifically withdrawn his Article 8 claim  before  the
       Adjudicator.  The Tribunal said that the  Appellant  could  not  then
       contend that it was an error  of  law  for  the  Adjudicator  not  to
       consider it.  Indeed it would clearly have been inappropriate for the
       Adjudicator to consider a claim which had  not  been  pursued  before
       him.

   18. The challenge as pleaded to the  alleged  failure  of  the  Judge  to
       consider a matter that had been abandoned appears to have no arguable
       merit although  at  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  Ms  Fijiwala
       acknowledged there was an arguable error in the respondent's decision
       which may have explained the  conduct  of  the  appellant's  advocate
       before the Judge. It was accepted that in light of the findings  that
       had been  made  concerning  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
       children, section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 2002 was relevant and should have been considered as part of  the
       article 8 assessment by the Judge but was not.

   19. This section provides:

           '(6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
                where-


                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and


                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.'


   20. It was accepted the appellant is not a person liable for deportation.
       It was found by the Judge  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with his children who are qualifying
       children. It was accepted by Ms Fijiwala  that  on  the  evidence  it
       would not be reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom.

   21. It is conceded the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  not  considering  this
       provision as part of the article 8 assessment which is  material.  In
       light of this the determination must be set aside.

   22. It is also conceded that in light of section  117B(6),  and  for  the
       reasons set out above, the appeal must be allowed.

   23. I substitute a decision allowing the appeal  pursuant  to  article  8
       ECHR on the basis that the respondent's own interpretation of how the
       proportionality of this issue must be  interpreted,  through  Section
       117B(6), means the appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom  has
       not been shown to be proportionate.

Decision

   24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the Judge. I remake the  decision  as  follows.  This
       appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

   25. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 July 2019

