
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15168/2018
     HU/15176/2018
     HU/15179/2018
     HU/15182/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019                            |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                             m KKP (plus three)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Barca
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants  in  this  case  are  nationals  of  India.   The  first
    appellant was born on 18 October 1981 and arrived in the United Kingdom
    in 2004 as an illegal entrant and has remained since  that  date.   The
    second appellant arrived in 2009  with  valid  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student until 2012.  The second appellant overstayed  her  leave.   The
    third and fourth appellants were born on 3 September 2010 and  7  April
    2017 in the UK, respectively and have remained.

 2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision
    of the respondent dated 12 July 2018 refusing  their  applications  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  In a decision promulgated  on
    9 October 2018, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro dismissed  the
    appellants' appeals on human rights grounds.

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 3. The appellants appeal with permission on the grounds, that in light  of
    the jurisprudence, including MT and  ET  (child's  best  interests;  ex
    tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC), either  the  judge  had
    given inadequate reasons or had reached  an  irrational  conclusion  in
    concluding that the best interests of the qualifying child,  the  third
    appellant were outweighed.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. Although the error of law hearing before me considered  this  issue  in
    some detail, and I am grateful for the  detailed  submissions  of  both
    representatives, the issue before me is a relatively narrow one.

 5. Mr Harding drew my attention to the judge's  findings  in  relation  to
    specifically the third appellant, the "qualifying child", Miss  KP  who
    at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing was (and indeed  remains
    now) 8 years old.  The judge acknowledged this at [41].   At  [48]  the
    judge acknowledged that the third appellant  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom and had lived in the United Kingdom for more than seven  years,
    attended school, had many friends and the judge  had  seen  her  school
    reports and she was doing  very  well.   The  judge  accepted  she  had
    integrated well into British society.

 6. At [49] the judge took into account that a return  to  India  would  be
    hugely disruptive for the third appellant, in that  it  would  decimate
    friendships, relationships and activities that form  the  core  of  her
    private  life  and  also  interrupt  her   education,   "although   not
    irredeemably".   The  judge  went  on,  at  [54],  to  find  that   the
    appellants' stay in the UK had:

         "reached the length where as was said in Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
         00197, it can lead to the development of social  and  cultural  and
         educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt  without
         compelling reasons and that seven years is  considered  a  relevant
         period in cases of children for  such  ties  to  be  developed  and
         emotionally it would undoubtedly be highly stressful".

 7. The judge took into consideration all these factors and,  although  not
    highlighted by Mr Harding, the judge had also considered  factors  such
    as, although the third appellant suffered from acute  eczema,  this  is
    managed by cream and avoiding the sun and that she is mainly  well  and
    that her family had managed the heat in the summer in the UK, which was
    a good indicator of how they could help to manage  it  in  India.   The
    judge went on at [56] to see no reason why the  third  appellant  could
    not establish a connection with the country of her nationality and that
    she had grandparents, an aunt and uncle and cousins in India and  would
    have contact with her parents, friends and family members who form part
    of the Indian community in the United Kingdom, which means that she has
    some knowledge and familiarity of Indian culture.  The judge took  into
    consideration that this did not mean that she would not  find  life  in
    India different from life in the UK but it will assist her in adapting.
     The judge found  that  the  third  appellant  would  have  spoken  and
    understood Gujarati prior to attending school,  when  she  communicated
    mainly with her parents whose  main  language  remains  Gujarati.   The
    judge made a finding, which has not been challenged, that the appellant
    would be able to speak Gujarati, even if not able to read it and  write
    it and there was 'nothing to think' that she would have any  particular
    difficulty in learning this.

 8. The judge found that the third appellant  would  be  well  educated  in
    India and had been provided with no evidence to satisfy  her  that  she
    would not have access to education.  The  judge  also  found  that  the
    third appellant had not reached secondary level  education  which,  she
    indicated, may have made a difference in the judge's consideration  and
    did not consider that her education would be  significantly  disrupted.
    There was no challenge to those findings which were  closely  reasoned,
    evidence based and available to the judge.

 9. Having very carefully considered the position of the  third  appellant,
    including in light of the relevant case  law  and  the  judge  directed
    herself in relation to EV Philippines and Others[2014] EWCA Civ 874 and
    MT and ET child's best interests ex tempore pilot Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT
    0088 (IAC), as  well  as  Azimi-Moayed  and  others   [2013]  UKUT  and
    considered the evidence before her in light of that case law, the judge
    went on to reach a finding on the third appellant's best interests that
    they would lie in  her  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom,  at  [57],
    because:

         "It will mean that ties in the United Kingdom  formed  through  her
         residence would not be disrupted and she is likely to  have  better
         future  opportunities  both  educationally  and   economically   by
         continuing to live in a first world country."

10. However the judge, also at [57], went on to state that she did not find
    this to be a case where the third appellant's  best  interests  pointed
    overwhelmingly in favour of remaining in the United Kingdom because  of
    the factors which she had already mentioned which indicated  she  would
    be able to form a connection with her country of nationality.

11. There was much discussion at the hearing before me in relation  to  the
    effect of MT and ET and in particular what was said  at  paragraph  34,
    namely:

         "In the present case there are no such powerful reasons.  Of course
         the public interest lies in removing a person, such as MT, who  has
         abused the immigration laws of the  United  Kingdom.   Although  Mr
         Deller did not seek to rely on it, we  take  account  of  the  fact
         that, as recorded in Judge Baird's decision, MT had, at some stage,
         received a community order for using a  false  document  to  obtain
         employment.  But, given the strength of ET's case, MT's conduct  in
         our view comes nowhere close to requiring the respondent to succeed
         and Mr Deller did not strongly urge us to so  find.   Mr  Nicholson
         submitted that, even on the findings of Judge Martin, MT  was  what
         might be described as  a  somewhat  run  of  the  mill  immigration
         offender  who  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  visit   visa,
         overstayed, made a claim for asylum that was found to be false  and
         who has pursued various legal means  of  remaining  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  None of this is to be taken in any  way  as  excusing  or
         downplaying  MT's  unlawful  behaviour.  The  point  is  that   her
         immigration history is not so bad as  to  constitute  the  kind  of
         'powerful' reason that would render reasonable the removal of ET to
         Nigeria."

12. Both parties accepted that the decision in MT and ET was  not  reported
    on this basis, but rather in relation to the focus of a best interests'
    assessment (as well as ex tempore  decisions).  Mr  Harding  sought  to
    persuade me  that  paragraph  34  was  at  the  very  least  persuasive
    guidance.

13. As already indicated the judge directed herself in relation to  MT  and
    ET, at [52] and [53].  The judge summarised the head note of MT and  ET
    in relation to the fact that a very young child  who  has  not  started
    school will have difficulty in establishing that Article 8 private  and
    family life is a material element but that this position  changes  over
    time where an assessment of best interests must adopt a correspondingly
    wider focus, examining the child's position  in  the  wider  world,  of
    which school will usually be an important part.  In addition, the judge
    went on to record at [53] that great reliance had been placed on MT and
    ET but the judge found that the facts of that case were quite different
    to the case before her, in that the child in MT and ET  was  older  and
    "was at a critical stage of her education".  The judge reiterated  that
    the circumstances of the third appellant were quite  different  and  as
    always each case has to be considered on its individual  facts.   Those
    were clearly available findings and could not, on  the  facts  and  the
    judge's careful findings, be said to be irrational.

14. I was not pointed to anything by Mr Harding  that  might  suggest  that
    such an approach is an error.  It is more than evident that  the  judge
    had in mind and applied the correct tests,  including  that  the  judge
    applied MT and ET and turned her mind to whether the same  outcome,  as
    set out in paragraph 34 of MT and ET was merited in this case. For  the
    adequate reasons she gave, it was not.

15. Indeed, although the judge's decision  was  promulgated  on  9  October
    2018, a number of weeks before the judgment in KO (Nigeria) and  Others
    [2018] UKSC 53, the judge's approach is that endorsed  by  the  Supreme
    Court.  Whilst I accept Mr Harding's submission that the Supreme  Court
    was focused on the question of whether or not the  immigration  history
    and  conduct  of  the  parents  is  relevant  to  the   assessment   of
    reasonableness (under  Section  117B(6)  or  paragraph  276ADE)  or  to
    whether deportation is unduly harsh, the Supreme Court  found  that  it
    was inevitably relevant to consider where the parents, apart  from  the
    relevant  provision,  are  expected  to  be  as  it  will  normally  be
    reasonable for the child to  be  with  them.   The  Supreme  Court,  at
    paragraph 18, decided that, to that extent, the record of  the  parents
    may become indirectly material if it leads to them having to leave  the
    UK.  It is only if it would not be reasonable for the  child  to  leave
    with them that the provision may give the parents a right to remain.

16. Although Mr Harding  valiantly  attempted  to  persuade  me  otherwise,
    including suggesting that there was a circularity to  the  respondent's
    argument, which I do not accept, the  judge  gave  more  than  adequate
    reasons as to why it would be reasonable for  the  third  appellant  to
    leave the UK, including as set out at [55] and [56] of the decision and
    reasons, as well as, in summary, at [62].

17. In her summary at [62] the judge found  that  although  she  took  into
    account that it was in the third appellant's best interests  to  remain
    in the UK, it was reasonable, bearing in mind the  public  interest  in
    the maintenance of immigration control, and the judge  placed  reliance
    on what was said in EV Philippines and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 874  (and
    the general approach in EV Philippines  was  further  approved  by  the
    Supreme Court) that the maintenance of immigration control is a  strong
    weight and therefore it would be reasonable for the third appellant  to
    return to India with her parents and brother who are  all  citizens  of
    India and who have no right to remain in the United Kingdom.

18. It was the judge's finding, again to which  there  was  no  sustainable
    challenge before me,  that  the  third  appellant  had  not  reached  a
    critical stage in her education and would be able to adapt to  life  in
    India, her country of nationality with both her  parents'  support  and
    although she was at an age where friends were becoming  more  important
    to her, her parents were still the centre  of  her  life  and  able  to
    support the third appellant and promote  her  development.   The  third
    appellant had relatives in India and the judge found that she will  not
    be totally unfamiliar with the culture and traditions for  the  reasons
    that the judge had given at [56].

19. Mr Harding took specific issue with the judge's findings  at  [61]  and
    submitted that there  were  no  powerful  reasons  as  required  in  MA
    Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  In considering whether it was reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom regard must be  had  to
    the wider public interest in effective  immigration  control  and  that
    where a child had been in the United Kingdom for seven years this  must
    be given significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
    exercise.  However the judge reminded herself  that  it  establishes  a
    starting point that leave should be granted unless there were  powerful
    reasons to the contrary (paragraph 49 of MA Pakistan).

20. In finding those powerful  reasons  the  judge  noted  that  the  first
    appellant had come to the United Kingdom with no right  to  remain  and
    there was no dispute that this was in March 2004.  Therefore the  first
    appellant at the time of the First-tier Tribunal decision had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for over fourteen years illegally.  The  judge  also
    took into consideration that the first  appellant  came  illegally  and
    deliberatively remained without regularising  his  immigration  status.
    Although his wife entered as a student in  2012  she  too  subsequently
    remained in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   The  judge  took  into
    consideration that an application had been made to the  respondent  for
    leave in 2012.  However this was refused and the  appellants  continued
    to remain without leave.

21. The judge made no error in finding  that  this  significant  number  of
    years without leave in the United Kingdom could not be  overlooked  and
    also took into consideration that neither the appellant  nor  his  wife
    spoke English nor were they financially independent,  noting  that  the
    first appellant  works  illegally  when  he  has  the  opportunity  and
    otherwise relies on relatives and friends for financial support.

22. This is not a case where the judge was relying on the misconduct of the
    first  and  second  appellants  as  part  of   the   consideration   of
    reasonableness under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and Section 117B(6), which
    KO (Nigeria) has now confirmed would be the wrong approach.  Rather, as
    also expressly stated in KO (Nigeria), the judge was considering  where
    the parents were expected to be and gave more than adequate reasons  as
    to why it was reasonable for the third appellant and indeed the  fourth
    appellant to go with them and there was also  no  error  in  the  judge
    distinguishing the facts in MT and ET, including the age and  education
    stage of the respective appellants.

23. The judge reached a rational conclusion for the adequate reasons  given
    which were available to her on the basis of the evidence she  carefully
    considered, including in light of the relevant jurisprudence.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellants' appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
As two of the appellants are minor children I make an anonymity direction.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
