
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
HU/15609/2016

                                                    HU/15613/2016

                                                    HU/15618/2016

                                                     HU/15620/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22nd March 2018                         |On 25th April 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     ra
                                    m s k
                                     wk
                                     m K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini of Counsel, instructed by Apex Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Cooper promulgated on 22 December 2017, in which the Appellants  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  their  applications  for
    leave to remain on the basis of private and family life  dated  4  June
    2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are all nationals of Pakistan who  are  mother  and  her
    three children.  Their dates of birth are 25 May 1983, 12 October 2007,
    29 November 2009 and 24 September 2015.  The  First  Appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom on 2 February 2009 as a spouse with valid  leave  to
    remain until 17 June  2009.   Further  applications  as  the  dependent
    partner (of a  Tier  1  Post  Study  migrant  and  on  a  human  rights
    application) were made and  refused  in  2009  and  2013.   The  Second
    Appellant also entered the United Kingdom as a child joining his parent
    on 2 February 2009 with leave to remain valid to 17 June 2009.  He  was
    also included in the same further  applications  as  his  mother.   The
    Third Appellant was born in the United Kingdom and was  included  as  a
    dependent on the last application  in  2013  which  was  refused.   The
    Fourth Appellant was born in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had  no  prior
    applications to the one leading to the decision under appeal.

 3. On 17 March 2016, the Appellants  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom under the parent and private  life  route,
    which was refused in a single composite letter dealing with all of  the
    Appellants on 4 June 2016.  The Respondent firstly considered the First
    Appellant's position under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    found that the requirements were not met for a grant of leave to remain
    as a parent because although it was accepted that the Second  Appellant
    had lived in the United Kingdom continuously for at least  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of application, paragraph EX.1  did  not
    apply as it was considered reasonable  for  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom  and  return  to  Pakistan  with  the  other  Appellants.   The
    Respondent also decided that the  First  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules on the  basis
    that there were no very significant obstacles to her reintegration into
    Pakistan because she was born there and had spent the majority  of  her
    life there, spoke English and was  believed  to  continue  to  maintain
    close cultural, social and familial ties to Pakistan.

 4. In respect of the Second Appellant,  the  Respondent  first  considered
    whether he was entitled to leave to remain as a child under Appendix FM
    but  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  as  the  First  Appellant's
    application had already been refused.  In relation to private life, the
    Respondent accepted that  he  had  lived  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least seven years but deemed it reasonable  for  him  to
    return to Pakistan with his mother  and  two  siblings  such  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration  Rules  were
    not met.

 5. In respect of the Third and Fourth Appellants, the  Respondent  refused
    their applications under Appendix FM on  the  same  basis  as  for  the
    Second Appellant, that they did not have a parent with leave to  remain
    and in relation to private life, neither child  had  been  continuously
    resident in the United Kingdom for at least seven  years  and  did  not
    meet any of the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 6. The Respondent separately considered whether there were any exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules, but did not accept that there were.  In  particular,
    it was considered reasonable for the Appellant to return to Pakistan as
    part of a family and that friendships and  relationships  made  in  the
    United Kingdom could be maintained on return.  The Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellants would suffer any  greater  hardship  than
    other people in Pakistan on return and there was no explanation  as  to
    why financial support from a family friend in the United Kingdom  could
    not continue on  return,  at  least  in  the  short  term.   The  child
    Appellants would be able to enter the education system in Pakistan  and
    would be supported by their  mother  to  reintegrate.   The  Respondent
    considered that the best interests of the children were to remain  with
    their mother and return to Pakistan with her.

 7. Judge Cooper dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22
    December 2017 on all grounds.  It was accepted  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the central issue in  the  appeals  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the children to be removed to  Pakistan  which  required
    firstly, an assessment as to their individual  best  interests.   There
    was no dispute that the best interests of the children were  to  remain
    with their mother as their primary carer and the best interests of  the
    Fourth Appellant went no further than this given his very young age  at
    the time of application and hearing.  Consideration was then  given  to
    the best interests of the Second and Third Appellants,  the  detail  of
    which I return to below, with a conclusion that  their  best  interests
    would lie in remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  continuing  their
    education here.  However, when undertaking the balancing  exercise  for
    the purposes of Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,
    Judge Cooper's conclusion was that their removal to Pakistan would  not
    be a disproportionate interference with  their  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article 8.

The appeal

 8. The Appellants appeal on the grounds that the  best  interests  of  the
    child Appellants were not given  primary  consideration  in  accordance
    with section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.
    In particular, the First-tier Tribunal did not consider their length of
    stay in the United Kingdom and the strong roots they had put down at  a
    formative part of  their  life,  that  all  of  the  children  were  in
    education and the eldest has been in the United Kingdom for nine  years
    since the age of one.  Secondly, the Appellants  appeal  on  the  basis
    that there had been insufficient consideration of the Article  8  claim
    of the First Appellant who had formed a strong family and private  life
    in the United Kingdom.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chohan on 19 January 2018  on
    all grounds.

10. In oral submissions, Mr Saini for the Appellants sought to expand  upon
    the grounds of appeal, some of which was adding  detail  and  flesh  to
    that which was originally  claimed  and  some  of  which  was  straying
    towards reliance on a new unpleaded ground of appeal.  The  latter  was
    the submission that the First-tier Tribunal fails to make any reference
    to the Respondent's guidance 'Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section
    1.0b - Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private  Life:  10-Year
    Routes' which  contains  an  expectation  of  leave  being  granted  to
    children with seven years continuous residence in  the  United  Kingdom
    unless there are strong countervailing reasons.

11. The part of the Respondent's guidance relied upon by the Appellants  at
    the oral hearing, in substance goes no further than the guidance  given
    by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 705 as to the  best  interests  of  the
    children and the application of section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Although Counsel  relied  further  on
    the original intention set out in the Home Office 'Statement of Intent:
    Family  migration'  (June  2012)  that  only  criminality  would  be  a
    sufficiently strong counterveiling factor against a child's  continuous
    residence in the United Kingdom for at least seven years, Lord  Justice
    Elias found in paragraph 46 of MA (Pakistan) that the requirement  went
    no further than  'strong  reasons'.   For  these  reasons,  I  did  not
    consider the submission to be a new distinct ground of appeal in  which
    an application should be made to amend the grounds.

12. The Appellants rely specifically on paragraphs 13,  26  and  28  of  MA
    (Pakistan) which contain preliminary remarks about paragraph 276ADE  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  section  117B(6)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and then submissions from  the  parties
    as to the scope of consideration under section 117B(6).  MA  (Pakistan)
    was also relied upon as the basis of a submission that the  immigration
    history of the parents is not relevant  to  any  consideration  of  the
    public interest,
    and the First-tier Tribunal therefore erred in law as  the  immigration
    history of the First Appellant was the only reason for refusing  leave.
    However, Counsel then  accepted  that  the  immigration  history  of  a
    parent(s) was a factor to be considered in the round.

13. In response, Mr Duffy submitted on behalf of the  Respondent  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was an adequate one which  included
    sufficient consideration of the best  interests  of  the  children  and
    assessment of proportionality  under  Article  8.   Although  the  best
    interests of the eldest two children were found to be to remain in  the
    United Kingdom, there were countervailing factors against  a  grant  of
    leave to remain, in particular the  poor  immigration  history  of  the
    family and the finding of deliberate  manipulation  of  the  system  by
    making an application deliberately within weeks of the Second Appellant
    having been in the United Kingdom for seven  years  continuously.   The
    findings and decision made by  the  judge  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and there were no material errors in the decision.

Findings and reasons

 1. The Appellants' first ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal
    has failed to  properly  consider  the  best  interests  of  the  child
    Appellants in accordance with section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.   Specifically,  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider the children's length of residence in the United  Kingdom  and
    the strong roots they have put down here including  their  progress  in
    education.  However, in circumstances  where  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    expressly considered all of these factors (which are clearly set out in
    paragraphs 49 and 53 to 55), and concluded that  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the Second and Third Appellant to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  it  is  difficult  to  see  where  the  Appellants  could  be
    dissatisfied with the findings made, let alone show an error of law  in
    the assessment of the best interests.

 2. Contrary to the written grounds  of  appeal,  as  identified  by  Judge
    Chohan  when  granting  permission  to  appeal,  the  Appellants'  real
    complaint  is  that  insufficient  weight  has  been  attached  to  the
    children's best interests given their length of residence in the United
    Kingdom when determining whether their removal from the United  Kingdom
    would  be  unreasonable  and  ultimately  whether   it   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with their right to respect  for  private
    and family life under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 3. The Appellants are right to highlight the lack of express reference  to
    the Court of Appeals  decision  in  MA  (Pakistan)  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision which is clearly applicable to  the  facts  of  the
    present appeal, however I do not find that in substance there has  been
    any failure to consider the right factors in making the decision as  to
    whether it is reasonable to expect the child Appellants  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom nor any failure to attach  sufficient  weight  to  their
    best interests, by reference to their length of residence in the United
    Kingdom or otherwise.

 4. Lord Justice Elias found that the only significance of section  117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is that  where  the
    seven year rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning  in
    favour of leave to remain  being  granted  (paragraph  45).   This  was
    expanded in paragraph 49 where he stated that "the fact that the  child
    has been in the UK over seven years would need to be given  significant
    weight in the proportionality exercise for two related reasons:  first,
    because of its relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the
    child's best interests; and second, because it establishes  a  starting
    point the leave should be granted unless there were powerful reasons to
    the contrary.".

 5. Although it  is  well-established  that  the  conduct  and  immigration
    history of the parents is not relevant to the assessment of  a  child's
    best interests, it is relevant to the wider assessment of whether it is
    reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    ultimately whether removal  is  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    their right to respect for private and family  life  under  Article  8.
    The Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) rejected the submission  that  the
    best interests  assessment  for  a  child  automatically  resolved  the
    reasonableness question.  In paragraph 47, Lord Justice Elias held that
    "Even where the child's best interests are to stay, it may still not be
    unreasonable to require a  child  to  leave.   That  will  depend  upon
    careful analysis of the nature and extent of links in the UK and in the
    country where it is proposed he should return.".   He went on to  refer
    to the decision of Lord Justice Christopher Clark in EV (Phillipines) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  874  as  to
    how a tribunal should apply the proportionality test where wider public
    interest considerations are in play in  circumstances  where  the  best
    interests of the child are that he should remain in the United Kingdom,
    finding that the same principles would apply on the wider  construction
    of section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
     That decision refers to factors to  consider  to  determine  the  best
    interests of a child and then how emphatic an answer falls to be  given
    to the question of whether it is in the best interests of the child  to
    remain, as to how much weight should be given to that compared  to  the
    strong weight to be given to the need to maintain  immigration  control
    in pursuit of the economic well-being of the country, including whether
    the applicants have no entitlement to remain and if they  have  a  poor
    immigration history.

 6. In paragraph 36 of EV (Phillipines),  Lord  Justice  Clark  held,  "The
    longer the child has been here, the more  advanced  (or  critical)  the
    stage of his education,  the  looser  his  ties  with  the  country  in
    question, and the more deleterious the consequences of his return,  the
    greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.   If  it  is
    overwhelmingly in the child's best interest that he should not  return,
    the need to maintain immigration control may well not tip the  balance.
    By contrast if it is in the child's best interest to remain,  but  only
    on balance (with some factors pointing the other way), the  result  may
    well be the opposite.".

 7. In the present case, the  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the  child
    Appellants had been brought up with Pakistani influences and family  in
    the United Kingdom, including eating Pakistani food,  with  Urdu  being
    spoken at home and with the Second  and  Third  Appellant  having  some
    grasp of that language as well as learning other languages  at  school.
    Further, that the Appellants had  close  family  members  in  Pakistan,
    including the First Appellant's  father  and  siblings  who  will  live
    together in the extended family home there.  Specific consideration was
    given to the length of residence of the children  and  their  education
    but there were no factors, individually or cumulatively to show that it
    was overwhelmingly in the children's best interests to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The  strongest  factor  was  acknowledged  to  be  the
    significance attached to the length of residence of the children but no
    specific deleterious consequences on  return.   Specific  consideration
    was also given to the public  interest  in  this  case,  with  specific
    reference to the First Appellant's poor immigration history and finding
    that she deliberately remained in the United Kingdom  until  the  point
    was reached that the Second Appellant would have been resident here for
    seven years to make an application to acquire status on that basis.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal's reasons for the conclusion that  there  would
    be no disproportionate interference  with  the  Appellants'  rights  to
    respect for private and family life under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights are set out in summary in  paragraph  71  as
    follows:

    "I do not doubt that  returning,  or  going  for  the  first  time,  to
    Pakistan will present the children with difficulties.  They  will  have
    to get to know Urdu better than they know it now, and  comes  to  terms
    with a different society and culture.   However  I  am  satisfied  that
    their upbringing to date has occurred against the  background  of  that
    language and those cultural norms.  They will be returning  with  their
    mother, to their mother's extended family.  The eldest child  [...]  is
    at a stage in his  schooling  where  he  would  be  preparing  to  move
    secondary school, so it could be seen  as  a  "natural  break"  in  his
    education, and an appropriate time for him to make the  change  to  the
    Pakistani education system."

 9. The conclusion and the reasons for it show that not only has the First-
    tier Tribunal properly assessed the  best  interests  of  the  children
    under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
    but has also attached  sufficient  weight  to  them  in  the  balancing
    exercise to determine the question whether it is reasonable for them to
    leave the United Kingdom as part of the ultimate question as to whether
    their removal would be a disproportionate interference with their right
    to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  Despite the lack of express  reference  to
    the Respondent's guidance or to the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  MA
    (Pakistan), the First-tier Tribunal's decision was in  accordance  with
    both and there is no  error  of  law  as  to  the  assessment  of  best
    interests or findings on Article 8.  Those findings were  open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis of the evidence before it.

10. The Appellants' second ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal
    erred in its assessment of the First Appellant's  individual  interests
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   There  is
    however no error of law in the assessment of  her  interests  absent  a
    finding further to section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 that it would not be reasonable to expect any or all of
    her children to leave the United Kingdom.  As set out in  the  decision
    in paragraphs 57 to 61, the First Appellant has remained in the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully since 2009 such that little weight should  be  given
    to the private life that she has established here in that time.   There
    was further little detail of any significant private life in the United
    Kingdom which could not be re-established in Pakistan.  There would  be
    no interference with her family life as she would  return  to  Pakistan
    with her three children and in the circumstances, there is no error  of
    law in the finding that her removal would, on  assessment  of  her  own
    individual interests, be proportionate to the legitimate aim.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     23rd April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

