
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15692/2018
                                                               HU/15700/2018
                                                               HU/15695/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                 |                                |
|On 9th July 2019                       |On 17th July 2019               |
|                                       |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                     FNO
                                     TSO
                                     HOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adewusi of Crown Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Groves Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
 1. An anonymity direction was previously made and shall continue.
 2. The Appellants are a mother (A1) and her  two  daughters  (A2  and  A3)
    whose  dates  of  birth  are  respectively  30.3.1973,  21.2.2000   and
    29.3.2004 and they are all nationals of Nigeria.
 3. This is a resumed hearing after at an error of law hearing on  4.1.2019
    when I set aside the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge  Turner  who
    had allowed the Appellants appeal against  a  refusal  of  their  human
    rights claim.
 4. The Appellants are appealing against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    made on 10 July 2018 to refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom on
    the basis of
    family and private  life.  The  refusal  was  on  the  basis  that  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and Paragraph 276 ADE of HC  395  were  not
    met.In the circumstance that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    are not met by such the Appellant the Secretary of State will  consider
    granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the   Rules   where   exceptional
    circumstances apply which are defined by her as circumstances in  which
    refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    individual concerned. Such circumstances were not  found  to  apply  in
    this case.
 5. The refusal letter reasons can be summarised as follows:-
          a) A1 the adult could not meet Appendix FM as a  partner  and  in
             relation to EX.1a the Appellants children had not lived in the
             UK for 7 continuous years at the time of the  application  and
             the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  eligibility  requirements
             because she was an overstayer.
          b) In relation to  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  there  were  no  very
             significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  in  Nigeria  a
             country where she had lived the majority of her life and spoke
             both English and Yoruba.
          c) A2 and A3 could not  at  the  date  of  application  meet  the
             requirements of paragraph 276 (iii)  (20  years  residence)  ;
             (iv) (lived in the UK for 7 years); (v) (aged 18-25)  or  (vi)
             (aged over 18)
          d) There were no exceptional circumstances.

The Law
 6. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the standard
    of proof is upon the balance of probability.
 7. The Appellant's  appeal  is  pursuant  to  Section  82(1)  (b)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('the  2002  Act')  which
    provides that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where  the  Secretary
    of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim.  S84  of  the  Act
    provides that an appeal under s82(1)(b) must be brought on  the  ground
    that a decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.
 8. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it
    must, in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in all
    cases to the considerations listed in section117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014). Section 117 (3) provides that  the  'public  interest  question'
    means the question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
 9. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

Section 117B6


10. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

"qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"




11. In relation to the test of reasonableness  for  the  purpose  of  both
    paragraph s 117B6 of the 2002 I have taken into account  the  guidance
    in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 at paragraph 51
    "The parents' conduct was relevant in that it meant that they had to
    leave the country. As I have explained (para 18 above), it was in that
    context that it had to be considered whether it was reasonable for the
    children to leave with them. Their best interests would have been for
    the whole family to remain here. But in a context where the parents had
    to leave, the natural expectation would be that the children would go
    with them, and there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by the judge
    to suggest that that would be other than reasonable."
Evidence
12. I had the  bundles  that  were  before  the  First  tier  Tribunal.  No
    additional evidence was served.
13. I heard evidence from all of the Appellants and there is a full note of
    their evidence in the record of proceedings and  I  will  refer  to  it
    where relevant.
Final Submissions
14. I heard submissions from Ms Groves on behalf of the Respondent:
15. She relied on what was said in KO that while it  may  be  in  the  best
    interests of the child Appellant to remain in the UK if the parent  has
    no right to remain in the UK the natural expectation is that they  will
    follow the parents.
16. It was not unreasonable for A3 to leave with the mother.
17. She suggested that the Tribunal were not being  told  the  whole  truth
    about the  family  available  in  Nigeria  as  there  were  significant
    inconsistencies in the evidence of the witnesses.
18. The fact that contact has been lost with family members does  not  mean
    it cannot be re-established.
19. A1 had made an effort to maintain links with people  from  Nigeria  and
    her culture in her place of worship.
20. English is widely spoken in Nigeria and clearly  A2  and  A2  had  some
    facility in Yoruba.
21. I heard submissions by Mr Adewusi on behalf of the Appellants.
22. He accepted that the issue in the case was one  of  reasonableness  for
    the purpose of s 117B 6 as A3 is a qualifying child.
23. He suggested that the child Appellant was at a  crucial  stage  in  her
    education studying for her GCSEs and it was in her  best  interests  to
    remain in the UK.

Findings

24. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round before  reaching
    any findings.  I have done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
    compartmentalised my findings in some respects below, I must  emphasise
    the findings have only been made having taken account of  the  evidence
    as a whole.

25. The Appellant appeals the refusal of their human rights claims. I  have
    determined the issue on the  basis  of  the  questions  posed  by  Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


26. I accept that the Appellants enjoy family life together in the  UK  but
    their enjoyment of family life could continue if they were returned  to
    Nigeria as a family. Indeed it seems likely from the evidence  I  heard
    (which I will address further below) that it is likely that A2 and  A3s
    father is in Nigeria and therefore if they are ever to have a  prospect
    of developing a relationship with their father that is more  likely  to
    occur if they are in Nigeria.


27.  I accept that given the Appellants have been in the UK and A2  and  A3
    had attended school here they have developed a private life.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


28. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


29. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for  the  Appellants  to  regulate  their
    conduct by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


30. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


31. In making the assessment of the best interests of A3 who  is  15  years
    old I have   taken  into  account  ZH  (Tanzania)  (FC)  (Appellant)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011]  UKSC  4
    where Lady Hale noted Article 3(1) of the UNCRC which states  that  "in
    all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by  ...  courts  of
    law,  administrative  authorities  or  legislative  bodies,  the   best
    interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."

32. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

33. The starting point is that it is in the best interests of  children  to
    be with both of their parents and if their parents  are  being  removed
    from the UK and starting point suggests dependent  children  should  go
    with them.  A1 had leave in the UK until April 2013 and thereafter  has
    had no right to remain in the UK.


34. I take into account that at the time of the hearing A3 has been in  the
    UK for eight years  having  entered  on  the  2nd  of  May  2011.   She
    confirmed to me that she enjoys good health.   She  also  confirmed  in
    oral evidence that she attended school in Nigeria prior  to  coming  to
    the UK.  She attends school in the UK and there is nothing  to  suggest
    that she is not performing well.  Given that that she  turned  15  this
    year she is on course to do her GCSEs next year so I do not accept that
    she is currently at a particularly crucial stage in her education.


35. I considered the extent to which it could be said that she  has  become
    distanced from her country of origin as she has not returned to Nigeria
    since her arrival in the UK.  A3s mother  confirmed  in  oral  evidence
    that she could speak Yoruba although the  Appellant  herself  suggested
    she was not a strong speaker but could certainly understand it. She  is
    clearly a bright young lady and if she can speak it  to  a  degree  and
    understand it I am satisfied that if required her fluency would improve
    with the help of her mother although clearly English is  widely  spoken
    in Nigeria.  She also said in oral evidence that a mother made  efforts
    to keep their culture alive for them.  She confirmed that she  attended
    the Muslim Society with her mother and sister  and  that  many  of  the
    other attendees were Nigerians and that you  room  that  was  routinely
    spent there. Therefore I find that efforts have been made both socially
    and linguistically to retain links to their country of origin.


36. I have considered the extent to which the family's connections could be
    re-established in Nigeria in so far as that was relevant to  the  issue
    of A3s best interests.  I have found it  difficult  two  draw  a  clear
    picture of what family is available in  Nigeria  because  I  found  the
    mothers evidence on this issue to be extremely  poor  and  inconsistent
    with the evidence given by A2 and 3.  It seems to need more likely that
    they were telling the truth as they understood it to be and the  mother
    was lying in order to  minimize  what  might  be  described  as  family
    available to them in Nigeria as it did not assist her case.   Thus  for
    example while A1 suggested that her mother died a long time ago as  did
    her father, and dated 2002 being suggested after  some  hesitation,  A2
    confirmed that her mother's parents were alive when they came to the UK
    in 2011 and A3 stated in oral evidence she  believed  they  were  still
    alive. This undermines the general credibility of  A1s  evidence  about
    her family in Nigeria as she has clearly lied to minimize her links  to
    the country.


37. I have already indicated  that  the  available  information  about  the
    father of A3 was that he was in Nigeria as that was the last  place  A2
    and A3 were aware he lived and clearly if A3 was in  the  same  country
    there is some potential for re-establishing contact.


38. I note that the family are Muslims and attend the Muslim Society in the
    UK but there is nothing to  suggest  that  A3  could  not  continue  to
    practice her religion in Nigeria and indeed may find some support  from
    religious  charities  initially  as  they  have  been  supported  by  a
    religious organisation in the UK.


39. At this stage I have also considered whether the family  could  support
    themselves on their return to Nigeria as this might impact on the  best
    interests of A3.  I found that in this respect A1 was again a very poor
    witness in her own cause.  The Appellant had to be repeatedly  reminded
    to answer  questions  directly  as  it  seemed  to  me  she  was  being
    deliberately vague and evasive and mumbling so that neither I  nor  the
    advocates could hear her response to difficult questions that  did  not
    assist her case so the questions had to be  repeated  on  a  number  of
    occasions.  It became clear from her oral evidence that after initially
    claiming she had not worked in Nigeria that in  fact  she  had  a  shop
    selling goods and lived independently of her family. She gave  evidence
    that she acquired the shop when she was 25 years old and  was  able  to
    support herself of the next  13  years  and  was  unable  to  give  any
    coherent reason why on her return she could not support herself and her
    family with such an enterprise again. Therefore I do  not  accept  that
    there would be anything about their financial and social  circumstances
    that would be contrary to the Appellants best interests.


40. I recognise that A3 herself would prefer to stay in the UK as  she  has
    developed friendships and feels familiar with  the  culture,  education
    and society here. There are no health or linguistic issues and  Nigeria
    has an education system that A1 herself admits she benefited from until
    the age of 25.


41. There is therefore no evidence that returning to her home country where
    she lived for 7 years would be contrary to A3s  best  interests.  If  I
    were wrong and it was in her best interests to stay  it  would  not  be
    overwhelmingly so as I am satisfied that  in  the  absence  of  social,
    health, linguistic  or  educational  issues  the  Appellant  would  re-
    establish herself in Nigeria with the support of her mother  and  older
    sister.


42.  I now turn to the wider proportionality assessment. Consideration  of
    the issue of proportionality is 'consideration of "the public interest
    question" as defined  by  section  117A(3)  of  the  2002  Act.  I  am
    therefore required  by  section  117A(2)(a)  to  have  regard  to  the
    considerations listed in section 117B.


43. I take into account  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest. I note in this context  that  while
    this is not an appeal against the refusal under the  Immigration  Rules
    that none of the Appellants meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which underpin immigration control in the UK that there would  It
    is apparent from the  documents  which  accompanied  the  Statement  of
    Changes that  the  changes  to  the  Rules  were  intended  to  promote
    consistency, predictability and transparency in  decision-making  where
    issues under Article 8 arose, and to clarify the policy framework.  The
    changes were said to reflect the Government's and Parliament's view  of
    how, as a matter of public policy, the balance should be struck between
    the right to respect for private and  family  life.  While  Mr  Adewusi
    referred to A3 meeting 276 ADE (iv) she did not do so at  the  time  of
    the application which is a requirement of the  Rules  and  A2  for  the
    reasons set out in the refusal letter did not  meet  the  private  life
    requirements of the Rule. I am required therefore to give weight to the
    fact that the Appellants did not meet the requirements of the Rules.


44. Therefore I am satisfied that  the  only  issue  in  this  case  is
    whether the Appellants succeed by reference to paragraph 117B6  and
    whether it would be reasonable to expect A3  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom because if the answer to that question is no then A1 and A3
    s appeal would I accept A1s appeal would  succeed  and  given  that
    they are a family unit and A3 has not  established  an  independent
    life her appeal would also succeed.


45. The assessment of the reasonableness of  return  must  not  however
    focus on the position of the children alone and this has been  made
    clear in MA and more recently in AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180.
     I am therefore entitled to take into account that A1 and A2 had no
    right to live in the UK as A1s leave expired in 2013 and A2s  leave
    expired in 2011 and there was no attempt to regularise their status
    until 2017. A1 was unable to give a coherent explanation as to  why
    she waited so long to regularise her status. None  of  the  parties
    are UK citizens which distinguishes their  case  from  J  G  (117B6
    "reasonable to leave UK") Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 relied on by  Mr
    Adewusi .


46. I accept that they speak English.


47. I note that they have not been self reliant as they have relied  on
    the charitable support of a religious organisation.


48. I am required by the provisions of s 117B to give little weight  to
    private life established while status is unlawful and as  indicated
    above the Appellants have had no status in the UK since their leave
    expired.


49. When considering where the balance lies between the best  interests
    of the children on the one hand where I have set out above that the
    best interests A3, and the importance  of  maintaining  immigration
    control on the other, I am mindful of the fact that a child  should
    not be punished for the actions of their parents. But I am entitled
    to take into account the fact that they  are  not  British  Citizen
    children and are not entitled as  of  right  to  benefit  from  the
    education system and other public services of this country.


50. Having considered all of the evidence carefully and in the round  I
    have come to the conclusion that it is reasonable for the  purposes
    of section 117B6 to require A3 to leave the United Kingdom  as  her
    best interests are not  determinative  of  the  issue  and  can  be
    outweighed by the public interest. Whilst I  accept  that  it  will
    inevitably cause all of the family some distress and hardship, I am
    not persuaded that this will be sufficiently grave to outweigh  the
    wider interests of maintaining immigration control.  They  will  be
    returning as a family unit to a place


        . where they have all lived previously, A1 for the majority  of
          her life.


        . A1 has previously worked and supported herself in Nigeria and
          there was no reason why she could that there not do so again.


        . I am not  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  has  been  given  a
          truthful picture about what family members are  available  in
          Nigeria.  There was a clear discrepancy between the  evidence
          of the appellants as to whether A1s parents were still  alive
          and therefore I have come to the  conclusion  that  I  cannot
          rely on her assertion that she has any other  family  members
          in Italy and she has contact.  I am satisfied that A 2 and  3
          have relied on her evidence  as  to  what  family  they  have
          there.

51. I am satisfied that in this case the applications failed to comply with
    the Immigration Rules and no compelling circumstances  were  identified
    why those Rules should not be applied in this case in  the  usual  way,
    there was nothing disproportionate in applying the Rules in  accordance
    with their terms, with the effect that Appellants application failed.

Conclusion

52. On the facts as established in these appeals, there are no  substantial
    grounds for believing that the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
    treatment in breach of ECHR.

Decision
53. The appeals are dismissed.
54. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014


55. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                              Date
12.7.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
