

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/15215/2018

                                               HU/15217/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 December 2019                      |  On 9 December 2019             |
|                                        |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 MISS RABIA
                               ABDULLAH JAVED
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PAKISTAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, born on 18 June  2001  and  20
    December 2002.  The sponsor is their mother.  She moved to  the  UK  in
    2009, leaving the appellants and their older brother (now  adult)  with
    their father (and other family members) in Pakistan.  On 12 March 2018,
    the appellants applied for clearance to enter the  UK  to  settle  with
    their mother.  Their father was said to have left the family home on 23
    December 2017, with no contact since then.

 2. The ECO considered the applications firstly under paragraph 297 of  the
    immigration rules, which provides as follows:
      The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
      enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents or a
      relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement in the
      United Kingdom are that he:
      (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent, parents
      or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
           (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom;
           or
           (b) both parents are being admitted on the same occasion for
           settlement; or
           (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and
           the other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement;
           or
           (d) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the other
           parent is dead; or
           (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had
           sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
           (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
           United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
           settlement and there are serious and compelling family or other
           considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
           suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care; and
           (ii) is under the age of 18; and
           (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is
           not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family
           unit; and
           (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the parent,
           parents or relative the child is seeking to join without
           recourse to public funds in accommodation which the parent,
           parents or relative the child is seeking to join, own or occupy
           exclusively; and
           (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent,
           parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
           recourse to public funds; and
           (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
           this capacity; and
           (vii) does not fall for refusal under the general grounds for
           refusal.

 3. In decisions dated 18 June 2018, the ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor had sole responsibility  for  the  children's  upbringing,  and
    found no exceptional circumstances to justify a grant of leave  outside
    the rules on human rights grounds, under reference to  the  appellants'
    best interests (although section 55 of the  2009  Act  does  not  apply
    directly, as the appellants are outside the UK).

 4. An Entry Clearance Manager maintained the decisions following a  review
    on 19 January 2019.

 5. The appellants appealed  to  the  FtT  on  the  grounds  the  decisions
    resulted in "a flagrant breach of family life" of  the  appellants  and
    the sponsor; that the circumstances of the departure of the appellants'
    father from the family home, and of their mother's sole  responsibility
    since 2009, had been supported by evidence; and that the  ECO  did  not
    have "due consideration" to the best interests of the appellants.

 6. F-tT Judge Debra H Clapham heard the appellants' appeals on 20 February
    and dismissed them by a decision promulgated on 28 June 2019.

 7. The appellants' grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT,  in  summary,  are  as
    follows:

      (1) inadequate reasoning; at [69] the judge was not sure she had  been
      given a full picture of the family circumstances; that indicated  that
      she looked for a  higher  level  of  certainty  than  the  balance  of
      probabilities; that  incorrect  standard  infected  the  rest  of  the
      decision;

      (2) at [71] the judge said that much of the evidence had  been  before
      the ECO and ECM, and asked, "If it was not sufficient then why  is  it
      now?"; her function was to assess all the evidence herself and not  to
      adopt findings of the decision  maker  below;  this  misconstrued  the
      appeals process and indicated "a degree of prejudice that undermines a
      conclusion that the appellant[s] had a fair hearing";

      (3) at the end of [71] the judge approached the evidence "with western
      eyes", failing to understand, in respect  of  whether  the  appellants
      were privately educated, that it was not unusual in  the  subcontinent
      for a public sector school to require additional financial support for
      pupils;

      (4) at [72], failure to recognise that communication with the children
      and with their grandparents as day to day carers was  effectively  one
      and the same; and

      (5) the conclusion at [73] of no evidence of sole responsibility  left
      out of account the sponsor's evidence.

 8. The F-tT granted permission on 17 September 2019.

 9. Having heard submissions, I indicated my decision, along the  following
    lines.

10. Ground 1 is not well taken.   There  is  nothing  wrong  with  a  judge
    observing that she has not been  given  the  full  picture.   There  is
    nothing in the decision to suggest that the judge applied anything  but
    the correct standard of proof.

11. Ground 2 identifies an apparent error of approach.  The F-tT  does  not
    ask if the decision appealed against is within the  range  of  law  and
    reason, and does not assume it is a good starting point; it carries out
    a "full merits"  appeal.   However,  there  was  force  in  Mr  Clark's
    argument that this ground takes  a  carelessly  worded  phrase  out  of
    context, and that the decision is based on the judge's own appraisal of
    the evidence.

12. Ground 3 makes a reasonable point.  Although Mr Clark argued  that  the
    appellants could have clarified the matter in evidence and submissions,
    it is not one which their representative could be expected to  foresee,
    and once raised, it is one which has a clear answer.  However, this  is
    a relatively minor matter.

13. Ground 4 goes wrong, and Mr Forrest withdrew it.  The evidence was that
    the appellants and their father lived in a house which had belonged  to
    his parents, but they both  died  years  ago.   The  evidence  did  not
    mention the maternal grandparents.

14. Ground 5 was not on its face a promising one, but it was  a  sufficient
    basis for the best point advanced  for  the  appellants.   The  crucial
    alleged event  which  led  to  the  applications  being  made  was  the
    abandonment of the appellants by their  father  on  23  December  2017,
    leading to the sponsor having sole responsibility from then on; but the
    judge did not deal with that aspect of the case, and treated it  as  if
    the appellant sought to prove, and had to  prove,  sole  responsibility
    throughout the period from 29 June 2009, when she left Pakistan.

15. The F-tT's delay from hearing to decision is longer than is  desirable,
    which may have contributed to a loss of focus,  and  to  the  principal
    allegation being left unresolved.

16. Grounds 2 and 3 might not have been sufficient but when they are  taken
    with ground 5, as it was developed, and with the unexplained delay, the
    decision of the F-tT falls to be set aside. It stands only as a  record
    of what was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is  such  that
    it is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the F-tT for an entirely fresh hearing.  The
    member(s) of the F-tT chosen to consider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge Clapham.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      5 December 2019
      UT Judge Macleman





