

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15357/2018
                                                               HU/15359/2018
                                                               HU/15361/2018
                                                               HU/15363/2018
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 06 August 2019                             |On 04 September 2019         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                               E A and OTHERS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the  case  involves  child  welfare  issues.  We  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellants  are  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the
respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           In person
For the respondent:          Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who entered the UK  on  15
    September 2007 with leave to enter as a student. The second  appellant,
    his wife, entered the UK on 24 August 2011 with their two children. The
    oldest child was three years old and the youngest was two years old  on
    arrival in the UK.

2.    On 22 February 2018 the appellants applied  for  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds. At the date of the application both children  had
    lived in the UK for a continuous period of six years  and  six  months.
    The respondent refused the application in a decision dated 06 July 2018
    on the ground that the  appellants  did  not  satisfy  the  family  and
    private life requirements contained in the immigration rules and  there
    were no other exceptional circumstances to justify a grant of leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge N.M.K. Lawrence ("the judge") dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 03 April 2019. At the date  of  the
    hearing on 15 March 2019 the oldest child was  11  years  old  and  the
    youngest child was 10 years old. By that time  the  children  had  been
    resident in the UK for a continuous period of around  seven  years  and
    seven months. The judge concluded that none of the appellants  met  the
    private or family  life  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.  In
    assessing whether the first and second appellants met the  requirements
    of section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    ("the  NIAA  2002")  the  judge  accepted  that  both   children   were
    'qualifying children' because they had been continuously resident for a
    period of at least seven years. There was no dispute that the first and
    second appellants had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the children. However,  the  judge  concluded  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK with their parents.

4.    The appellants  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

       i) Failure to make clear findings relating to best interests of  the
          children
          Despite citing numerous cases on the issue, the judge  failed  to
          make any clear findings as to where the best interests of the two
          children lay. Having failed to make any clear  findings  relating
          to the best interests of the children the judge lacked  a  proper
          starting point for consideration  of  the  separate  question  of
          whether it was reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK
          for the purpose of section 117B(6) NIAA 2002.

      ii)   Confused   and   contradictory   findings   relating   to   the
          'reasonableness' test
          The  judge  made  confused  and  contradictory  findings   before
          concluding that it would be reasonable to expect the children  to
          leave the UK. At [24] the judge said: "On the evidence before me,
          on balance, I do not find it is not unreasonable  to  expect  the
          third and fourth appellant from leaving the UK with their parents
          and returning to Nigeria. (sic)" The finding itself  is  confused
          and the double negatives had  the  opposite  effect  to  the  one
          apparently intended by the judge.

     iii) Failure to give appropriate weight to the  children's  length  of
          residence
          The judge made further confused  and  contradictory  findings  in
          relation to the test set out in MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA
          Civ 705. At [13] he correctly identified the finding of the Court
          of Appeal that 'significant weight' must be accorded to the  fact
          that a child had been continuously resident for a period of seven
          years. When he came to make his findings, the judge confused  the
          test in the following way at [24]: "On the evidence I  find  that
          the third  and  fourth  appellants  have  put  down  some  roots.
          However, I do not  find  that  there  are  'strong  reasons'  (MA
          (Pakistan)),  at  this  stage  in  their  lives,  it   would   be
          detrimental to their  development  to  leave  and  to  return  to
          Nigeria. (sic)" This finding appeared to require  the  appellants
          to show 'strong reasons' why it would be detrimental for them  to
          return to Nigeria and  failed  to  give  correct  weight  to  the
          children's length of residence.

      iv) Error of law in requiring  some  form  of  detriment  or  welfare
          concern before it would be unreasonable to expect the children to
          leave the UK
          The third and fourth points dovetail  with  one  another.  It  is
          argued that the judge erred at [10], [16] and [22]  in  requiring
          detriment or welfare concerns to be  shown  in  relation  to  the
          'reasonableness' test. Although the welfare of the children might
          be relevant to the assessment of  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
          expect a child to leave the UK, the assessment under Article 8 is
          an evaluative assessment and not  solely  a  welfare  assessment.
          Whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK is a
          holistic assessment  taking  into  account  all  relevant  issues
          including  the  ties  that  the  children  were  likely  to  have
          developed in the UK. There  is  no  strict  requirement  for  the
          appellants to show safeguarding concerns.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

5.    Having considered the grounds of appeal and the  submissions  made  by
    the parties we are satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of errors of law in relation to the  assessment  of
    the 'reasonableness' test for the  reasons  given  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal  outlined  above.  The  decision  was  long  on  recitation   of
    authorities and short on clear findings. Some findings were confused or
    incoherent. Some findings also applied the wrong approach.

6.    For these reasons  we  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  findings
    relating to the  assessment  the  'reasonableness'  test  contained  in
    section 117B(6) NIAA 2002. The appellants only sought to challenge  the
    decision on this basis. The  other  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal relating to the assessment under the immigration  rules  shall
    stand.

Remaking

Best interests of the children

7.    In assessing the best interests of the children,  we  have  considered
    the broad principles outlined in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC4,
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and  others  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best  interests  of  children  are  a  primary
    consideration although they are not the only consideration.

8.    The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are "in the United Kingdom". We take into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 ("BCIA 2009"). In the guidance,  the  respondent  acknowledges
    the importance of international human rights instruments including  the
    UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on
    to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." The UNCRC sets  out
    rights including a child's right to survival and development, the right
    to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

9.    It is in the interest of both children to remain in the care of  their
    parents. The two children are Nigerian  citizens  who  entered  the  UK
    legally with their mother in 2011. Given their young age on arrival  it
    is unlikely that they have any significant memories of life in Nigeria.
    They have now lived in the UK for a continuous period of  eight  years.
    Their residence has been at  an  important  developmental  time  during
    which the children began school and have progressed in their education.
    The oldest child is now 11 years old and is on the  cusp  of  secondary
    education. The youngest child is 10 years old. Both children have spent
    most of their young lives in the UK. It is reasonable  to  assume  that
    they have developed friendships and other ties outside the family  unit
    during their time at school. It is also reasonable to assume that  they
    are culturally integrated in the UK given that it is the only home that
    they have ever really known. The  fact  that  the  children  have  been
    resident for a continuous period of eight years is a matter  that  must
    be given significant weight.

10.         Bearing in mind that the appellants are unrepresented,  we  have
    had  regard  to  publicly  available  information  contained   in   the
    respondent's Country Background Note  relating  to  Nigeria  dated  May
    2019. The note says that there continues to be  high  rates  of  infant
    mortality in Nigeria [7.1]. Although free and compulsory  education  is
    federally  mandated  by  the  Education  Act,  little  enforcement   of
    compulsory education laws occurs at state level and the cost of  school
    fees is prohibitive for many families. Access to education  is  further
    hindered by a lack of teachers and  inadequate  sanitation  facilities,
    particularly for girls [7.2.2]. UNICEF report that  abuse  in  all  its
    forms are a daily  reality  for  many  Nigerian  children  and  only  a
    fraction ever receive help. Six out of  every  10  children  experience
    some form of violence and one in four girls and 10 percent of boys have
    been victims of  sexual  violence.  The  drivers  of  violence  against
    children are rooted in  social  norms,  including  around  the  use  of
    violent discipline, violence against women and community beliefs  about
    witchcraft [7.4.1].

11.   An earlier Country Information and Guidance  Note  entitled  "Nigeria:
    Women fearing gender-based harm or violence"  dated  August  2016  says
    that the Constitution  protects  women,  but  discrimination  is  still
    widespread. While progress has been  made  towards  parity  in  primary
    school  education,  there  remains  significant  gaps   in   education.
    Discriminatory laws and practices, violence against  women  and  gender
    stereotypes  continue  to  hinder  progress  towards  gender   equality
    [2.3.1]. A UNICEF report from September 2015 set out the statistics for
    childhood violence (as above) and found that such violence has a  long-
    term impact that lasts well into adulthood, including poorer mental and
    physical health outcomes.  The  survey  showed  that  violence  against
    children is not  confined  to  marginalised  groups.  Violence  against
    children transcends social and economic status [6.1.4].

12.   The appellants think that it would be difficult for their children  to
    adapt to life in Nigeria. They are now accustomed  to  British  culture
    and have strong ties  to  the  UK.  They  do  not  speak  any  Nigerian
    languages, but that does not mean that they could not  learn  with  the
    assistance of their parents. We take into account the fact that English
    is widely spoken in Nigeria and that  it  would  be  possible  for  the
    children to continue their education there. There  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that either child suffers from a serious  health  condition  or
    that they have any other significant vulnerabilities. Their parents are
    well educated and were able to find work in Nigeria  before  coming  to
    the UK. Nothing in the evidence suggests that they would not be able to
    provide for their children if they returned to Nigeria as a family.

13.   However, the  background  evidence  shows  that  there  is  widespread
    societal  discrimination  against  girls  and  women  in  Nigeria.  The
    evidence also shows that the girls are likely to be exposed to  violent
    forms of discipline in school. As young girls who approaching  puberty,
    they may also be more vulnerable to sexual abuse  and  exploitation  by
    people outside the family home. Although the girls are likely  to  have
    had some exposure to Nigerian  culture  through  their  parents,  given
    their young age on arrival and  their  close  connections  to  the  UK,
    Nigeria is now likely to be a foreign country to them.  It  is  in  the
    interests of the children to maintain the stability they have in the UK
    and to continue to make progress in their  education.  Removal  of  the
    appellants to a country the children are likely  to  find  alien  would
    cause serious disruption to their lives. In cases  involving  residence
    of over seven years there is a strong expectation that  it  is  in  the
    best interests of the children to remain in the UK with their  parents.
    For these reasons we conclude that the best interests of  the  children
    point quite strongly towards remaining in the UK in the care  of  their
    parents.

Article 8(1) - private and family life

14.   The first appellant has lived in the UK for nearly 12  years  and  the
    rest of the family for  eight  years.  It  is  likely  that  they  have
    developed private lives in the  UK  during  such  extended  periods  of
    residence. It is likely that the children have developed  ties  outside
    the family home as a result of school and  extra-curricular  activities
    and are now culturally integrated. We find  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellants from the United Kingdom in consequence of the decision would
    interfere with their right to private and family life in a sufficiently
    grave way as to engage the operation of Article 8(1)  of  the  European
    Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

15.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects  the  right  to  private
    and family life. However, it is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

16.    The  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  and   the   statutory
    provisions are said to reflect the respondent's position as to where  a
    fair balance is struck for the purpose of Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. The appellants do not meet  the  private  and  family  life
    requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE(1) and Appendix  FM  of  the
    immigration rules and there is no evidence of exceptional circumstances
    that might justify a grant of leave to remain on human  rights  grounds
    with reference to GEN.3.2(2) of Appendix FM.

17.   Part 5A of the  NIAA  2002  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches a person's right to private  or  family  life  and  as  a
    result is unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998. In considering  the
    'public interest question' a court or tribunal must have regard to  the
    issues outlined in section 117B in non-deportation cases.  The  'public
    interest question' means the question of whether  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for their private or family life is justified
    under Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

18.   Although several public interest considerations are listed in  section
    117B, section 117B(6) is the operative provision  for  the  purpose  of
    this appeal. The provision states that the  public  interest  will  not
    require the person's removal if the person has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child and "it would not be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom." A 'qualifying child'  is
    defined as a person who is under the age of 18 and who is (i) a British
    citizen; or (ii) has lived in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  at
    least seven years.

19.   In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 the  Supreme  Court  found  that
    the assessment of 'reasonableness' is directed to the position  of  the
    child without reference  to  the  misconduct  of  his  or  her  parents
    although what is reasonable must be  considered  in  the  'real  world'
    context in which the children find themselves.

20.   In JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72  the
    Upper Tribunal rejected the submission that  section  117B(6)  is  only
    engaged if the children would, as a matter  of  fact,  be  expected  to
    leave the UK. It found that the provision requires a court or  tribunal
    to hypothesise that the  child  in  question  would  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and must ask whether it would be reasonable to expect the child
    to do so.

21.   The concept of the 'real world' context in  which  the  children  find
    themselves discussed by the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria)  was  drawn
    from the discussion of Lewison LJ  in  EV  (Philippines).  However,  it
    should be borne in mind that those comments were made in the context of
    an overall balancing exercise assessing whether the  interests  of  the
    children were outweighed by the need to maintain and  effective  system
    of immigration control i.e. a  holistic  assessment  under  Article  8.
    Although section  117B(6)  is  intended  to  reflect  the  respondent's
    position as to where a fair balance should be  struck  in  relation  to
    Article 8, the  position  as  it  stands  since  KO  (Nigeria)  and  JG
    (Turkey), is that the 'reasonableness' assessment is  focussed  on  the
    child and is not balanced against the conduct and  immigration  history
    of the parents.

22.   The case law relating to section 117B(6) has come full circle  to  the
    position first outlined by Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705. His favoured approach was to interpret the wording of  section
    117B(6) to focus solely on the child (albeit he went on to find that he
    was bound by a previous decision of the Court of Appeal at  the  time).
    The  chosen  threshold  of  seven  years  has  significance.  Elias  LJ
    emphasised that the Secretary of State's policy recognised  that  after
    seven years a child is likely to have  set  down  roots  and  developed
    social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that it would  be
    highly disruptive if the child is required to leave. This may  be  less
    so when a child is very young, but the disruption becomes more  serious
    as the child gets older. The fact that a child has been resident for  a
    period of seven years should  be  given  "significant  weight"  in  the
    balancing exercise. He went on to say: "Moreover, in these cases  there
    must be a very strong expectation that the child's best interests  will
    be to remain in the UK with his parents as part of a family unit,  that
    must  rank  as  a  primary   consideration   in   the   proportionality
    assessment."

23.   The 'real world' context in which this case is considered is the  fact
    that the appellants do not meet the requirements for  leave  to  remain
    under the immigration rules and would normally be expected to leave the
    UK.

24.   We have found that it is in the best  interests  of  the  children  to
    remain in the UK, the country where they have lived most of their lives
    and where they have established strong ties  over  a  period  of  eight
    years. It is not in their best interests  to  be  returned  to  Nigeria
    where the evidence shows that their life chances would be reduced, they
    would be exposed to an increased risk of discrimination and possibly an
    increased risk of violence. For these reasons we conclude that it would
    not be reasonable to expect children who have been resident in  the  UK
    for eight years during an important developmental period of their  life
    to leave the UK. Their parents meet the requirements of section 117B(6)
    NIAA 2002 which states that the public interest does not require  their
    removal in such circumstances.

25.   Even if a holistic assessment is conducted under Article 8, where  the
    best interests of the  children  are  weighed  against  the  cumulative
    effect of public interest considerations,  the  outcome  would  be  the
    same. The best interests of the children are  a  primary  consideration
    albeit not the only consideration. The respondent previously recognised
    that strong reasons would  be  needed  to  outweigh  the  interests  of
    children who have been resident in the UK for more than seven years. In
    this case the parents entered the UK legally and had  leave  to  remain
    until 2013. Further applications for leave to remain  on  human  rights
    grounds were made promptly but were refused.  The  appellants  did  not
    leave the UK following those negative decisions, but neither  is  there
    any evidence to show that the respondent  took  any  action  to  remove
    them. Apart from the fact that they remained without leave there is  no
    evidence of abuses of the immigration system at the more serious end of
    the scale e.g. deception, fraud or absconding. There is no evidence  of
    criminal convictions or other matters that might give additional weight
    to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  an  effective   system   of
    immigration control.

26.   To the contrary, the first appellant says that he was not  allowed  to
    work so he has spent his time volunteering for  several  charities.  He
    says that he worked for Peace Parters Charity as a Project Manager,  at
    the 999 club in Lewisham as an  Employability  Team  Member  and  as  a
    volunteer in the Family Support Team at an organisation  called  Pecan.
    Both parents speak English and have qualifications  that  would  assist
    them to find work. If permitted to work, they  are  unlikely  to  be  a
    burden on taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society. Even
    if we were to conduct a full assessment  under  Article  8  the  public
    policy considerations are  not  sufficiently  strong  to  outweigh  the
    interests of children who have been resident in the UK for a period  of
    eight years. For these reasons we also conclude  that  any  removal  in
    consequence of the decision would be disproportionate under  Article  8
    of the European Convention.

27.   We conclude that removal in consequence of the  decision  is  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date   27 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








