
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15580/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2019                              |On 17 April 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                        MISS DANIQUE DANIVEE MARSDEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ishrat Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Bassi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing her appeal  against  the  decision  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to refuse her entry clearance under Rule 297 as  the  dependent
    child of a person present and settled here.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity direction, and I do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant  requires  anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica,  whose  date  of  birth  is  13
    August 1999.  On 25 July 2017, shortly before her  18th  birthday,  she
    applied for entry clearance under Rule 297 to join her mother, [AP], in
    the UK.

 3. On 26 October 2017 the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") gave his reasons
    for refusing the  application.   She  had  been  looked  after  by  her
    grandparents since her mother had left for the UK in the year 2000.  If
    her mother had had sole responsibility for her upbringing,  they  would
    expect to see evidence that she took the important decisions about  her
    upbringing - for example, where she lived, her choice of school and her
    religious practice.  She had not provided any evidence that her sponsor
    was responsible for making  these  decisions.   So,  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that she had one parent who was present and settled in the UK
    and who had had sole responsibility for her upbringing.

 4. The  evidence  provided  with  her  application  stated  that  she  was
    currently being looked after by her grandparents, and that  her  mother
    travelled to Jamaica to see to her welfare.  The evidence provided  did
    not indicate that this arrangement could  not  continue.   She  was  17
    years old at the time of application, and had now turned 18.   The  ECO
    was not satisfied that there were  serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations which made  her  exclusion  undesirable,  or  that
    suitable arrangements had been made for her care in the UK.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Lodge sitting at Birmingham on
    10 October 2018.  Both parties were  legally  represented.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the sponsor, who was cross-examined by  the
    Presenting Officer.

 6. In his subsequent decision, the Judge set out the sponsor's evidence in
    some detail at paragraphs [7] to [16].   At  paragraphs  [19]  to  [37]
    (comprising 2  closely-typed  pages),  the  Judge  gave  very  detailed
    reasons for finding that the appellant had not discharged the burden of
    proving that her mother had had sole responsibility for her upbringing;
    and that it was in fact the appellant's grandparents who made  all  the
    important decisions with regard to her upbringing.   Alternatively,  if
    he was  wrong  about  that,  he  found  that  the  appellant  had  only
    established that  the  sponsor  shared  joint  responsibility  for  her
    upbringing with the grandparents.

 7. At paragraphs [39]-[48], the Judge gave his reasons  for  finding  that
    the appellant had not shown that  she  met  the  requirements  of  Rule
    297(i)(f).  He did not accept that there was no room for the  appellant
    in her grandmother's new house, and hence that she  was  homeless.   He
    did not accept that her  grandmother  would  not  feel  any  continuing
    responsibility towards her to make sure that there  was  somewhere  for
    her to live.  The Judge continued:

         "Whatever the situation, I am not satisfied that the appellant  has
         established evidence of neglect or unmet needs.  The glowing letter
         from the school dated 2 October  2018,  only  the  day  before  the
         statement of the grandparents, does not suggest any  problems.   It
         speaks of her blossoming.  I have no reliable evidence [that] there
         are not stable arrangements for her care."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. Ground 1 was that the Judge had materially misdirected himself  in  law
    in his approach to Rule 297(i)(e).  Ground 2 was  that  the  Judge  had
    erred in law in failing to give reasons  as  to  why  he  had  entirely
    disregarded the evidence of the appellant's grandparents on  the  issue
    of sole responsibility.  Ground 3 was that the Judge had erred  in  law
    in adopting an old-style approach to the claim under Article 8  ECHR  -
    whereas following MM & Others [2017] UKSC 10, he ought to have  treated
    the Rules as merely the starting point for an Article 8 consideration.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9. On 30 November 2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott  Baker  granted
    permission to appeal on all three grounds, although she indicated that,
    in her view, the first ground had little merit.

10. There was no evidence from the  school  corroborating  the  appellant's
    claim that her mother had made the important decisions in her life, and
    whilst  there  was  no  express  reference  to   TD   (Yemen   -   sole
    responsibility) [2006] UKAIT 0049, this case  had  been  cited  to  the
    Judge in the skeleton argument and submissions, and his  findings  were
    arguably in line with that decision.

11. However, the decision on Article 8  was  arguably  inadequate,  as  the
    exceptionality test referred to at [49] engaged an earlier test and did
    not reflect the guidance in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  The assessment was
    also arguably flawed in that the Judge had not engaged with all of  the
    evidence which he had before him and he had failed to make findings  on
    the medical evidence relating to the grandparents.

Discussion

Ground 1

12. It is argued that the Judge erred in law in not taking as his  starting
    point the proposition that the sponsor has had sole responsibility  for
    the appellant, given that he accepted that the appellant's  father  had
    disappeared from the appellant's life in 2004.  Reliance is  placed  on
    the following passage in paragraph  [49]  of  TD  (Yemen):  "Where  one
    parent has disappeared from a  child's  life  and  so  relinquished  or
    abdicated his or her responsibility for the child, the  starting  point
    must  be  that  it  is  the  remaining  active  parent  who  has   sole
    responsibility for the child.   The  fact  that  the  remaining  active
    parent is in the UK makes no difference to this".

13. While the Judge did not expressly remind himself of this  guidance,  he
    was well aware that this was the  central  thrust  of  the  appellant's
    case, and he engaged directly with it.

14. At paragraph [22], he pronounced himself satisfied that the sponsor had
    simply made  a  decision  to  abandon  her  daughter  to  take  up  the
    opportunities of a better economic life in the UK.  He  found  that  in
    2004 the sponsor had given birth to a second child in the  UK,  and  in
    the same year the  appellant's  father  had  abandoned  the  appellant,
    leaving her in the care of her grandparents.

15. While the Judge accepted that there was  documentary  evidence  of  the
    sponsor making financial remittances to the  appellant  in  the  period
    2001 to January 2002, and then from 2005 to 2018, on the above findings
    of fact it was open to him not to treat the sponsor as  falling  within
    the paradigm case envisaged in TD (Yemen) at [49]. It was open  to  him
    not to treat the father's relinquishing of parental responsibility  for
    the appellant by handing her  over  to  her  grandparents  in  2004  as
    constituting a transfer of parental responsibility to  the  sponsor  in
    the UK. For, on the facts found by the Judge, the  sponsor  was  not  a
    remaining active parent in 2004.

16. In any event, the operation  of  the  principle  did  not  relieve  the
    appellant of the obligation to prove that her mother had in  fact  been
    exercising sole responsibility for her upbringing "in the  recent  past
    even for a relatively short period up to the date of application or the
    present date", as the Judge correctly  directed  himself  at  paragraph
    [19].

17. It was open to the  Judge  to  find  that  the  sponsor  had  not  been
    exercising sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing either in
    the distant past, the recent past or indeed in  the  present.   It  was
    open to the Judge to find  that,  aside  from  mere  assertion  by  the
    sponsor and the grandparents, there was "a  woeful  lack  of  evidence"
    with regard to the sponsor making all the important  decisions  in  the
    appellant's life.  It is clear from paragraph [30] that what the  Judge
    had in mind was a woeful lack of "official or objective" evidence.

18. In the same paragraph, the Judge observed that the latest  letter  from
    the appellant's school reported that  she  was  doing  well,  but  said
    nothing about any involvement of the  sponsor  in  her  education.   He
    noted that the sponsor gave evidence that she had no school reports and
    that she had not had contact with the school prior to 2016.   She  said
    that the school reports  were  not  sent  directly  to  her,  but  were
    collected by the grandmother or were all sent to the grandmother.

19. The Judge also took into account that there was no  evidence  from  the
    appellant's  GP  of  the  sponsor's  involvement  in   monitoring   the
    appellant's health; and that there were two letters from  the  churches
    which the appellant attended; but neither letter  said  anything  about
    the sponsor's  involvement  in  regard  to  the  appellant's  religious
    upbringing.

20. In the absence of corroborative evidence from an independent source, it
    was open to the Judge to find that Rule 297(i)(e) was not made out  for
    the reasons which he gave.





Ground 2

21. Ground 2 also relates to Rule 297(i)(e).  Each of the grandparents made
    statements asserting that if there were any decisions  to  be  made  in
    relation to Danique's schooling or religious upbringing and  the  like,
    [A] made all of those decisions.  It is pleaded that the Judge erred in
    law in failing to consider the grandparents' evidence on this issue  or
    in failing to set out reasons why it was not accepted.

22. The Judge made it abundantly clear why he did not accept  the  evidence
    of the grandparents.  This was because they were not an independent  or
    impartial  source  of  information;  and   their   evidence   was   not
    corroborated by "official or objective"  evidence  emanating  from  the
    appellant's school, GP, or church.

Ground 3

23. Ground 3 has some merit.  The  Judge's  disposal  of  the  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR did not follow the guidance given in Agyarko [2017] UKSC
    11.  However, the Judge's error was not material for two reasons.   The
    first is that he had already effectively engaged  with  the  Article  8
    claim by making findings on the applicability of Rule  297(i)(f).   The
    second is that, having reached a sustainable and  unchallenged  finding
    that Rule 297(i)(f) was not satisfied, there was no realistic  prospect
    of the appellant succeeding in the alternative  under  a  free-standing
    Article 8 claim.

24. The Judge's self-direction  as  to  the  factors  which  he  needed  to
    consider under Rule 297(i)(f) was entirely in line  with  the  guidance
    given in T (S55 BCIA 2009 entry clearance) Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT  00483
    (IAC) and in Mundeba (S55 and para 2971F) [2013] UKUT  88  (ICA)  where
    the Tribunal held that the exercise of a duty by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to assess an application under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  to
    whether there were family or other considerations  making  the  child's
    exclusion undesirable, inevitably involved an assessment  of  what  the
    child's welfare  and  best  interests  required.   The  Judge  directed
    himself as follows at paragraph [39]: "The focus here needs  to  be  on
    the circumstances of  the  child  in  the  light  of  her  age,  social
    background and development history and involve an inquiry as to whether
    there is evidence of neglect or  abuse,  unmet  needs  that  should  be
    catered  for  and  whether  there  are  stable  arrangements  for   the
    appellant's physical care.  The assessment involves consideration as to
    whether the combination of circumstances is  sufficiently  serious  and
    compelling to require admission."

25. The grounds of appeal contain no error of law challenge to the  Judge's
    findings under Rule 297(i)(f). It is not asserted that  the  Judge  did
    not give adequate reasons for finding that  the  requirements  of  Rule
    297(i)(f) were not met.

26. The only additional matter which the Judge is said to  have  failed  to
    consider in the context of an Article 8 claim are the best interests of
    the appellant's half-brother, [D], who is a British  citizen.   But  it
    was never suggested that the sponsor would be  forced  to  relocate  to
    Jamaica with [D] in the event that the appellant was not granted  entry
    clearance, thereby uprooting [D] from his settled life in the  UK,  and
    it is not explained how the maintenance of the status quo would  impact
    adversely on [D]'s best interests.

27. While Ms Mahmud adopted the observation of Judge Scott Baker that Judge
    Lodge had failed to make findings on the medical evidence  relating  to
    the grandparents, this is not a matter raised anywhere in  the  grounds
    of appeal. Nonetheless, I address the issue de bene esse.

28. The case under Rule 279(i)(f) was  that  the  appellant's  grandparents
    were now too ill and frail to look after her; that the grandfather  was
    due to move to a nursing home following a stroke, and  the  grandmother
    was going to be living with another  unidentified  family  member,  and
    there was not going to be  a  place  for  the  appellant  in  the  same
    household "as most of her family resides abroad".

29. As an 18-year-old, the appellant did not need the same degree of day-to-
    day care and supervision as she would have needed when her grandparents
    were younger and  fitter.   As  the  Judge  indicated  in  his  nuanced
    analysis, the medical evidence relating to  the  grandmother  did  not,
    taken at its face value, show that she was no longer capable of looking
    after the appellant.

30. While one doctor said that the grandmother was not  capable  of  caring
    for the appellant due to her age and health, there was - as  the  Judge
    observed - no explanation as to what health conditions the  grandmother
    suffered from, or whether she had any age-related medical problems.

31. Another doctor, Dr Nesbeth, did condescend  to  some  detail,  but  the
    detail did not establish that the grandmother was  medically  unfit  to
    continue in her role as a responsible adult. Dr Nesbeth  reported  that
    she was diabetic and hypertensive, and very feeble.  It was open to the
    Judge to find that the  grandmother's  condition,  as  reported  by  Dr
    Nesbeth, did not preclude the grandmother from continuing to provide  a
    reasonable level of care  appropriate  for  an  18-year-old,  including
    providing her with a roof over her head  and  continuing  companionship
    and emotional support.

32. Dr Nesbeth also reported on the family's accommodation  situation,  and
    asserted that there would not be a place for the appellant in  the  new
    home where the grandmother would be living with another family  member.
    As the Judge commented at paragraph [43], any knowledge that Dr Nesbeth
    could have as to the appellant's accommodation problems would  be  from
    either the appellant or her  grandparents.   In  short,  as  the  Judge
    indicated, the letter from the doctor did  not  constitute  independent
    corroboration of the claim that the appellant was  now  going  to  have
    nowhere to live, and no one to look after her. For that reason and  for
    the other reasons given by the Judge, the finding under Rule  297(i)(f)
    was sustainable, and there was no scope for the appellant succeeding in
    the alternative on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside the Rules, since  the
    resolution of both issues turned on the same facts.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 13 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

