
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15692/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 14 March 2019                     |on 18 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                      A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Drummond
                    Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent decided on 21 June 2016 to deport the appellant.

 2. FtT Judge Farrelly heard the appellant's appeal on  12  December  2017,
    and dismissed it by a decision promulgated to the parties on  26  March
    2018.

 3. The appellant based his case on his relationship,  or  possible  future
    relationship, with his daughter E, who was then the subject of adoption
    proceedings.  At the time of the FtT hearing, he  was  challenging  the
    order freeing E for adoption in appeal proceedings.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the UT state at paragraph 1:

         "On 9 March 2018 the Inner House of the Court  of  Session  allowed
         the appellant's appeal and remitted  the  matter  [to  the  Sheriff
         Court] for further consideration.  On 21 March 2018  that  decision
         was drawn to the attention of [Judge Farrelly] by  letter  and  fax
         from the appellant's agents.   The  judge  therefore  had  evidence
         before him that the appeal was at least ongoing with  the  prospect
         of success ... The failure of the judge to make  any  reference  to
         the opinion of the Inner House was to leave out of account relevant
         matters and ... to err in law."

 5. UT Judge McWilliam granted permission on 26 July 2018:

         "The judge was of the view that  there  was  "nothing  which  would
         suggest to me an outcome contrary to the social worker guidance  of
         adoption and severing of close contact with the appellant"  and  it
         is arguable he attached significance  to  this.  In  light  of  the
         appellant's serious offending and failure  to  take  responsibility
         and inability to meet the requirements of the immigration rules, it
         may make no difference to the outcome; however, I cannot  rule  out
         that had the judge  considered  the  pre-decision  evidence  it  is
         possible  he  would  have  concluded  that  there  were  compelling
         circumstances."

 6. Mr Caskie advised the further developments which took place in relation
    to the adoption of E.  It is sufficient to say that further proceedings
    took place in England, which reached their final  resolution  when  the
    appellant was refused permission to appeal on 4 March 2019.

 7. It was common ground between the parties that despite  the  wording  of
    the ground of appeal to the UT, quoted above, it was highly  likely  (I
    should think practically certain) that the Court  of  Session  decision
    did not come to attention of Judge Farrelly before he sent his decision
    to the tribunal's administration to be promulgated.  That also  appears
    to be the case so far as can be discovered from the paper  file  before
    me.

 8. Mr Caskie submitted, and I accept, that procedural fairness,  amounting
    constructively to error of law, may occur through no fault of a  judge,
    where an administrative mishap has resulted in a decision being made in
    ignorance of evidence submitted by a party.  The most usual instance is
    a decision made "on the papers", without evidence  submitted  timeously
    by an appellant having been placed on the file.   I  accept  that  such
    unfairness might occur even where evidence is submitted after a hearing
    has taken place, but before a decision has been issued.

 9. Mr Caskie said that the point was one of  principle,  so  it  does  not
    matter if the further evidence was received only one  moment  before  a
    decision was issued.  Mr Matthew said the question was one of fact  and
    timing, and the present case did not show any procedural shortcoming by
    the FtT.

10. I consider that  a  question  of  fairness  can  only  be  resolved  by
    reference to the facts.  There is no overriding rule that  in  fairness
    any new matter must be taken into account in a decision, no matter  how
    late it is raised, subject only to that being before  the  decision  is
    issued.

11. Unfairness does not arise from  materials  not  being  considered  when
    these  are  submitted  at  a  stage  when  the  decision   is   already
    administratively on its  way  to  being  issued.  An  appellant  cannot
    reasonably expect a tribunal to stand ready  to  interrupt  the  normal
    course of events up to the last moment.

12. The appellant may have felt that his timing was unlucky, but  not  that
    he was unfairly treated, on receipt of a decision which  did  not  take
    his communication of 21 March into account.  There was no procedural or
    administrative shortcoming within the FtT.

13. I am fortified in that view by noting that the decision  of  the  Inner
    House was made on  9  March.   No  explanation  was  advanced  for  not
    communicating it to the FtT until 21 March.

14. Even if the appellant had shown a procedural mishap such as  to  amount
    to unfairness, that would not have justified the decision  of  the  FtT
    being set aside.

15. Mr Caskie accepted that the appellant could not hope to  succeed  in  a
    remaking of the decision by reference to the child  E.   He  said  that
    circumstances have evolved, such that the appellant now has a  case  to
    make by reference to another child, capable of showing very  compelling
    circumstances; if not able to take these proceedings any  further,  the
    appellant would make further submissions, leading inevitably either  to
    the Court of Session on judicial review, or to another  appeal  to  the
    FtT; and based on "procedure rule two", matters should be  resolved  in
    these proceedings.

16. That was an ingenious submission, but it is not well-founded.

17. Paragraph 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Procedure  Rules
    2008 sets out the overriding objective of dealing with cases fairly and
    justly,  and  includes  the  avoidance  of  delay.   That  relates   to
    proceedings within the UT.  It does not empower the UT  to  bypass  the
    making of applications to the respondent and the respondent's decision-
    making.

18. The aspect of the appeal on which error  was  alleged  has  since  been
    extinguished.  An error going to that aspect would not justify  setting
    the decision aside to enable the  appellant  to  develop  a  new  case,
    either in the FtT or in the UT.

19. I do not have to consider whether anything outlined had  the  potential
    of showing "very compelling circumstances" as required by the rules and
    by section 117C of the 2002 Act.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. The FtT did not make an anonymity direction, and  the  matter  was  not
    addressed  in  the  UT.   However,  I  consider  that  the   underlying
    circumstances are such that a direction is appropriate.

22. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    [pic]


    14 March 2019
    UT Judge Macleman


