
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/15200/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2021                     |On 29 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                           ANGELIC MAM FATOU MENDY

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr H Sadiq of Adam Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Gambia with date of  birth  given  as
   22.11.01, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
   decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   promulgated   14.10.20   (Judge
   Shergill), dismissing on all grounds her appeal against the  decision  of
   the Secretary of State, dated 19.8.19,  to  refuse  her  application  for
   entry clearance as a child of Paul Mendy, a parent settled in the UK, and
   family life with the parent's partner Anna Johnson Thompson, pursuant  to
   Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and outside the  Rules  pursuant  to
   article 8 ECHR.

2. The issue in the appeal is one of sole  responsibility,  pursuant  to  TD
   (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
   was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 20.11.20, on the basis that  it
   was arguable that the judge  reached  findings  not  based  on  evidence,
   namely that because the appellant's aunt (the sister of the sponsor)  was
   involved with the  appellant's  upbringing  for  some  17  years,  shared
   responsibility had to be assumed, ousting the  sponsor's  claim  to  sole
   responsibility. The judge granting permission noted, "It is  argued  that
   not a  single  example  that  emerged  during  cross-examination  or  the
   examination of the court as to how the sponsor's sister was  involved  in
   respect of  the  appellant  that  could  be  described  as  important  or
   determining direction at all. It is argued that the judge's approach that
   the sponsor's sister must have had shared responsibility  over  direction
   and control is based on virtually no evidence other than perhaps  a  view
   taken as to what the words guidance or consultation may mean." The  judge
   granting permission also considered that "It is arguable that  since  the
   (appellant's) mother has abandoned the responsibility of the  (appellant)
   the role played by the father has been significant enough  to  ensure  he
   has sole responsibility."

3. There is no Rule 24 reply to the grounds.

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. The judge cited and purported to apply TD with regard  to  the  issue  of
   continuing control and direction. In that case, the Upper  Tribunal  held
   that,

       "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be decided upon all  the
      evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in the child's  upbringing
      because he (or she) had abandoned  or  abdicated  responsibility,  the
      issue may arise between the remaining parent and others who have  day-
      to-day care of the child abroad.  The test is whether the  parent  has
      continuing  control  and  direction  over  the   child's   upbringing,
      including making all the important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.
      However, where both parents are involved in a child's  upbringing,  it
      will be exceptional that one of them will have "sole responsibility".

6. Contrary  to  the  position  taken  by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal
   decision, at [2] of the decision the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  accepted
   that the sponsor is the appellant's biological father. At [7],  no  issue
   was taken with the credibility of the sponsor and his  partner  (P),  the
   judge accepting that he had provided financial  support  for  some  time,
   including payment of school fees. At [8] the judge accepted that  he  had
   maintained contact with the appellant,  that  P  had  twice  visited  the
   appellant in Gambia, and that their son wants  his  half-sister  to  join
   them in the UK. At [10] the judge accepted that  the  appellant's  mother
   had abdicated any responsibility for the child and was totally uninvolved
   in the child's upbringing.

7. However, the judge appears to have taken the view that the  evidence  did
   not "displace" the aunt's involvement in the appellant's care. At [9] the
   judge stated that whilst the sponsor  claimed  that  he  checked  on  the
   appellant's  educational  progress   and   general   well-being   through
   conversations with the teachers on the phone, "It is implausible that the
   aunt would not be consulted as the first port of call given she is local,
   and that decisions may need to be taken by her acting in  loco  parentis.
   The fact that she has been a de facto parent since the  appellant  was  2
   years old, some 17 years to date of hearing, is a significant part of the
   factual matrix. She is not someone who has merely stepped into the  void,
   or taken care of the appellant for a limited time. She has been the  only
   substantive parental influence the appellant has had on a daily basis  in
   my assessment." The judge concluded that from an objective assessment the
   sponsor's claimed role does not equate to sole responsibility.

8. At [11] the judge stated that although the sponsor paid the  school  fees
   and the vicar referred to the aunt as the appellant's 'guardian' did  not
   displace the parental role of the aunt and "does not alter my view  about
   the 'guardian aunt' having de facto parental  responsibility."  At  [12],
   the judge's assessment was that having looked after the  appellant  since
   she was 2 years of age, "the aunt is likely to  have  had  a  predominant
   role in parenting." Reference is made to the aunt's letter, in which  she
   states that the appellant had been "under my custody and guidance",  even
   though she stated that this was "in consultation with" the  sponsor.  The
   judge concluded, "She is likely to have been doing more than  merely  the
   day-to-day decision making, and it is more likely than not she has had to
   make important decisions about  the  appellant's  upbringing  during  the
   passage of 16 years (to majority) when the sponsor was busy  sorting  his
   own life out thousands of miles away."

9. Specifically purporting to apply the 'continuing control  and  direction'
   test of TD, at [13] of the  decision  the  judge  concluded,  "I  am  not
   satisfied on the balance of probabilities that looking at the totality of
   the evidence and the period of time the aunt was acting in loco  parentis
   that the sponsor was 'making all the important decisions in  the  child's
   life.' Some of those important decisions during that 16-year period  were
   likely to have been taken by the aunt."

10. In the light of the above, it can be seen that  the  judge's  assessment
   and conclusions about the role of the aunt arise from  assumptions  based
   almost entirely on the long period of residence with  the  appellant  and
   not evidence. I am satisfied that given the acceptance of  the  sponsor's
   credibility and the several positive findings summarised above, there was
   no real evidence upon which a conclusion could be reached that  the  aunt
   was acting in loco parentis to the displacement of the sponsor's claim of
   sole responsibility so  that  there  was  shared  responsibility.  It  is
   possible  for  a  relative  or  other  to   have   delegated   day-to-day
   responsibility without the sponsor abdicating sole responsibility or  the
   continuing care and control referred  to  in  TD.  There  was  no  actual
   evidence that the aunt made any of the important decisions in the child's
   life without consultation with the sponsor, only the  judge's  assumption
   (if not speculation) that because she was 'local',  she  must  have  made
   such decisions. In  effect,  the  judge  approached  the  issue  of  sole
   responsibility on the apparent basis that the starting point was that the
   aunt was in loco parentis and that it was for  the  sponsor  to  displace
   that assumption and prove to the contrary. This is not a correct approach
   or interpretation of the guidance in TD. In the premises, the decision of
   the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand and must be set aside to be remade.

11. On the positive findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  absence  of
   evidence to the contrary, I am satisfied that the  only  conclusion  that
   can be drawn is that the sponsoring father did retain continuing care and
   control and, therefore, sole responsibility. In  the  circumstances,  the
   appeal should be allowed.

12. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find  material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that  it  must
   be set aside to be remade by allowing the appeal.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       19 March 2021



