

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/15165/2018

                                                 HU/15171/2018

                                                 HU/15174/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th March 2019                        | On 19th March 2019               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                   m o a d
                                   m b b o
                               f o o (a minor)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Cohen (Counsel )
For the Respondent:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellants  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Place) (F-tT) promulgated on
    20th December 2018  in which the appellants human  rights  claims  were
    dismissed.

Background

2.    The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.   The  third  appellant  is  a
    child born in 2010 and was a qualifying  child  under  section  117B(6)
    Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 as  amended  ("2002  Act  as
    amended").  At the date of hearing he was nearly 9 years old.  The  FtT
    considered Article 8 outside of the Rules.

FtT findings

3.   The FtT found that both parents had entered  and  remained  in  the  UK
    illegally [13].  They had worked without permission, used the  services
    of the NHS and obtained  education  at  public  expense.   The  parents
    failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    paragraph 276ADE as there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  their
    reintegration in Nigeria [15].  Their private lives had been  built  up
    while living illegally in the UK for a period of 12 years [16].

4.   The FtT considered  the  third  appellant's  position  as  regards  the
    Immigration rules at paragraph 276ADE (iv) and section 117B(6) 2002 Act
    as amended [17].  The FtT found that it was in his  best  interests  to
    remain with both of his parents and that whilst  he  was  a  qualifying
    child he was nevertheless dependent on his parents.   It  was  accepted
    that he was established at school  and  had  friends.   No  weight  was
    placed on the evidence that the child considered himself to be  British
    [19].   The FtT considered  that  the  economic  circumstances  of  the
    parents would not make it unreasonable for the child to move to Nigeria
    given that there are family members in Nigeria.  The FtT  accepted  the
    evidence  that  the  second  appellant's   siblings   were   struggling
    economically but that they were able to survive and the  threshold  for
    Article 3 was not met. No weight was given to the fact that  the  child
    did not speak the local dialect given that  the  official  language  in
    Nigeria is English [20].

Grounds of appeal

5.     In grounds of appeal the appellants argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing  to  properly  consider  the  significance  of  the  length  of
    residence and integration of the child in the UK,  the  best  interests
    assessment and reasonableness consideration was flawed. The FtT  failed
    to apply the respondent's guidance dated 22.2.2018 and the case law  of
    MT & ET(child's best interests ; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT
    88 (IAC) and or to properly apply section 117B(6) 2002 Act as amended.

Permission to appeal

6.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted by FTJ  N.
    Haria on 28.1.2019.  In granting permission the FTJ found that  it  was
    arguable that the approach to section 117B(6) was flawed.

Submissions


7.    I heard submissions from both representatives, the  details  of  which
    are set out in the record of proceedings.  Ms Cohen produced  a  bundle
    of authorities and made reference in  particular  to  KO(Nigeria),  the
    background to the drafting of paragraph 276ADE and current Home  office
    guidance as to the assessment of "reasonableness." She argued that  the
    Courts sought to approach the question of children in a more consistent
    and fair manner and thus the length of residence and age of  the  child
    were key. The only  qualification  to  section  117B(6)  was  that  the
    parties were not liable to deportation.  The FtT  failed  to  make  any
    reference to the underlying guidance as to the position  of  qualifying
    children.  The FtT erred by conflating the issues including the parents
    immigration history and had not made a proper factual assessment of the
    best interests of the child and the question  of  reasonableness.   The
    FtT erred by way of a misdirection in law.  The FtT had not taken  into
    account the strength of the child's private life and no  reference  was
    made to the  material  from  his  school,  which  showed  that  he  was
    established and thriving.  The FtT had not found or identified powerful
    reasons to displace the interests of the child in remaining in the  UK.
    The FtT erred by taking into account in a direct and material  way  the
    poor immigration history of the parents.

8.   Mr Kandola acknowledged  the  bundle  of  authorities  and  Ms  Cohen's
    summary of the law. He argued that there was no misdirection  and  that
    the parents immigration history could be taken into account indirectly.
     The strong reasons for the child to live in Nigeria with  his  parents
    was because they had no  right  to  remain.   The  FtT's  approach  was
    consistent with KO.  Mr Kandola  relied  on  NS  which  looked  on  the
    immigration history of the parents as a significant  factor.   The  FtT
    had not overlooked any  issues  or  evidence  and  had  considered  the
    position of the family in Nigeria.

9.    Ms Cohen responded that whilst the parents'  immigration  history  was
    indirectly relevant, the FtT erred  by  focussing  on  it  as  directly
    relevant.  The facts of this case were distinct  from  NS.   The  facts
    were more similar to MT & ET (para 33).

Decision

10.   I was satisfied that the appellants grounds were  made  out  and  that
    there was a material error in law by the FtT. There was a  misdirection
    in law by failing to follow the  guidance  in  KO(Nigeria)  as  to  the
    approach to be taken when dealing with qualifying  children.   The  FtT
    disregarded the evidence from the school, which in general showed  that
    the child was established and thriving.  The  FtT  placed  insufficient
    weight on the length of residence in the UK and  the  child's  age  and
    wishes, and  conflated  the  issues  by  concluding  that  the  parents
    immigration  history  was  directly  relevant  in  the  assessment   of
    reasonableness.  There was evidence that the  family  in  Nigeria  were
    simply "surviving" on very low finances and whilst that does  not  meet
    the Article 3 threshold, it was a factor relevant to the assessment  of
    reasonableness. The family would have no  property  and  be  unable  to
    support the child in Nigeria.  The FtT  accepted  that  the  first  and
    second appellants were hardworking and no issue was specifically  taken
    as to reliance on public funds.

11.   There is a material error of law in the decision which  shall  be  set
    aside. I heard further submissions as to the re making of the decision.

Re making

12.  I have decided to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds  under  the
    rules and outside of the rules. On the  evidence  before  me,  none  of
    which was challenged by the respondent before the F-tT, I am  satisfied
    that the best interests of the child are to remain with his parents  in
    the UK.  The child was born in the UK and regards  himself  as  British
    which is understandable given that he knows of no other country. He  is
    of an age where his views can be taken into account.  He is settled  at
    school and the evidence shows that he has consistently  done  well  and
    his attendance is 100%.  The evidence from the school demonstrated that
    the child was well integrated and had established friends. It  was  not
    evidence of any exceptionality but  clearly  established  that  he  was
    doing well and that it was in his best interests  that  that  continue.
    Whilst I accept that he is at present dependent on his parents, he  has
    reached an age where he will be developing towards  adulthood  and  his
    school plays an important role in terms of his secondary socialisation.
    A disruption would not  be  in  his  interests.  I  find  that  he  has
    established a private life in the UK and there would be an interference
    if removed to Nigeria to live with his parents.  There is  family  life
    in the UK.

13.   I have considered the poor  immigration  history  of  the  appellant's
    parents which has indirect bearing on my consideration.  The appellants
    have lived and worked in the UK without leave for a considerable number
    of years and made  use  of  resources  and  public  funds  in  the  UK.
    However, I find no evidence to show that their conduct was to the level
    of seriousness in NS, where the  behaviour  which  involved  fraud  was
    found to amount to a powerful reason to displace the interests  of  the
    child.  The immigration history of the  parents  reveals  nothing  that
    would amount to powerful reasons  capable  of  displacing  the  child's
    interests. This is compatible with the relevant  Home  office  guidance
    dated 22.2.2018 and case law (MA(Pakistan) & ors [2016] EWCA  Civ  705,
    MT & ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT
    88 (IAC), PD & ors (Article  8:  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri  Lanka
    [2016] UKUT 108 (para 39) and KO (Nigeira) at paragraph 17.

14.   In terms of the circumstances in Nigeria I find  that  the  child  has
    never visited Nigeria and does not speak the local dialect although  he
    would  of  course  be  able  to  fully  communicate  in  English.   The
    educational system and schooling would  be  different  and  he  has  no
    friends or experience of Nigerian life.   He  would  face  hardship  in
    terms of day to day existence to the extent that the standard of living
    was found to be at survival level for the family in Nigeria  and  there
    would be no assistance from them. The criteria for a  qualifying  child
    is residence of 7 years in the UK or British citizenship. I  find  that
    the best interests of the child lie in his remaining in the UK with his
    parents and that it would not be reasonable  for  him  to  relocate  to
    Nigeria. I find no evidence that would amount to strong  or  "powerful"
    reasons why the interests of the child should  be  displaced  (MA  para
    46). Significant weight is attached to the length of residence and  the
    age of the child, now 8 years and 7  months  old.   In  conclusion  the
    third appellant meets paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) and the first and second
    appellants meet section 117B(6).

Decision

15.  I remake the decision by allowing the human rights appeals.






                               Signed                     Date 13.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 13.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
