
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/15241/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2020                  |On 19 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  SYKUL [I]

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr M Schwenk, instructed by Amin Haque Solicitors



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. For the purpose of this decision and to avoid confusion, I refer  below
    to the parties as they were at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh with date of  birth  given  as
    15.5.90.

 3. The respondent has appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  16.1.20
    (Judge Durance), who allowed on human rights  grounds  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  29.8.19,
    to refuse his application made on 21.8.18 for leave to remain in the UK
    on the basis of family life with his British citizen partner and child.



 4. The grounds argue that the judge erred in law in relation to the  TOEIC
    deception issue, in failing to invoke the Family  Court  Protocol,  and
    that, applying RS  (India) [2012] UKUT  00218  (IAC),  he  should  have
    awaited the outcome of  Family  Court  proceedings  before  making  the
    article 8 assessment. In particular, it is argued that the judge  erred
    in  failing  to  provide  adequate  reasoning  for  finding  that   the
    respondent had not discharged the burden of proof  and  in  considering
    the evidence no more than generic.

 5. In granting permission  on  all  grounds  on  15.5.20,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge considered that the judge arguably erred in the approach
    to Family Court proceedings and the impact on  the  article  8  issues.
    "The judge appears to have been unaware of the Family Court Protocol by
    which he  could  have  requested  from  the  Family  Court  information
    necessary to make findings on the outcome of the Article 8  appeal  and
    the best interests of the appellant's son particularly in the light  of
    the unsatisfactory nature of the undated photographs supplied."

 6. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the submissions made in the remote hearing and the grounds
    of application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

ETS TOEIC Issues

 7. I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an  entirely
    accurate self-direction in relation  to  the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof, as set out at [15] of the decision. As held in SM and Qader (ETS
    -Evidence- Burden of  Proof)  [2016],  although  there  is  an  initial
    evidential burden that may  switch  to  the  appellant  to  provide  an
    innocent explanation, the legal burden of proof rests on the respondent
    throughout. That is  not  necessarily  clear  from  the  judge's  self-
    direction.

 8. More significantly, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  made  a  crucial
    factual error in asserting that the ETS bundle was entirely generic and
    that there was no evidence specific to the appellant. To the  contrary,
    the bundle contained  a  spreadsheet  extract  which  showed  that  the
    appellant's English language test had been invalidated on  evidence  of
    fraud in the taking of the test. This together with the other evidence,
    including that which shows that the likelihood of a false  positive  is
    less than 2%, has been held in SSHD v Shehzad & Anor  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    615, to be sufficient satisfy the evidential burden on the Secretary of
    State.

 9. Mr Schwenk argued that the judge was clear about the differing  burdens
    and at [17]  found  that  the  legal  burden  of  proof  had  not  been
    discharged. He also submitted that the judge had  accepted  that  there
    was evidence specific to the appellant, by referring to the appendix at
    the rear of the witness Sarah Marsh's evidence. I am not  persuaded  by
    Mr Schwenk's submissions, as the judge does not recognise that the type
    of evidence submitted has been repeatedly held by the  superior  courts
    to be sufficient to discharge the evidential burden. The judge does not
    acknowledge that case law nor make a finding that the evidential burden
    was discharged.

10. It  follows  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law,  one  which
    necessarily infects the rest of the decision, including the  article  8
    proportionality balancing exercise. The import of the error is that, if
    the deception issue is made out, and in that respect I  note  that  the
    judge found the appellant dishonest in another aspect  of  the  appeal,
    his relationship with his former partner, that means that the appellant
    fails the suitability requirements  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE, and cannot meet the requirements for Leave  to  Remain,  as  he
    cannot reach EX1(a). A finding in favour of the Secretary of  State  in
    this regard would be highly relevant to the proportionality  assessment
    outside the Rules.

The Article 8 Considerations

11. It is clear that the appellant's  relationship  with  his  partner  had
    broken down. As stated above, the judge found the appellant's  attempts
    to depict the relationship in a positive light and belief that it could
    be revived not credible; "it has been at an end for  some  considerable
    time." This is repeated  in  stark  terms  at  [28]  of  the  decision.
    However, I accept Mr Schwenk's submission that  this  dishonesty  about
    his partner does not necessarily mean his intentions with regard to the
    relationship with his child  are  not  what  he  claims.  However,  the
    adverse credibility finding and  the  timing  of  the  application  for
    contact with his  child,  made  only  after  the  respondent's  refusal
    decision (as the judge noted), should have put the judge on notice of a
    risk of being misled by the appellant about his relationship  with  his
    child and required a careful approach.

12. Nevertheless, I accept that  relying  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SR (subsisting parental relationship  -  s117B(6)  Pakistan
    [2018] UKUT 334 (IAC), at [32] the judge set  out  considerations  with
    regard to the appellant's relationship with his  son.  The  conclusions
    drawn at [33] and [34] were that "little can be said  which  creates  a
    depth of bond or relationship between SI and his son. The best that can
    be said is that he spends 2 hours every fortnight with  him  in  ASDA,"
    and, "I find that SI fails the meet the relationship requirement  under
    the Rules." The respondent submits that it is clear  that  any  contact
    was extremely  limited  and  "was  commenced  at  an  extremely  recent
    juncture in October 2019 thus raising questions as to  the  appellant's
    motivation and genuine intentions in regard to his child."

13. However, at [35] the judge accepted  that  the  appellant  provides  at
    least some care, "albeit it is at the lower end of  the  threshold.  To
    that extent the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship for
    the purposes of s117B(6)." The judge went on at [36] to find  the  best
    interests of the child were for the appellant to remain in the UK.  The
    judge also noted that there was an interim Family Court order.  On  the
    basis  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles   to   the   family
    relationship between the appellant and his son continuing  if  he  were
    returned to Bangladesh, and that it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    the child to go to Bangladesh, the judge allowed the appeal on  article
    8 ECHR grounds.

14. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety suggested  that  the  findings  at
    [32] should have led the judge to conclude that there  was  no  genuine
    and subsisting relationship, disputing that 2 hours  once  a  fortnight
    could properly be characterised as providing 'care' for the  child.  He
    also pointed to the absence of any evidence as to the best interests of
    the child. I agree that it  would  be  difficult  to  characterise  the
    limited contact as 'care' but it does not necessarily follow  that  the
    relationship was not genuine or subsisting. One has  to  bear  in  mind
    that the limited contact was imposed on the appellant.

15. In the grounds, the respondent relies on  RS  (immigration  and  family
    court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC),  and  complains  that
    the judge failed to follow the correct guidance for  a  case  in  which
    there are outstanding family proceedings in relation to a child of  the
    appellant. It is submitted that the judge appears to have been ignorant
    of the Family Court Protocol and should have  adjourned  to  await  the
    outcome of the recently instituted  family  proceedings,  invoking  the
    Protocol.

16. I have to consider whether the finding in relation  to  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child under s117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act was open to the judge on the evidence and adequately reasoned.



17. That as a British citizen the child is a  qualifying  child  is  beyond
    dispute. Also  not  in  dispute  is  that  there  were  ongoing  family
    proceedings in which the appellant sought an order for contact with his
    son. The evidence indicates that the appellant's relationship with  the
    child's mother broke down prior to the child's birth in September 2018,
    and there is no prospect of it being revived, as the judge  found.  The
    respondent suspects that the appellant's  only  interest  in  belatedly
    seeking contact with his son is in order to frustrate  his  removal  to
    Bangladesh when he has no other basis to remain in the UK.

18. However, apparently under the terms of an interim order, the  appellant
    previously had contact with his son at ASDA every two weeks. The  child
    is now just over 2 years of age. It is  not  known  whether  the  child
    knows or recognises the appellant or understands his  role  as  father.
    Neither is it known what the Family Court may make of the child's  best
    interests, whether it is considered appropriate and of benefit  to  the
    child for contact with his father to continue. Neither was the Tribunal
    aware of the wider circumstances, having access only to the appellant's
    over-optimistic perspective.

19. These were all issues likely to have been  pending  before  the  Family
    Court, in respect of which a hearing was listed for  13.1.20,  just  10
    days  after  the  Tribunal  appeal  hearing.  In  a   section   marked,
    'Postscript' the judge was asked for an extension of time in  which  to
    provide information  from  the  Family  Court,  but  having  apparently
    previously agreed that there should be no  extension,  the  application
    was refused. It is not clear why the judge did  not  consider  invoking
    the Family Court Protocol and await the outcome  of  proceedings.  That
    outcome may or may not have assisted the appellant; it is impossible to
    know at the present time.

20. It is clear from RS that where there are outstanding family proceedings
    relating to a child of a claimant,  the  judge  should  first  consider
    whether the outcome of those proceedings was likely to be  material  to
    the immigration decision. Without knowing what the outcome was,  it  is
    clear that they were highly material to the issue of the  child's  best
    interests and whether  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship. RS also guides the judge to consider whether the  contact
    proceedings were initiated to delay or frustrate  removal  rather  than
    promote the child's welfare.

21. I am satisfied that the judge should at  the  very  least  have  either
    awaiting the outcome of the family proceedings and considered  invoking
    the Family Court Protocol, or allowed the appeal to the limited  extent
    suggested in MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA iv 133. The issues  described
    above were obviously highly pertinent to the  appeal  and  whether  the
    appellant enjoyed  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    qualifying child so  that  his  removal  would  not  be  proportionate.
    Neither did the judge allow a further  delay  pending  the  attempt  to
    obtain release of the Family Court proceedings, nor  was  consideration
    given to invoking the Family Court Protocol to assist in obtaining  the
    relevant information. I am  satisfied  that  to  act  on  such  limited
    information in the circumstances of this case was an error of law.

22. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that it must
    be set aside to be remade.

23. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal vitiate the findings of fact and the  conclusions  from  those
    facts so that there has not been a valid determination of the issues in
    the appeal.

24. Mr McVeety suggested that the decision could be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Mr Schwenk pointed out that if I were to find an error of law
    on both grounds there would need to be evidence  not  only  as  to  the
    family proceedings, but the ETS issue. In all the circumstances, at the
    invitation and request of Mr Schwenk, I relist this appeal for a  fresh
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that this  is  a  case
    which falls squarely within the Senior President's  Practice  Statement
    at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

    The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    I remit the decision in the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    made afresh with no findings preserved.

    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup     Date: 16 November 2020

