
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/15334/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June 2019                      |On 11 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                              ADAM LEE GOLDMAN
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Chapman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  the  USA  born  in  1980.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 26 June 2018 to refuse him
    entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.  His mother is  a  dual
    US and Irish national now living in the UK.

 2. The application was refused under paragraph E-ECDR1.1 of Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant's claim  is  that  he  is  living  alone  in  exceptional
    circumstances.  He suffers  from  schizophrenia,  and  has  no  one  to
    encourage him to take his medication.  He was living  with  a  roommate
    but she has moved away.  He has a father and step-mother in the USA but
    his step-mother is unwell and cannot care for him.  His father provides
    for him financially but not emotionally or practically.  He believes he
    should be cared for by his mother.

 4. The basis of the refusal was that there was little evidence of  contact
    between him and his mother.  He was living with a  woman  named  Tracey
    Accord and has done so for 10 years and  she  was  providing  him  with
    support.   Also,  while  it  was  accepted  he   was   suffering   from
    schizophrenia there is treatment available in his home country  and  he
    was accessing such.  Further, there was no information  as  to  how  he
    would  meet  the  financial  requirements.   Finally,  there  were   no
    exceptional circumstances  which  would  warrant  the  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules.

 5. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 6. Following a hearing at Nottingham on 28  February  2019  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Obhi dismissed the appeal.

 7. She found that the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  While he has some mental health  difficulties  he  is  able  to
    manage his personal care.  With some support, not  necessarily  from  a
    carer but another person who is able to keep an eye on him he  is  able
    to take his medication and go to appointments.  He is entitled to  care
    in the USA and such care is available.  His former roommate  with  whom
    he lived cared for him for 12 years.  The care  he  requires  could  be
    provided for him by his father hiring a carer.

 8. The judge then went on from [30] to consider the situation outside  the
    Rules concluding that there were no exceptional circumstances.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted on  14  May
    2019.

Error of law hearing

10. At the error of law hearing before me Ms  Chapman  submitted  that  the
    judge's approach to the Article 8 assessment had been flawed.  Although
    she set out the salient extract from the comments of  Lord  Bingham  in
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, she did not make the  necessary  findings
    of fact, in particular, whether  the  appellant  and  sponsor  share  a
    family life.  In the absence of such a finding her  consequent  finding
    that there was insufficient evidence to show that the refusal of  entry
    clearance would have consequences of such  gravity  as  to  potentially
    engage Article 8  was  undermined.   In  any  event  such  finding  was
    contrary to authority which made clear that the threshold of engagement
    with an interference was not high.  Further, there was no consideration
    of the third or fourth tests namely, whether the proposed  interference
    would be in accordance with the  law  and  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society.  In addition, there was inadequate consideration of the  fifth
    test, proportionality.

11. Ms Chapman added that the appellant had been ill-served by his previous
    representatives who had failed to  put  relevant  material  before  the
    First-tier Judge.  Such, if lodged for the case were it to be remitted,
    might result in a different decision.  She submitted that the test  for
    me in deciding if there was material error was whether  the  additional
    material would make any difference were the case to be reheard.

12. Ms Everett expressed sympathy for the appellant if he had  been  poorly
    represented previously.  However, while  the  judge's  analysis  showed
    error in failing to adopt a structured approach to her  analysis,  such
    error was not material as on the evidence before the judge  the  appeal
    could not succeed.

Consideration

13. I agree with Ms Everett that the judge's decision shows error but  that
    such error is not material.


14. Having found that the appellant could not satisfy the provisions of the
    adult dependent relative rules (which is unchallenged), she went on  to
    note the correct approach to the analysis of private and  family  in  a
    human rights appeal as set out in Razgar.  However, the judge  did  not
    follow that approach.  The first question she should have addressed  is
    whether there is family life between the appellant and his mother,  the
    sponsor.  The facts are not in dispute.  The appellant is 38 years  old
    and his mother in her early seventies.  He had lived  with  his  father
    from the age of seven  when  his  parents  divorced.   His  father  was
    awarded custody. His father had thereafter  provided  for  him  though,
    latterly, such had been financially and practically  by  providing  him
    with a home, rather than emotionally.  He and  his  mother  had  shared
    time together now and then through visits by him to the UK and  by  her
    to the USA. Despite the lack of frequent and regular contact it was  an
    ongoing relationship. In respect of his mental health  there  was  only
    one letter, dated August 2015, from a therapist who suggested that  the
    appellant has schizophrenia for which he is able to access and  receive
    treatment.  Evidence that he had seen a psychiatrist during a visit  to
    the UK lacked documentary support.


15.  It is necessary to show that there is a real, committed  or  effective
    support or relationship between  the  family  members  and  the  normal
    emotional ties between a mother and an adult son are not without  more,
    enough. It is difficult to see how the judge on the evidence before her
    could have properly concluded that the appellant has a family  life  in
    any sense capable of coming within the meaning and purpose  of  Article
    8. As for private life there is no obligation on an ECHR state to allow
    an alien to enter its territory to pursue  private  life  (per  SSHD  v
    Abbas [2017] EWCA Civ 1393).

16. Nonetheless, having apparently taken a generous view of  the  existence
    of family life, she concluded that any interference with the  right  to
    respect for such family life did not have consequences of such  gravity
    as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.  Here she  appears
    to have been unaware of AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801 where  it  was
    held that "While an interference with private or family  life  must  be
    real if it is to engage art  8(1)  the  threshold  of  engagement  (the
    'minimum level') is not a specially high one."   Further,  her  reasons
    for finding (at [32]), that there would be no interference, namely, the
    lack of evidence of the impact of the refusal  where  the  reality  was
    that they had not lived together for many years; the fact that they had
    shared only short periods of time together; that he has lived with  his
    father and when not doing so his father had made arrangements  for  his
    care; that his father could pay someone to move in  and  provide  care,
    appear to go more to the proportionality assessment. As she also  noted
    he does not meet the Rules. Further, as indicated, there was a lack  of
    medical evidence about the appellant's medical health, namely, a single
    letter from a therapist whose qualifications are unclear. It  is  dated
    August 2015. There was nothing up to date. There was no  indication  as
    to what he is capable of doing himself and not doing, and the extent to
    which his mental health has debilitated him.

17. It is evident that the judge proceeded to the fifth  test  set  out  in
    Razgar, namely, proportionality.  It appears that she used her findings
    in [32] together with a finding (at [33])  that  the  sponsor  has  the
    option of going to the USA and putting in place  arrangements  for  his
    care.

18. At [34] she was alert to s117B and,  in  particular,  that  immigration
    control is in the public interest.

19. I agree with Ms Everett that the judge erred in not adopting a  clearer
    approach to the various Razgar steps as she should have done and as she
    stated was her intention.  As indicated it is difficult to see how  the
    judge on the evidence before her could find that there was family life.
    Nonetheless, having apparently  taken  the  case  at  its  highest  she
    reached adequate findings and conclusions on proportionality which were
    open to her on the evidence for the reasons she gave (at [32, 33,34]).

20. I may say I do not find merit in Ms Chapman's submission  that  it  was
    appropriate in assessing materiality of error that  evidence  that  was
    not before the judge should  be  taken  into  account.   No  additional
    evidence was  sought  to  be  lodged  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  No
    application was made to vary the grounds.

21. The issue is whether on the  evidence  before  her  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law.  For the reasons stated I find that no  material
    error was made and that her decision stands.

Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show material error of  law
and that decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date 8 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

