
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15511/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On Tuesday 25 May 2021               |On Monday 14 June 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     J S
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel instructed by Amirthan &  Suresh
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves protection issues, I consider it is appropriate  to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    O'Keeffe promulgated on  26  August  2020  ("the  Decision").   By  the
    Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 20 August 2019 refusing  his  human  rights
    claim.  That claim was made in the context of an application for  entry
    clearance to join his wife who is settled in the UK.  I  refer  to  his
    wife hereafter as the Sponsor.  The Sponsor is recognised as a  refugee
    in the UK, having been found credible in her claim to be of interest to
    the Sri Lankan authorities.  The Appellant's case includes claims  that
    he too has been and is of interest  to  those  authorities.   For  that
    reason, I have continued the anonymity direction made by the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 2. The Judge pointed out that there was no evidence before  her  from  the
    Appellant ([30] of the Decision).  She did not  accept  as  explanation
    for that omission that the Sponsor was unable to make contact with  the
    Appellant due to safety concerns.  Based on that absence  of  evidence,
    the Judge did not accept that it had been shown that  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and Sponsor was  genuine  and  subsisting.    She
    therefore concluded that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules and that Article 8(1) was not engaged.

 3. The Appellant's grounds are not numbered.   In  summary,  they  are  as
    follows:

      1) The Judge has erred by failing to assess the current  circumstances
         against the  findings  of  UTJ  Chalkley  who  had  determined  the
         Sponsor's appeal in 2016. In particular, it is  asserted  that  the
         Judge failed to have regard to the accepted evidence and history in
         that appeal about the risk which contact  with  the  Sponsor  would
         cause.

      2) The Judge made a material error of fact in stating that the Sponsor
         had not referred to having  contact  with  the  Appellant  via  the
         Appellant's mother's  phone  (as  well  as  through  the  Sponsor's
         mother's phone).  That error said to be made at [27] was one of the
         reasons why the Sponsor was not found to be credible in relation to
         her inability to contact the Appellant.

      3) The Judge erred in her consideration of the evidence about  a  trip
         made by the Sponsor and her mother to India in 2017.   It  is  said
         that the Judge has misunderstood or ignored relevant evidence.

      4) The Judge erred in her consideration of the evidence about  contact
         by the Sponsor with the Appellant's parents in Sri  Lanka.   It  is
         said that this was contact by the  Sponsor's  mother  and  not  the
         Sponsor.

      5) There is a minor point made about  the  Judge's  comment  that  the
         Sponsor had said that her barrister  did  not  advise  her  that  a
         statement from  the  Appellant  should  be  provided.   It  appears
         suggested that it was the solicitor who did not so advise  her  and
         that he did so because he was aware of the risks to  the  Appellant
         if the Sponsor were to contact him.

      6) The Judge erred by  placing  reliance  on  the  Sponsor's  mother's
         willingness to make a statement as undermining the reasons why  the
         Appellant had not done so.  It  is  pointed  out  that  it  is  the
         Appellant who has previously been detained and is  said  to  be  at
         risk.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    28 September 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  It is not disputed that the  conversations  shown  on  the
         phone evidence had not been translated and in those the Judge could
         not have placed any weight on the evidence submitted.  The evidence
         recorded in the decision at paragraph 21, and not  challenged,  was
         that the Appellant had returned to Sri Lanka  on  the  decision  of
         'their parents'  i.e.  a  decision  of  both  the  Appellant's  and
         Sponsor's parents.  In those circumstances the Judge  was  entitled
         to find that the account was not as claimed given the role  of  the
         Sponsor's mother who had travelled to India despite her role in the
         Appellant returning to Sri Lanka.  The absence of evidence from the
         Appellant was an obvious feature,  it  is  not  clear  why  witness
         statements from the Appellant's representatives had  not  been  put
         before the Judge and it is not an error to decide  a  case  on  the
         evidence  presented.   In  the  circumstances  the  grounds  are  a
         disagreement with findings that were  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
         evidence available.

         4.   The grounds disclose no arguable error of law  and  permission
         to appeal is refused."

 5. On renewal  of  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal, permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  on  14
    November 2020 in the following terms:

         "1.  At issue in this application for refugee  family  reunion  was
         whether the marriage between the Appellant and Sponsor was  genuine
         and subsisting, as required by paragraph 352A(v) of the Immigration
         Rules.  The Respondent, and now the First-tier Tribunal, had  found
         a paucity of evidence demonstrating that the couple had  maintained
         contact with one another between 2011 and 2019.

         2.   I have considerable sympathy  with  the  assessment  of  Judge
         Parkes that the grounds read much  like  a  disagreement  with  the
         findings of the First-tier Tribunal.  I am nevertheless prepared to
         grant permission on the ground that it is arguable that set against
         the background of Judge Chalkley's findings,  the  Tribunal  should
         have weighed in the balance the evidence that there had  been  some
         degree of contact, albeit  that  the  substance  of  much  of  that
         contact remained opaque for the reasons rehearsed in  the  grounds.
         The grant of permission is not restricted."

 6. Judge Bruce gave directions for a remote hearing to deal with the error
    of law. So it is that the matter came before me  to  determine  whether
    the Decision contains an error of law and, if I so concluded, to either
    re-make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to
    do so.

 7. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 reply to the appeal on  26  March  2021,
    resisting the appeal in the following terms:

         "...  2    The  respondent  opposes  the  appellant's  appeal.   In
         summary, the respondent will submit inter alia that  the  judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.  The  judge
         gave full consideration to the facts in the appeal.  The judge  was
         aware of the sponsor's account that no statement  had  been  taken,
         but also  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
         maintained contact with her own family and that of  her  husband's.
         It is not considered credible  that  if  the  appellant  had  fears
         regarding contact with her husband  that  they  would  not  equally
         apply to her own family or that of her husband.

         3.   It will be argued that if  there  were  such  difficulties  it
         would have been open to the appellant to seek an adjournment on the
         grounds that they were  having  difficulties  taking  instructions/
         obtaining a statement.  There was  no  evidence  before  the  judge
         regarding the solicitors attempts to obtain a statement, as such it
         was not an error of law for him to find against  the  appellant  in
         the absence of a statement from him and unspecified alleged  safety
         concerns, given the fact the sponsor has had contact with him since
         his return to Sri Lanka without incident."

 8. The hearing took place remotely via  Microsoft  Teams.  There  were  no
    technical difficulties affecting the conduct of  the  hearing.   I  had
    before me a core bundle of documents including the Respondent's bundle,
    the Appellant's bundle as before the First-tier Tribunal (running to 65
    pages) (hereafter referred to as [AB/xx])  and  the  skeleton  argument
    filed for that hearing as well as a bundle of  the  witness  statements
    filed by the Respondent for that hearing being the statements filed  in
    the Sponsor's appeal.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

 9. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Clarke  accepted  that  there  was  an
    error of law in the Decision.  As he pointed  out,  the  Appellant  has
    raised a number of issues in the grounds.  He accepted that  there  was
    an error  only  in  relation  to  paragraph  [5]  of  the  grounds  (as
    summarised by me at [3(2)] above).  I accept his concession is  rightly
    made for the following reasons.

10. At [27] of the Decision, the Judge said this:

         "The sponsor said the appellant had contacted her a  few  times  on
         her phone when she was in India.  Her explanation  as  to  why  she
         could not provide evidence of that contact was that she  had  given
         her mother her old phone and had the details  deleted  in  a  phone
         shop.  The sponsor claimed that since returning to the UK, she  had
         contact with the appellant on her new phone.  The  sponsor  claimed
         that she had been in contact with the  appellant  on  her  mother's
         phone.  In oral evidence before me the sponsor said she had  spoken
         with the appellant on his mother's phone.  She made no  mention  of
         contact via her mother in law in her statement."

         [my emphasis]

11. The Sponsor dealt with contact via other's phones at [13] and  [16]  of
    her statement at [AB/4] as follows:

         "13. My husband and I continue to be in  contact  via  my  mother's
         phone on IMO and Viber.  Sometimes we make contact on my  in  laws'
         phone.  He continues to live in a  fearful  environment.   We  have
         been married since 2011 and to date we continue to struggle  to  be
         able to have free and open communication without fear.

         ...

         16.  Further, in terms of providing evidence of  our  contact,  our
         contacts are on IMO and Viber on my  mother's  phone  only.   These
         messages are limited and private.  Most of  my  chats  are  deleted
         immediately by my husband in my mother's phone for his own  and  my
         mother's safety as he continues to be in fear  for  his  life.   In
         March 2019, he had a phone for his use for Visa purposes.  This was
         his mother's phone.  He used it between April 2019 and August 2019.
          We were in contact on that phone for a short period  and  then  he
         returned the phone to his mother.  So, I have provided the  details
         I have from our communication during that time."

         [my emphasis]

12. As Mr Clarke submitted and I accept, the Judge  has  failed  to  notice
    that evidence.  She has used what she saw as a discrepancy between  the
    Sponsor's oral and written evidence as reason to doubt the truth  about
    the contact between the Sponsor and the Appellant.  Whilst on the  face
    of it, the Judge's comment might appear trivial, it is not.  The  issue
    in this appeal is whether the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  are  in  a
    relationship which subsists.  The Judge found against the Appellant  on
    that issue due to the lack of evidence from the Appellant  said  to  be
    due to difficulties of contact and the lack of evidence  of  continuing
    contact between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor.   The  Judge  did  not
    accept as credible the Sponsor's  evidence  about  those  difficulties.
    The reason given at [27] is one of those which led to that finding.

13. As Mr Clarke submitted and I accept this is a mistake of fact  made  by
    the Judge which amounts to an error of law.  Put another way, the Judge
    has failed to take into account relevant evidence (in terms of what  is
    said  in  the  statement)  or  has  taken   irrelevant   factors   into
    consideration (as to the discrepancy).  Either way, I accept  that  the
    mistake of fact discloses an error of law.

14. I also accept that the error, whilst involving only one of the  reasons
    given by the Judge for not finding the lack of contact to be  credible,
    is one which is capable of making a  difference.   As  I  have  already
    pointed out (and as Mr Clarke accepted), the  level  of  contact  is  a
    crucial issue in this appeal.  I  have  some  sympathy  (as  did  Judge
    Bruce) for the position in which Judge O'Keeffe  was  placed  and  with
    what was said by Judge  Parkes  about  the  evidence  in  this  appeal.
    However, the paucity of the evidence is explained by the  Sponsor.   As
    Mr Clarke put it, that explanation may or may not ultimately  be  found
    to be credible, but it had to be considered on an  accurate  assessment
    of all the evidence put forward.

15. I would in any event have found an error of law  based  on  the  ground
    which I have summarised at [3(1)] above.  Although I  accept  that  the
    Judge makes reference to UTJ Chalkley's decision at [20] to [22] of the
    Decision she does so only to note that the  Sponsor  was  found  to  be
    credible in her own appeal, and that the relationship was  accepted  to
    be subsisting at that time.  As the Judge points out  at  [22]  of  the
    Decision that was in 2016. I accept of course that this does  not  mean
    that the Judge had to accept that the relationship  was  subsisting  in
    2020.

16. There is however a further aspect  of  relevance  of  Judge  Chalkley's
    decision and that is his findings about the risk to the Sponsor and the
    Appellant in Sri Lanka.  Understandably given the context, those mainly
    concern the interest of the Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  the  Sponsor.
    However, the Judge did accept that the Sri Lankan authorities  took  an
    interest in the Appellant due to his links with the Sponsor and that he
    was put on reporting conditions.  What he says  about  the  Appellant's
    disappearance has of course to  be  read  with  subsequent  events  and
    evidence about the Appellant's whereabouts. The findings made in  Judge
    Chalkley's decision are, however, therefore potentially relevant to the
    credibility of the  evidence  about  current  risk  of  contact.   That
    decision therefore needed to be considered in that context.

17. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is an error of law
    in the Decision. The Decision therefore falls to be  set  aside.  As  I
    have pointed out, the credibility of the Sponsor's explanation for  the
    lack of evidence about contact and the contact itself is central to the
    issue in this appeal which is whether the relationship  is  subsisting.
    For those reasons, the credibility findings need to be re-made in their
    entirety.  It is for that reason inappropriate to preserve any  of  the
    findings made.

18. Although there are limited issues in this appeal, there will need to be
    entirely fresh findings of fact made.   The  appeal  will  be  starting
    again  from  scratch.   For  that  reason,  it  was  agreed   by   both
    representatives that it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.  I concur with that  position.



    CONCLUSION

19. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that there is  an  error  of  law
    disclosed in the Decision. I do not preserve any of  the  findings.   I
    therefore set the Decision aside in its entirety.  For the reasons  set
    out above, it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal as all factual findings will need to be made afresh.




    DECISION

    The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe  promulgated  on  26
    August 2020 involves the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  I
    therefore set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge O'Keeffe.




    Signed: L K Smith

    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

    Dated: 27 May 2021
