
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15486/2019
                                                               HU/15487/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (via Microsoft      |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|Teams)                                      |                               |
|On 26 August 2021                           |On 07 October 2021             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            THAMANSING PURJA PUN
                           BUDHIBAHADUR PURJA PUN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         AN ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moll instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellants appeal with permission a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Swinnerton ('the Judge') promulgated on 12 March 2021 in which  the
   Judge dismissed the appeals of the  appellants  against  the  refusal  of
   their applications for  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  adult
   dependent children of their mother, the sponsor and a widow of  a  former
   Gurkha soldier.



Background


      2. At the date of the hearing, the first appellant was 49 years of age
         and the second appellant 45.
      3. The appellants father enlisted in  the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas  on  4
         November 1957 and was discharged with an exemplary military conduct
         record on 7 December 1970. He died on 21 May 2005.
      4. The sponsor was aged 74 at the date of the hearing and entered  the
         United Kingdom on 4 May 2014, having  been  granted  the  requisite
         leave on 3 March 2014.
      5. The Judge notes the appellants continue to live in the family  home
         owned by the mother and that there are two other siblings who  live
         and work in Hong Kong.
      6. Having had the benefit of considering the documentary evidence  and
         the sponsor's oral evidence at the  hearing,  the  Judge  sets  out
         findings of fact [21] of the decision under challenge. At [26 - 28]
         the Judge writes:


        26.  With respect to the provision  of  financial  support  by  the
             sponsor to the Appellants,  it  is  readily  acknowledged  and
             accepted by the  Respondent  that  the  sponsor  has  provided
             financial support to the Appellants but it is not accepted  by
             the Respondent that the sponsor has  provided  this  financial
             support in a  regular  or  frequent  manner.  The  Respondents
             characterise the financial support provided by the sponsor  to
             the Appellants as sporadic  or  limited.  The  money  transfer
             receipts provided do not detail any payments having been  made
             by the sponsor to the Appellants from the end  of  2015  until
             July 2017. In 2018, three money transfers were made ,  and  in
             2018 four money transfers were made. Based  on  the  available
             evidence of financial support provided by the sponsor  to  the
             Appellants, I do not accept that the sponsor has  provided  or
             provides financial support to the  Appellants  on  a  frequent
             basis. I find that it is much more  likely  that  the  sponsor
             provides financial support to the Appellants on an  infrequent
             basis and that the Appellants are largely able to provide  for
             themselves as a consequence of the  farming  work  which  they
             undertake.


        27.  It is clear that voluntary  separation  does  not  end  family
             life. Neither does the attainment of the age of  majority  end
             family life although age is a relevant factor  and  the  first
             Appellant was aged 47 and the second Appellant aged 43 at  the
             time of the application.


        28.  It is not disputed that the sponsor has lived apart  from  the
             Appellants for long periods of time  during  their  childhood.
             That includes the period of about 10 years from 1996  to  2005
             when the sponsor lived with  her  husband  in  Hong  Kong  and
             almost all of the last 7 years since the sponsor first entered
             into the UK on 4.5.2014. I do not doubt that the sponsor loves
             and cares deeply for the Appellants  and  for  her  other  two
             children, and neither do  I  doubt  that  those  feelings  are
             reciprocated by the Appellants. That said,  and  having  taken
             account of all the  circumstances  in  this  case,  I  am  not
             satisfied that there exists emotional dependency  between  the
             sponsor and the Appellants over and above the normal emotional
             ties or that there is real, effective or committed support.  I
             am not therefore satisfied that family life  exists,  or  that
             Article 8(1) is engaged.


      7. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
         another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  12  May  2021,  the
         operative part of the grant being in the following terms:


        2.   The grounds asserts that the Judge erred in placing  too  much
             weight on a voluntary  separation  of  the  sponsor  from  the
             appellants without grappling with  whether  the  family  would
             have remained together had it been possible under  the  United
             Kingdoms immigration laws at an earlier date; and  in  failing
             to  indicate  whether  she  accepted  the  evidence  that  the
             appellants were subsistence only farmers who did not  earn  an
             income from their farming.


        REASONS FOR DECISION


        3.   The selective summary of the judge's findings and  reasons  in
             the grounds of appeal does not accurately reflect the basis on
             which the judge concluded that  family  life  does  not  exist
             between the  sponsor  and  the  appellants.  It  is  arguable,
             however, that the judge did not have regard to the totality of
             the sponsor's  evidence,  including  the  witness  statements,
             particularly that relating to the period  she  spent  in  Hong
             Kong and why she went. In the alternative, it is arguable  she
             failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting it.



Error of law


      8. The fact the appellants and their mother are related is not  enough
         per se. In CO and NO (Nigeria) [2004]  UKIAT   00232  the  Tribunal
         noted that there was a distinction to be drawn between family  life
         in the colloquial sense (now often referred to as family ties)  and
         family life within the meaning of Article 8(1).   At  [7]  of  that
         decision it is written:


         7.   We do not accept that the right "to respect  for  private  and
             family life" extends necessarily to a right (even a  qualified
             right) to join with other relatives who are entitled  to  live
             in the United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules. Mr  Chelvan
             was not able to show us any decision of  the  European  Courts
             which recognised the right of adult children to choose to live
             with their parents in a country where the European  Convention
             on Human Rights applies. We accept  that  there  may  well  be
             cases where removing a person interferes with his private  and
             family life established in, for example, the  United  Kingdom.
             That is quite different from saying  that  a  person  has  the
             right to join with a relative who has chosen to  live  in  the
             United Kingdom. Similar points were made by Mr J Barnes  (Vice
             President) in the  case  known  as  S  (Uganda) [2004]  UKIAT
             00064 at paragraph 8


             "It is accepted that in circumstances where family life is put
             forward as existing between an adult child and his parents  or
             an adult sibling and his other  siblings  there  needs  to  be
             further evidence of  dependency  involving  more  than  normal
             emotional ties. This was reaffirmed by  the  Tribunal  in  the
             recent case of Salad [2002] UKIAT 06698 relying on the earlier
             case of Advik v United Kingdom, a Strasbourg case  decided  in
             September 1995. The relevant  quotation  from  Advik  is  also
             contained at paragraph 13 of the decision in Salad. Each  case
             is fact dependent. In Salad adult  brothers  had  been  living
             apart for a long period of time and were not dependent on each
             other. Equally where  relationships  between  parents  and  an
             adult child are concerned the protection of  Article  8  would
             not  necessarily  be  engaged  without  evidence  of   further
             elements of dependency. In the present appeal no  evidence  of
             such  further  dependency  has  been  adduced   although   the
             appellant was offered the opportunity to bring  oral  evidence
             before us had he wished to do so."


      9.  In S v UK [1984] 40 DR 196 Sedley LJ made it clear  that  "Neither
         blood ties nor the concern and affection that  ordinarily  go  with
         them are, by  themselves  altogether,  in  my  judgment  enough  to
         constitute family life.  Most of us have close relations of whom we
         are extremely fond and whom we visit, or who visit us, from time to
         time; but none of us would say on those grounds alone that we  have
         a family life with them in any sense capable of coming  within  the
         meaning and purpose of Article 8".
     10. The answer to  the  question  whether  family  life  recognised  by
         Article 8 exists depends upon the specific facts of the case.
     11. In PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance Officer,  Chennai  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 612 it was held that some tribunals  appeared  to   have   read
         Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  as   establishing   a   rebuttable
         presumption against any relationship between an adult child and his
         parents or siblings being sufficient to engage Article 8. That  was
         not correct. Kugathas required a fact-sensitive approach and should
         be understood in the light of the subsequent case law summarised in
         Ghising (family life -adults -Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 160  (IAC)
         and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630.   There  was  no  legal  or  factual
         presumption as to the existence or absence of family life  for  the
         purposes  of  Article  8  nor  was   there   any   requirement   of
         exceptionality.  It all  depended  on  the  facts.   The  love  and
         affection between an adult and his parents or siblings would not of
         itself justify a  finding  of  a  family  life.  There  had  to  be
         something more. A young adult living with his parents  or  siblings
         would normally have a family life to be respected under Article  8.
         A child enjoying a family life with his parents  did  not  suddenly
         cease to have a family life at midnight as he turned  18  years  of
         age. On the other hand, a young adult living independently  of  his
         parents might well not have a  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
         Article 8 (paras 23 -26).
     12. In PT it was found to be  proportionate  to  refuse  entry   to   a
         young  adult  with  a family  life  when the   Claimant  had   been
         able   to   make   the    transition    to   independent    living,
         notwithstanding  a  degree  of  financial  dependence, there was no
         evidence of any special impact from his separation from his  mother
         and  sisters and the rest  of  the family  had   chosen   to   move
         to  the UK and were not facing persecution in Sri Lanka.
     13. Specifically in relation to children of former Gurkha soldiers, the
         legal position is  that  the  policy  of  redressing  the  historic
         injustice which had prevented  Gurkhas  from  settling  in  the  UK
         carried far less weight where non-dependent adult  relatives  of  a
         Gurkha applied for indefinite leave to  remain  than  it  did  when
         dependent relatives applied: see Pun (Nepal) v. Secretary of State
         for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2106  (13   December
         2017) [2018] 4 W.L.R. 80.
     14. Mr Moll sough to rely upon the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
         in Rai v. Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA  Civ  320
         (28 April 2017) in which it was found

         'The real issue under article 8(1) is whether, as a matter of fact,
         an adult family member has demonstrated that he has a  family  life
         with his parents which existed at the time of their  departure  and
         has endured beyond it, notwithstanding their having left Nepal when
         they did. There is no test of 'exceptionality''.


     15. It is not an error for a Judge not to set out  in  detail  all  the
         written evidence or to not have made findings in  relation  to  the
         same. The Judge states that all the evidence  relied  upon  by  the
         parties was considered, both written and oral, it is not  made  out
         on the basis of the evidence provided, the decision raises a  whole
         all the submissions that there is any  reason  to  go  behind  this
         statement.
     16. The grant permission to appeal refers to the sponsor's evidence  as
         to why she went to Hong Kong. In her witness statement dated 8  May
         2019 at [12 - 13] it is written:


         12.  After my son Pritam Bahadur  was  granted  Hong  Kong  ID,  he
             travels to Hong Kong and sponsored my and my husband's  visas.
             We were struggling and leaving [sic]  miserable  life  in  our
             village. We had no choices accept  travel  to  Hong  Kong.  We
             travel to Hong Kong in 1996.


         13.  I my husband worked very hard to provide our children. We also
             tried to bring our children  in  Hong  Kong  but  due  to  the
             restrictive immigration policy we could not bring our  son  in
             Hong Kong. I my  husband  were  working  hard  to  secure  our
             children's future. So later we could reunite for the  rest  of
             our lives.


     17. The appellants applications were considered  by  reference  to  EC-
         DR.1.1 Appendix FM, which provides:



         Section EC-DR: Entry clearance as an adult dependent relative


         EC-DR.1.1. The requirements to be met for entry clearance as an
         adult dependent relative are that-

         (a)  the applicant must be outside the UK;
         (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application for entry
             clearance as an adult dependent relative;
         (c)  the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of the
             grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability for entry clearance; and
         (d)  the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section E-
             ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult dependent
             relative.


     18. E-ECDR reads:



         Section EC-DR: Entry clearance as an adult dependent relative


         EC-DR.1.1. The requirements to be met for entry clearance as an
         adult dependent relative are that-

         (a)  the applicant must be outside the UK;
         (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application for entry
             clearance as an adult dependent relative;
         (c)  the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of the
             grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability for entry clearance; and
         (d)  the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section E-
             ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult dependent
             relative.

         Section E-ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult
    dependent relative


         E-ECDR.1.1. To meet the eligibility requirements for entry
         clearance as an adult dependent relative all of the requirements in
         paragraphs E-ECDR.2.1. to 3.2. must be met.


         Relationship requirements


         E-ECDR.2.1. The applicant must be the-

         (a)  parent aged 18 years or over;
         (b)  grandparent;
         (c)  brother or sister aged 18 years or over; or
         (d)   son or daughter aged 18 years or over of a person ("the
      sponsor") who is in the UK.

         E-ECDR.2.2. If the applicant is the sponsor's parent or grandparent
         they must not be in a subsisting relationship with a partner unless
         that partner is also the sponsor's parent or grandparent and is
         applying for entry clearance at the same time as the applicant.


         E-ECDR.2.3. The sponsor must at the date of application be-

         (a)  aged 18 years or over; and
         (b)
               (i)     a British Citizen in the UK; or
               (ii)    present and settled in the UK; or
               (iii)   in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
               protection; or
               (iv)    in the UK with limited leave under Appendix EU, in
                  accordance with paragraph GEN.1.3.(d)

         E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or disability require long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.


         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where
         they are living, because-

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
      can reasonably provide it; or
         (b)  it is not affordable.

         Financial requirements


         E-ECDR.3.1. The applicant must provide evidence that they can be
         adequately maintained, accommodated and cared for in the UK by the
         sponsor without recourse to public funds.


         E-ECDR.3.2. If the applicant's sponsor is a British Citizen or
         settled in the UK, the applicant must provide an undertaking signed
         by the sponsor confirming that the applicant will have no recourse
         to public funds, and that the sponsor will be responsible for their
         maintenance, accommodation and care, for a period of 5 years from
         the date the applicant enters the UK if they are granted indefinite
         leave to enter.


         Section D-ECDR: Decision on application for entry clearance as an
    adult dependent relative


         D-ECDR.1.1. If the applicant meets the requirements for entry
         clearance as an adult dependent relative of a British Citizen or
         person settled in the UK they will be granted indefinite leave to
         enter.


         D-ECDR.1.2. If the applicant meets the requirements for entry
         clearance as an adult dependent relative and the sponsor has
         limited leave the applicant will be granted limited leave of a
         duration which will expire at the same time as the sponsor's
         limited leave, and subject to a condition of no recourse to public
         funds. If the sponsor applies for further limited leave, the
         applicant may apply for further limited leave of the same duration,
         if the requirements in EC-DR.1.1. (c) and (d) continue to be met,
         and subject to no recourse to public funds.


         D-ECDR.1.3. If the applicant does not meet the requirements for
         entry clearance as an adult dependent relative the application will
         be refused.



     19. It was not accepted by the decisionmaker that the appellants  could
         satisfy the requirements of the Rules. It is particularly noted  in
         the refusal:


         You have disclosed no disability; you have provided no evidence and
         make no statement that would lead  me  to  consider  that  you  are
         unable to care for yourself on a daily  basis,  i.e.  to  wash  and
         dress yourself; prepare food for yourself. I am satisfied that  you
         have demonstrated no exceptional circumstances.


         You have stated that  you  are  unemployed  and  that  your  mother
         supports you. However, you have provided  no  details  as  to  your
         financial commitments in Nepal.  Even  if  I  accept  that  you  do
         receive financial assistance from your mother, I am satisfied  that
         you are a fit and capable adult who is able to look after yourself.


         Furthermore,  you  have  not  demonstrated   that   any   financial
         assistance that you receive cannot continue. Based on the documents
         that you have submitted and the information that you have provided.
         I am not satisfied that you require, due to either age, illness  or
         disability, long-term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks.  I
         therefore refuse your application under  paragraph  EC-DR1.1(d)  of
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (E-ECDR 2.4).


     20. Neither can the appellants satisfy the eligibility requirements for
         adult dependent children of former Gurkha soldiers set out  in  the
         Secretary of State discretionary policy as they are over  30  years
         of age.


         ANNEX K - Adult Children of Former Gurkhas
             1. For the purposes of this guidance, a  former  Gurkha  is  a
                Gurkha who  completed  their  service  in  the  Brigade  of
                Gurkhas of the British Army between 1948 and 1  July  1997.
                Definition of an adult child of a former Gurkha
             2. For the purposes of this policy, an adult child is the  son
                or daughter of a former Gurkha. See further guidance on the
                relationship to the sponsor in paragraph 11 of Annex  K  of
                this guidance. Who is not covered by this guidance.
             3. Other adult relatives aged 18 or over who might claim to be
                dependent on a former Gurkha such as parents, grandparents,
                grandchildren, siblings or wider family members of a former
                Gurkha  are  outside  the  remit  of   this   policy.   Any
                applications from parents, grandparents, siblings or  adult
                children (who do not qualify under this policy) aged 18  or
                over of a former Gurkha, settled in the UK,  must  be  made
                overseas under the adult dependent relative  provisions  of
                Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, and considered  under
                those Rules.
             4. There are no specific  Immigration  Rules  to  cover  wider
                family members such as  the  niece,  nephew,  aunt,  uncle,
                cousin or grandchild  of  a  former  Gurkha  and  they  are
                outside the  scope  of  this  policy.  Those  wider  family
                members would have to qualify in their own right for  leave
                to enter or remain in the UK under  the  Immigration  Rules
                e.g. if they wish to study or work in  the  UK  they  would
                need to apply under the Points  Based  System  rather  than
                rely on a family relationship with a former Gurkha to  seek
                to obtain leave.
             5. Spouses, civil partners, unmarried or  same  sex  partners,
                children under 18 and widows of former Gurkhas are  covered
                by existing  published  guidance  (see  background  to  the
                policy in paragraphs 6-8 below) and are  therefore  outside
                the scope of this policy.

     21. In relation to eligibility under the terms of the policy:


         Settlement for adult children of former Gurkhas


         9.   In order for settlement to be granted to the adult child of  a
             former Gurkha under this policy, a valid application for entry
             clearance must be made in accordance with paragraphs 24-30  of
             the Immigration Rules and the applicant will normally have  to
             meet the following conditions:
             1.   The former Gurkha parent has been, or is in  the  process
                  of being granted settlement under the  2009  discretionary
                  arrangements; and
             2.   The applicant is  the  son  or  daughter  of  the  former
                  Gurkha; and
             3.   The applicant is outside the UK; and
             4.   The applicant is 18 years of age or over and 30 years  of
                  age  or  under  on  the  date  of  application  (including
                  applicants who are 30 as at the date of application); and
             5.   The applicant is financially and emotionally dependent on
                  the former Gurkha; and
             6.   The applicant was under 18 years of age at  the  time  of
                  the former Gurkha's discharge; (or if  the  applicant  was
                  born after discharge see guidance in paragraph 16 of Annex
                  K of this guidance) and
             7.   The Secretary of State is satisfied that  an  application
                  for settlement by the former Gurkha would have  been  made
                  before 2009 had the option to do so been available  before
                  1 July 1997; and
             8.   The applicant has not been living apart from  the  former
                  Gurkha for more than two years on the date of application,
                  and has never lived apart from the sponsor for  more  than
                  two years  at  a  time,  unless  this  was  by  reason  of
                  education or something similar (such that the family  unit
                  was maintained, albeit the applicant lived away); and
             9.   The applicant has not formed an independent family  unit;
                  and
             10.  The applicant does not fall to be refused on  grounds  of
                  suitability under paragraph  8  or  9  of  Appendix  Armed
                  Forces to the Immigration Rules  or  those  provisions  of
                  Part 9 of  the  Immigration  Rules  (general  grounds  for
                  refusal) that apply in respect of applications made  under
                  Appendix Armed Forces.


     22. The appellants are unable to qualify under the discretionary policy
         set out by the Secretary of State to resolve what was perceived  as
         a 'historic wrong' in the treatment of family  members  are  former
         Gurkha soldiers who served in the British Army. The appellants were
         also unable to qualify under the Immigration Rules  which  set  out
         the basis in the view of the Secretary of State  for  permitting  a
         person who may otherwise be unable to enter the United Kingdom as a
         result of being over 18, but otherwise has special circumstances or
         needs, to secure leave to enter.
     23. The appellant therefore sought to  rely  on  Article  8  ECHR,  but
         Article 8 does not give a person the right  to  choose  where  they
         wish to live. The primary  purpose  of  Article  8  is  to  protect
         against arbitrary interferences with private and family life, home,
         and correspondence by a public authority in which  regard  must  be
         had to the fair balance that has to be struck between the competing
         interests of the individual and of the community as a whole.
     24. The best practice approach to assessing the merits of an article  8
         is to follow the guidance set out by the House of Lords  in  R  (on
         the application of  Razgar) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department  [2004] UKHL 27:


            i) Will the  proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  public
               authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
               respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
           ii) If so, will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
               gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
          iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
           iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
               in the interests of national security, public safety  or  the
               economic well-being of the country,  for  the  prevention  of
               disorder or crime, for the protection of  health  or  morals,
               for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
            v) If so, is such interference proportionate to  the  legitimate
               public end sought to be achieved?


     25. In this appeal the Judge answered the first of the Razgar questions
         in the negative, and so was not required to consider the  remaining
         four  questions  and,  in   particular,   the   question   of   the
         proportionality of the decision.
     26. Much was made by Mr Moll of the circumstances in which  the  family
         unit was separated when the sponsor and her husband  went  to  Hong
         Kong following their other son having been  granted  permission  to
         settle and work there. It was submitted that there  was  no  choice
         but for the family to take this course of action as a result of the
         poor living conditions of the family in Nepal.
     27. Further examination of this claim  during  the  course  of  hearing
         shows that it was not a case of the sponsor and her  husband  being
         forced from the family home and farmland in the hills of Nepal as a
         result of being destitute or having to flee the land as a result of
         natural or man-made disasters, but as a result of them  having  the
         ability to better themselves by working in Hong  Kong,  where  they
         could you earn a greater rate of pay  and  send  remittances  home.
         This is not a phenomenon unique to this family as  statistics  from
         2010 show the formal remittance from the 3 million  Nepali  migrant
         workers across the globe reaching Rs 262 billion.
     28. It was not made out on the information available to  the  Judge  in
         connection  with  this  application  that  the  standard  of   such
         accommodation or the lifestyle of  the  appellants  as  subsistence
         farmers is sufficient to establish hardship sufficient to amount to
         a breach of human rights.  The general situation must be taken into
         account as must what  is  generally  accepted  in  the  society  in
         question. The  description  of  the  lifestyle  experience  by  the
         appellants in Nepal was not shown to be anything  other  than  that
         normally experienced by  subsistence  farmers  in  that  region  in
         Nepal.
     29. It is accepted that this is not a commercial  agricultural  venture
         run by the appellants in Nepal as subsistence farming  occurs  when
         farmers grow food crops to meet the needs of themselves  and  their
         families on smallholdings. It was not made out  the  appellants  do
         not  produce  enough  produce  to  survive  and  meet  their  local
         requirements even if there was little or no surplus. The comment of
         the ECO in the  refusal  of  the  Appellants,  having  provided  no
         details of  their  financial  commitments  in  the  Nepal  is  same
         situation which existed before the Judge.
     30. I find no arguable merit in the challenge to the  Judge's  decision
         that the separation of this family unit, when the sponsor  and  her
         husband went to Hong Kong between 1996 and 2005,  was  a  voluntary
         act. The evidence supports the finding that during  this  time  the
         appellants, who would have been between 25 and 34  benefiting  from
         remittances that may have been sent, but otherwise led  independent
         lives.
     31. Following the unfortunate death  of  the  appellant's  father,  the
         sponsor returned to Nepal where she lived with the appellants until
         she applied for entry clearance and came to the United Kingdom.  It
         was not made out before the Judge that at  that  time  family  life
         recognised by Article 8 existed between the sponsor and  her  adult
         sons.
     32. The Judge accepted that some remittances were sent by  the  sponsor
         from the United Kingdom to Nepal, but it was argued by Mr  Moll  on
         behalf of the appellants that there was further evidence  that  the
         pension authorities had confirmed payment of a pension into a  bank
         account to which, it was claimed,  the  appellants  had  access  in
         Nepal.
     33. The letter from the Pension Payments and Information  Office  dated
         19 March 2018 confirms a pension payment to the sponsor,  with  the
         relevant exchange rate, and stating the monthly pension is credited
         at the end of every month into the relevant bank account. That  may
         be so but there was  insufficient  evidence  before  the  Judge  of
         regular  withdrawals  from  the  account  or  evidence  that   such
         withdrawals were required for the  purposes  of  meeting  essential
         needs of the appellants sufficient to create the necessary  element
         of dependency. It was clear that family life recognised by  Article
         8 had ended well before 2018.  The  Upper  Tribunal  was  also  not
         referred to bank statements relating to the account in question  to
         enable the account history to be established.
     34. The Judge clearly undertook the necessary  holistic  assessment  of
         the evidence and having done so concluded that the  appellants  had
         not discharged the burden upon them to establish that  family  life
         recognised by Article 8 existed. It is  not  made  out  that  is  a
         decision outside the range of those  reasonably  available  to  the
         Judge on the evidence sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal
         interfering any further in this matter. In this case  there  is  no
         evidence of  any  special  impact  upon  the  appellants  of  their
         separation from their mother.




Decision

     35. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


     36. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 27 August 2021

