
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15747/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 7 August 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                 Farhan ali
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Badar, Counsel instructed by Connaughts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing an appeal by the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2009 but his leave ran out and  his  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted on 15 July 2015.

 3. Shortly before his appeal rights were exhausted in July,  on  24  March
    2015, he married a British citizen and they started  to  cohabit.   The
    application was refused because the  appellant  was  considered  to  be
    unsuitable.  He had been identified as a person who had taken  a  TOEIC
    test of competence in the English language improperly by using a proxy.

 4. He was also criticised for using a false address in his  dealings  with
    the Registrar of Births, Deaths, Marriages and Civil  Partnerships  but
    the First-tier Tribunal ruled against the Secretary of  State  on  that
    point.

 5. Nevertheless, the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that the  appellant
    had obtained his certificate of competence improperly and was satisfied
    as a consequence of that that he  was  not  a  suitable  person  to  be
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.

 6. The nub of the case on dishonesty is that the appellant, at a time that
    he lived in London, said that he went to a particular  test  centre  in
    Manchester to take his TOEIC test and on the  day  that  the  appellant
    said that he took  his  test,  which  he  claimed  to  have  passed,  a
    subsequent investigation had shown that none of the  tests  taken  that
    day were satisfactory.  According to the "lookup tool"  there  were  88
    tests taken  at  Darwin's  College  on  16  November  2011,  none  were
    "released".  The records  show  that  19,  or  22%,  were  regarded  as
    questionable and 69, or 78%, were regarded as invalid.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe that  the  appellant  had
    taken a test at Darwin's College.  He gave two main reasons  for  that.
    First, he did not accept that the appellant would have  travelled  from
    London to Manchester  to  take  the  test.   He  did  not  believe  the
    appellant's explanation that he needed to pass  the  test  because  his
    leave was about to expire.  The appellant said he took the test  on  15
    November 2011 but his leave did not expire until 30 December 2011, some
    six weeks later.  The judge said: "I  do  not  accept  that  no  London
    college was able to provide a test date within that period."

 8. Second, he found that "if he had sat the test  himself  he  would  have
    known there were 4 times as many takers as he  recalled."   This  is  a
    reference to the appellant's claim that he recalled there being some 20
    to 25 people taking the test, when the records show that 88 people took
    the test at Darwin's College on the same day as the appellant.

 9. With respect to the First-tier Tribunal Judge I find neither  of  these
    reasons at all satisfactory.  There was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    claim that no London centre was able to provide the test within the six
    week period.  I have absolutely no idea how far in advance tests had to
    be booked.  I do  remind  myself  that  the  Judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is a respected immigration practitioner and may have knowledge
    on this point (and no doubt a great deal else) that I do not, but  this
    is not a matter that  can  be  dealt  with  satisfactorily  by  way  of
    judicial notice.  There was no evidence to justify that conclusion  and
    it is not obviously right.

10. Second, the contention that the appellant would have known  that  there
    were about 88 people taking the test rather  than  between  20  and  25
    assumes that everyone took the  test  at  the  same  time.   I  see  no
    justification whatsoever for that assumption.  If  that  assumption  is
    not right (there is no evidence for it) then the point falls away.

11. I have reflected very  carefully  on  whether  these  findings  can  be
    described properly as perverse.  They are consistent with one  view  of
    the evidence but they are based on assumptions that cannot be justified
    on the evidence before  me  and,  as  indicated  above,  they  are  not
    obviously right.  I have concluded that these findings are  unsound  in
    law.

12. Mr Lindsay made much of the appellant travelling to Manchester but  the
    appellant said that he  had  relatives  there  and  was  able  to  have
    overnight  accommodation.   It  does  not  strike  me  as  bizarre   or
    inherently unbelievable that he would have travelled to  Manchester  to
    take the test and certainly not if he found it difficult to  arrange  a
    test in London as he has claimed and he could combine taking  the  test
    with a family visit.

13. The grounds of appeal, anticipating a decision of the kind  I  have  to
    make here, contended that I should order that certain  findings  to  be
    preserved.  I have no reason to go  behind  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding that the marriage  is  genuine  and  subsisting  and  that  the
    appellant meets  the  eligibility  requirements  assuming  that  he  is
    suitable. Those findings, and the finding that the  appellant  had  not
    been dishonest with the registrar about his  place  of  residence,  are
    sound findings and should be preserved.

14.  However,  there  is  an  element  to  this  appeal  that  puzzles   me
    considerably.  In the bundle described  as  the  supplementary  bundle,
    which Mr Badar may not have seen at all, there is an ETS  "SELT  source
    data" in which the appellant has identified as  someone  who  took  the
    test at Darwin's College and the result was "invalid".  When this  case
    is looked at again, the  significance  of  that  finding,  if  any,  is
    something about which  the  Tribunal  will  want  assistance  from  the
    parties.

15.  Nevertheless,  for  the   reasons   given,   I   find   the   decision
    unsatisfactory.  The core findings are made on unjustified  assumptions
    and are therefore perverse.

Notice of Decision

16. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   I  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal to the extent that I direct  it  be  heard
    again in the First-tier Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 August 2018                  |

