
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/15468/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 September 2020               |On 28 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                               MIR FAZLE BARI

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For  the  appellant:      Mr  S  Karim  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Hamlet
Solicitors LLP

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
indicated that I had found an error of  law  in  the  decision  and  briefly
outlined my reasons, reserving the  full  reasons  to  a  written  decision,
which I now give. The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Bangladesh with date of birth  given
    as 5.2.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   promulgated   18.12.19,
    dismissing on his appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, dated 3.9.19, to refuse his application for Indefinite Leave  to
    Remain in the UK on the basis of long residence.

 2. The grounds of application for permission to appeal complain  that  the
    judge proceeded to hear the appeal despite being informed that  counsel
    representing him had been taken unwell on the day of the hearing.

 3. Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused
    by the First-tier Tribunal on 6.4.20. However, when the application was
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  granted
    permission on 6.7.20, considering it arguably unfair for the  judge  to
    justify  the  adjournment  refusal  owing  to  an  absence  of  medical
    evidence, casting suspicion on the honesty of counsel, and  which  was,
    in any event,  unrealistic  given  the  timescale  and  nature  of  the
    illness, namely influenza. It was also noted that a statement of  truth
    from counsel in question has been  provided  with  the  grounds.  Judge
    Kamara also  considered  it  arguably  unlikely  that  the  instructing
    solicitors would have been able to step into the  breach,  contrary  to
    the conclusions of the judge, given that counsel had been instructed in
    the first place.

 4. By letter dated 14.9.20,  Ms  Pettersen,  acting  for  the  respondent,
    informed the Tribunal that the application for permission to appeal was
    not opposed and inviting the Tribunal to remit the case to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 5. I am satisfied that the  making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  involved  an  error  of  law  in  refusing  the   adjournment
    application. I am satisfied that the application for an adjournment was
    made for good reason, even though there was no medical evidence.  Given
    that the appellant's representative,  instructed  counsel  had  on  the
    morning of the hearing succumbed to  influenza,  described  as  "strong
    flu" in the message given to the  appellant  by  counsel's  clerk  from
    chambers, it is most unlikely that any medical evidence would have been
    obtainable or forthcoming. That counsel was indisposed as  claimed  has
    been confirmed by his recent statement.

 6. It was not reasonable to expect the appellant's  instructed  solicitor,
    who was not in any event present at the hearing, to take  over  conduct
    of the appeal at the last minute. Whilst, given  the  hearing  did  not
    take place until 2:30pm, it  might  have  been  possible  to  find  and
    instruct alternative counsel, it is not clear whether this  option  was
    practically available to the appellant in the short time available. The
    appellant was entitled to have legal representation in the  appeal  and
    was not obliged to have someone come from the office to take the  reins
    who may or may not have the ability to take over the case, even if that
    was person was available. I am satisfied that in all the  circumstances
    the  refusal  of  the  adjournment  request   was   unreasonable   and,
    ultimately, procedurally unfair.  The  respondent  frankly  accepts  as
    much.

 7. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, as confirmed by
    Mr  McVeety  at  the  hearing  and  not  opposed  by  the   appellant's
    representative, I find a material error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal such that it must be set aside and remade afresh.

 8. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  error  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all findings of fact and the  conclusions  from
    those facts. The effect of the error has been to deprive the  appellant
    of a fair hearing.

 9. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The decision in the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    setting at Taylor House, to be made de novo with no findings preserved.



    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    22 September 2020





