
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number HU/15236/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester CJC
         Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 21st February 2019  On 14th March 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     K H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Ms Hasmi (Solicitor, Mamoon Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his
   application to remain in the UK on the basis of his private and family
   life was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies at Manchester on the
   25th of September 2018. The Judge rejected the credibility of the
   Appellant and his wife for the reasons given in paragraphs 42 to 45 of
   the decision. The Judge found that the Secretary of State had discharged
   the burden of showing that the Appellant had used false documents in a
   previous application, having used deception the Appellant could not meet
   the Immigration Rules.

2. The Judge went on to find that the Appellant had moved back to live with
   his wife and their children for the purposes of the appeal and that the
   relationship was not genuine or subsisting. Little weight was given to
   the Independent Social Worker's Report (ISWR) as that had not addressed
   the issue of their living together. In the circumstances the Judge found
   that the Appellant's removal would not engage article 8. There were no
   insurmountable obstacles the family returning to Pakistan and if article
   8 was engaged then removal would be proportionate. At paragraph 53 the
   Judge found that it would be reasonable for the children to leave the UK.

3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal arguing that had not
   considered MA (Pakistan) that leave should be granted unless there were
   powerful reasons to contrary, the Judge had failed to give findings in
   relation to the Appellant's access to his children, whether he lived with
   them or not, the ability of the Appellant's wife to speak English was not
   relevant and the Judge had not properly considered the children's best
   interests. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
   there had not been an independent assessment of the children's best
   interests and in taking account of the Appellant's wife's lack of English
   or that article 8 was not engaged or with regard to the Appellant's
   access/contact with his children. There was no rule 24 response from the
   Home Office but it was indicated that the Appellant's application was
   opposed on all grounds.

4. For the Appellant it was submitted that the finding at paragraph 53 that
   there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship contradicted
   previous findings. The ISWR had not been considered in its entirety. The
   children had been interviewed with and without the parents and it was
   indicated that removal would have a detrimental effect on them, there
   were no findings. The Appellant's wife does not speak English but the
   Appellant does, the findings made no sense. The Judge had not dealt with
   access to the children and his role in their upbringing. It was submitted
   that it was in the children's best interests to remain with both parents,
   the Judge had not explored what they would face if the Appellant was
   removed or if they were to leave with him.

5. For the Home Office it was submitted that the Judge had not been asked
   to make any findings on the question of access. It had been claimed that
   the Appellant lived in the same house and household but he had found that
   they did not. The finding that the Appellant was not in a genuine and
   subsisting relationship had not been challenged in the grounds. Paragraph
   53 was an alternative finding. The grounds did not cover the Appellant's
   previous deception and the negative credibility findings were not
   challenged. The ISWR said nothing and did not address what was actually
   being told.

6. In reply and referring to KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 it was submitted
   that the Appellant's conduct was not close enough. He did not accept the
   deception and his conduct was not criminal. It was submitted that the
   Appellant met the Immigration Rules and the appeal should succeed. At the
   end of submissions I indicated that if I found that there was an error I
   would remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal and would consider
   remitting the hearing to Judge Davies on the basis that there were
   significant unchallenged findings and the exercise would be limited.

7. Since the hearing the Upper Tribunal has published the decision in JG
   (s117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC). I have
   considered the effect of that case in addition to the guidance in KO
   (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. A decision is to be read on the basis that the
   Judge knew what he was doing, it is to be read fairly and as a whole
   without taking matters out of context and with indulging in "narrow
   textual analysis", a practice deprecated by the Court of Appeal. It is
   only if the decision shows that the Judge failed to carry out a necessary
   function that an error can be found and the necessary corrective action
   taken. It is not necessary for the Judge to set out the applicable law,
   it is necessary that the law is shown to have been applied.

8. It is ordinarily in the best interests of a child to live with both
   parents in a stable and caring environment, that is not a controversial
   proposition nor does it need a social worker to give evidence to that
   effect. It is also obvious that relocation will cause disruption in a
   child's life and that may have an effect on the child's education and
   development but that appropriate parental support may assist the process.
   Children are moved around globally at their parents' behest on a daily
   basis. All things being equal the fact of moving is not itself an issue,
   evidence would be needed to show that there were circumstances relating
   to the best interests of a child that outweighed any public interest that
   arose.

9. For the reasons given in paragraphs 42 and 43 the Judge found that the
   Appellant had used deception in regard to the use of the degree
   certificate purportedly from the University of Greenwich. As that has not
   been challenged in the grounds the finding stands. In paragraph 41 the
   Judge rejected the credibility of the Appellant and his wife. The
   submission by the Appellant's representative on the point is not relevant
   as there is no challenge in the grounds nor was there an application to
   amend the grounds before the Upper Tribunal. That finding would not by
   itself justify a rejection of the other evidence in the case but was a
   factor that the Judge would be entitled to take into consideration in
   assessing the evidence as a whole.

10. The family's circumstances were considered in paragraphs 43 to 45, the
   relevant evidence having been summarised earlier in the decision. The
   principal reasons are given in paragraph 44 of the decision. The
   discussion was brief and to the point and the Judge had regard to the
   evidence relevant to the family's history and their applications. These
   findings have not been challenged in the grounds and so remain as the
   Judge's decision on the evidence presented.

11. Paragraph 4 of the grounds states "The Honourable Judge has failed to
   give his findings in relation to the Appellant's access to his children
   whether he lives the or not, but he clearly has access to them." The
   Judge had given his findings in regard to the living arrangements
   rejecting the claim made that he was living with the children's mother
   and the children in a genuine and subsisting relationship. The assertion
   in paragraph 4 does not bear any relation to the decision itself and
   makes a basic assertion contrary to the actual decision.

12. In rejecting the Appellant's claim to be genuinely living with his wife
   and family, an unchallenged finding the Judge was entitled to make, there
   was no evidence relating to the alternative scenario the grounds rely on
   that the Appellant had contact with the children and played an active
   role in their lives. Any decision on that issue would have been
   speculation by the Judge and open to challenge on that basis. the failure
   of the ISWR to address the Home Office case and report accordingly
   justified the Judge in attaching little weight to it.

13. Given the observations in paragraph 12 above paragraph 53 of the
   decision is clearly a finding in the alternative. It is on that
   alternative basis, i.e. the assumption that a genuine and subsisting
   parental relationship exists that the Judge addressed the issue of
   removal. Paragraph 53 has the effect of answering section 117B(6) as
   required and the Judge's finding that it would be reasonable to expect
   the children to leave the UK was open to him on the limited evidence
   presented.

14. The fact that the Appellant's wife does not speak English is hardly a
   significant point made in the decision but cannot be said to be
   irrelevant. Being unable to speak English the implication is that their
   mother has to speak to them in a language that they both understand. That
   would be Urdu and so have a bearing on the children's ability to
   integrate into Pakistan. How the Appellant came to be without leave was
   not relevant to any proportionality assessment but was a basic fact which
   counted against him. To succeed evidence demonstrating that there were
   compelling circumstances justifying a grant of leave would have to be
   identified, the Judge found none and the grounds do not point to any.

15. It might have helped if there had been a separate section dealing with
   the legal issues to be addressed even if only in summary but at various
   points within the decision the Judge did refer to the matters that had to
   be addressed. In paragraph 42 the Judge referred to the burden being on
   the Secretary of State where deception was being alleged, in paragraph 39
   the Judge referred to the children's best interests and the
   considerations in relation to article 8 were set out in paragraph 7.

16. The decision has to be read fairly and as a whole without taking
   matters out of context, not on the basis of narrow textual analysis and
   on the assumption that the Judge knew what he was doing. It was for the
   Appellant to provide reliable evidence to justify findings of fact relied
   on and the Judge was entitled to find that he had not done so. In
   rejecting the claim that the family were genuinely living together, I
   repeat a finding not challenged, the Judge was not obliged to speculate
   on alternative positions for which there was no evidential basis. In any
   event the Judge did consider the alternative position in that the
   question of a genuine and subsisting relationship with the children was
   considered, the Judge was entitled to find that it would be reasonable to
   expect them to leave the UK. Although the decision could have been
   phrased more helpfully that is not an error, the grounds and oral
   submissions do not show that the Judge erred in the approach taken or the
   findings made.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 11th March 2019









