
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15105/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2020                  |On 03 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mr Adewale Olasunkanmi OTENAIKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Kradh Harlington


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are a written record of the oral reasons given for my decision at
    the hearing.

Background

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant, who was the respondent  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and who I will  refer  to  as  "the  Secretary  of
    State".   The  respondent  was  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("the FtT") and to avoid confusion, I will  refer  to  him  as
    "the Claimant".

 3. A deportation order was made against the Claimant on  22  August  2019,
    following his conviction on 8 November 2018 and sentence to  two  years
    in prison, for facilitating money-laundering. The  Secretary  of  State
    appeals against the decision of Judge Cassel ("the FtT") promulgated on
    19 November 2019, by which  he  allowed  the  Claimant's  human  rights
    appeal on the single, narrow point that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the Claimant's partner, a British citizen, to live in  the  country  to
    which the Claimant is to be deported, Nigeria,  because  of  compelling
    circumstances over and above  those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2  of
    appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The FtT had expressly found that
    the Claimant's appeal in respect of subsisting  parental  relationships
    with qualifying children failed (paragraph [44])  and  that  conclusion
    has not been the subject of a cross-appeal by the Claimant.

 4. Similarly,  in  relation  to  the  Claimant's  private  life,  the  FtT
    concluded that he did not meet the exception under  paragraph  399A  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  or  section  117C(4)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He had not spent most of his life  in
    the UK and therefore his appeal in respect of his private life  failed.
    Once again there is no cross-appeal on this finding.

 5. In respect of the sole issue on which the FtT  allowed  the  Claimant's
    appeal, and against which the  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  the  FtT
    concluded that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  Claimant's  British
    partner to live in a country to which  the  Claimant  was  to  deported
    (Nigeria), for the purposes of  paragraph  399(b)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, at paragraph [46]  of  the  decision;  and  the  effect  of  the
    Claimant's deportation would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  purposes  of
    section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, at paragraph [47] of the decision, for
    the reasons I set out below in the discussion on the error of law.

The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal

 6. The Secretary of State appealed the FtT's decision in grounds dated  19
    November 2019 on two grounds.

 7. As ground (1), the Claimant asserted that the FtT's analysis in respect
    of whether undue harshness was met was inadequate and instead  the  FtT
    had erroneously applied a test of 'very significant difficulties' which
    was the test under paragraph EX.2.,  whereas  insurmountable  obstacles
    amounted  to  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   very
    significant difficulties.

 8. As ground (2), in the alternative, even if  the  FtT  had  applied  the
    correct test, the analysis was inadequate.  There was  no  evidence  of
    any harm that would befall the Claimant's British partner  in  Nigeria;
    nor, if she were to remain in the  UK,  where  she  would  continue  to
    receive family support.



The Secretary of State's Submissions

 9. In the hearing before me, without discourtesy to Mr Kotas, he  did  not
    develop his submissions beyond those already identified in the grounds.



The Claimant's submissions

10. In equally succinct,  but clear submissions from Ms Harris, in relation
    to ground (1), she asserted that the test of what 'unduly harsh'  meant
    had been expressly set out by the FtT at paragraph [41], followed by  a
    detailed consideration at [42], by  reference  to  the   Supreme  Court
    decision of KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  The FtT's decision had
    to be read as a whole.

11. In  relation  to  ground  (2),  the  FtT  had  clearly  identified  the
    cumulative factors at paragraph [46] which made out  the  test  of  the
    being unduly harsh in relation to  the  Claimant's  partner  living  in
    Nigeria:

      a) the Claimant's partner had no connections with Nigeria;

      b) she has close family members in the UK;

      c) she had only visited Nigeria once;

      d) the impact of the couple's miscarriage had been considerable;

      e) the Claimant had needed the support of her mother and other members
         of her UK family, in the context of suffering a miscarriage and her
         consequential mental health issues;

      f) the FtT had  accepted  her  evidence  (as  to  which  there  is  no
         challenge by the Secretary of State) that because  of  her  fragile
         mental state, she needs the continuing support of close members  of
         her UK family.

12. The FtT had also considered why it would not be  possible,  and  indeed
    would be unduly harsh for the Claimant's partner to remain  in  the  UK
    without the Claimant, noting at paragraph [47]:

      a) the Claimant's partner had very  limited  financial  means  and  so
         separation would effectively mean the end of the relationship;

      b) the Claimant had expressed a genuine intention to kill himself  and
         had previously attempted suicide;

      c) the effect on the Claimant and his partner of their miscarriage.

Discussion and Conclusions

Ground (1)

13. In relation to ground (1), I accept the force of Ms Harris's submission
    that whilst paragraph [46] of  the  FtT's  decision   refers  to  'very
    significant difficulties' for the couple continuing their  family  life
    together, this has to be seen in the wider context of the  correct  and
    detailed consideration of what 'unduly harsh' means at paragraphs  [41]
    and [42].  Indeed, at paragraph [45], the FtT expressly referred to the
    need  to  consider  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those
    described in paragraph EX.2 of the Immigration Rules.  I conclude  that
    to  take  the  phrase  'very  significant  difficulties'  in  [46],  in
    isolation, would be to take the analysis out  of  the  context  of  the
    FtT's  detailed  analysis  of  the  correct   legal   test.    In   the
    circumstances, the FtT's decision has to be read as a whole and the FtT
    did not apply the wrong legal test.

Ground (2)

14. I further accept Ms Harris's submission that whilst his  reasoning  was
    succinct, at [46] and [47], the  FtT  reached  conclusions  which  were
    unarguably open to him to reach, based  on  the  evidence  before  him,
    about the compelling circumstances of the Claimant and his partner,  in
    particular the consequences on the mental health of both the  Claimant,
    who had previously attempted suicide, and his  partner;  her  need  for
    support from her UK  relatives;  the  support  she  receives  from  the
    Claimant; and the practical impossibility of her continuing to see  him
    in the event that he is removed to Nigeria.   The  Secretary  of  State
    does not allege that the FtT failed to consider  relevant  factors;  or
    considered factors which he ought not to have considered.  In  reality,
    the Secretary of State's assertion  that  the  combination  of  factors
    outlined and assessed by the  FtT  are  not  capable  of  amounting  to
    matters which are unduly harsh, is a disagreement with the  conclusions
    raised by the FtT.  The FtT's conclusions were open to him and  do  not
    demonstrate an error of law, even noting the  high  threshold  for  the
    legal test, about which the FtT expressly reminded himself.

Notice of Decision

15. For the above reasons, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed  on
    both grounds.  The FtT's decision did not contain any error of law  and
    stands.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   J Keith                    Date         18 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
