
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ/CO/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15988/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 April 2021                      |On 6 May 2021                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     JSA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel from JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India.  His date of birth is 27  December
    1968.  He married an Indian national in  1994.   They  have  two  adult
    children; a daughter, J, born on 29 October 1996 and a son, B, born  on
    17 February 2000.  On 6 December 1998 the Appellant was issued  with  a
    tourist visa.  He entered the UK using this visa.  He made a claim  for
    asylum on 22 June 1999.  This was refused on 5 July 2000.  He  did  not
    appeal this decision. He overstayed.

 2. The Appellant's wife, SKA, (date of birth 23 March 1971), came  to  the
    UK on 13 January 2001 with the couple's two children on the pretext  of
    visiting for two weeks.  On 16 December  2004  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for ILR.  He was granted ILR exceptionally outside  of  the
    Rules on 22 May 2006.  The rest of the family were granted ILR in  line
    with  him.   The  Appellant's  wife  and  children  were   subsequently
    naturalised as British citizens.

 3. On 10 July 2012  the  Appellant  was  convicted  at  Southeast  Suffolk
    Magistrates' Court on 79 counts of fraud, concerning the  falsification
    of tachograph records.  The offences were committed on various dates in
    2010 during the Appellant's employment as  a  haulier.   The  Appellant
    told his offender manager that he had an outstanding credit  card  debt
    of about �50,000 which  he  was  paying  off  in  instalments  and  the
    falsification of the records was to enable him to work excessive  hours
    in order to earn more money.  On 9 August  2012  he  was  sentenced  to
    eight months imprisonment.  On 16  May  2012,  when  on  bail  for  the
    offences, he committed the offence which  triggered  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation.  On 29 July 2013 he  was  convicted  at  Ipswich
    Crown Court of causing death by dangerous driving.  He was sentenced to
    a term of imprisonment of 42 months. When sentencing the  Appellant  at
    Ipswich Crown Court on 1 August 2013 the judge said as follows:

             "Your driving on 16thMay last year took the  life  of  xxxx  a
             young thirty-four year old wife and mother of a seven year old
             who was working here to support her family.  That, of  course,
             taking of her life, was never your intention.  But an accident
             - and a serious one - was the overwhelming likely  consequence
             of driving, as you did ... You were driving forty-four  tonnes
             of metal at fifty-five or fifty-six- miles an hour  -  ten  or
             twelve percent above the limit for that vehicle - in good road
             conditions, good lighting and relatively light  traffic.   The
             speeding as such as it was, on its own, of course, as the jury
             were told, would never have warranted conviction, on its  own,
             for dangerous driving.  What is plain, [JSA], is  that  for  a
             significant part of that journey on the  A14,  something  like
             half of it, or close to it, you were on the  telephone.   Now,
             Bluetooth  or  not,  hands-free   or   not,   you   were   not
             concentrating on the road ahead travelling at fifty-five miles
             an hour in a forty-four tonne vehicle."

 4. The Appellant was informed of his liability to deportation on 26 August
    2013.  A deportation order was signed on 20 January  2015.   On  1  May
    2015 he entered immigration service detention following his release  on
    licence.  Immigration bail was granted on 15 May 2015 and the Appellant
    was released with reporting conditions.  The initial decision to deport
    him made on 20 January 2015 envisaged that he would  only  be  able  to
    bring an appeal against deportation  after  he  had  left  the  country
    however following the judgment in R (Kiarie and Byndloss) v SSHD [2017]
    UKSC 42 a consent order was made and the decision  to  deport  him  was
    withdrawn.

The error of law hearing

 5. A panel comprising the Honourable Lord Matthews sitting as a  Judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal Judge and Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law and  set  aside  his
    decision dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal.   The  panel  found  that
    grounds 1 and 2 were made out.  The relevant parts of the decision read
    as follows.

         "14. In presenting the appeal  Mr  Bazini  drew  our  attention  to
             paragraph 71 of the determination which is  in  the  following
             terms:

                  'But even if I  am  wrong  to  find  that  both  questions
                  arising under paragraph 399(b) must  be  answered  in  the
                  affirmative for Exception 2 to  be  made  out,  I  do  not
                  consider that the criteria in 399(b)(iii)  are  made  out,
                  having regard to the guidance given in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD
                  [2018] UKSC 53 and RA (Iraq) as to the unduly harsh  test.
                  One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what
                  would be necessarily involved for any  qualifying  partner
                  faced  with  the  deportation  of   their   spouse.    The
                  expression 'unduly harsh' sets a high  threshold.   It  is
                  not enough for the outcome to be  severe  or  bleak.   SKA
                  coped with the separation from her husband when he was  in
                  prison.  Although  she  continues  to  suffer  from  panic
                  attacks and to break down in tears (as she did both at the
                  hearing and at the meeting with Dr Balu),  on  a  holistic
                  assessment she continues to display reasonable  resilience
                  and adequate coping skills.  Where (sic) this is  not  the
                  case, she would not be able to work  to  provide  for  the
                  family.  She also adequately  coped  with  (B)'s  distress
                  when the appellant's deportation appeared to be  imminent.
                  She stopped (B) from  continuing  to  destroy  furnishings
                  with a knife, and (B) did not at any point  attempt  self-
                  harm.  SKA was not mentally broken in 2015, and I  am  not
                  persuaded that she is mentally broken now.  I am also  not
                  persuaded that if she chose to remain in  the  UK,  rather
                  than to accompany her husband to India, she would suffer a
                  mental breakdown.'

         15.  Paragraph 77 is in the following terms:

                  'I accept that (B) is emotionally dependent on his father,
                  but I do not accept that there is a real risk of him self-
                  harming, still less attempting to commit suicide,  if  his
                  father is removed.  He did neither of these things in  the
                  past, when he was younger and more vulnerable, and when he
                  had not had the benefit of receiving a course of therapy.'

         16.  Paragraph 78 suggests that B could go to India with his father
             and in paragraph 79 It is suggested that  eventually  he  will
             develop sufficient maturity and confidence to be able to  lead
             a life independently from his father.

         17.  Mr Bazini submitted that the treatment of the medical evidence
             was deficient.  It  had  not  been  challenged  but  had  been
             rejected without adequate reasons having been  given.   As  Mr
             Melvin  in  due  course  pointed  out,  the  determination  at
             paragraphs 24 to 40 sets out the salient details  of  some  of
             the medical evidence but by no  means  sets  out  all  of  it.
             However, setting out the evidence is not the same as  reaching
             conclusions upon it and giving reasons for those  conclusions.
             Mr Bazini took us through a number of  pages  in  the  medical
             evidence relating both to B and to his mother and it  is  fair
             to say that the nature of the problems set out there  and  the
             opinions and recommendations are, or might be thought  to  be,
             significant.  We do not wish to say much more about it at this
             stage since the decision will have to be remade,

         18.  The medical evidence forms the main thrust of the  appellant's
             case.  It was unchallenged and it was appropriate, if  it  was
             going to be  rejected,  that  the  judge  should  give  proper
             reasons for that.  On the face  of  it,  at  least,  there  do
             appear to be significant concerns for  the  mental  health  of
             both B and his mother in  the  event  that  the  appellant  is
             deported.  It is true to say, as  does  Mr  Melvin,  that  the
             other side of the equation is not properly  addressed,  namely
             what might be the effect on the family if  they  all  went  to
             India.

         19.  Given the failure to address the medical evidence, we  do  not
             think it appropriate simply to make a finding that the  family
             could go to India.  Those circumstances should be reconsidered
             in the  context  of  a  reasoned  discussion  of  the  medical
             evidence.

         20.  Mr Melvin argued that  the  judge  had  fully  understood  the
             medical evidence and had made findings that were open to  him.
             It is not apparent to us that he did understand it and, though
             the findings  were  certainly  open  to  him,  they  were  not
             adequately reasoned.  We consider, therefore, that  Grounds  1
             and 2 are made out and that the errors of law are material.

         21.  Ground 3 appears to us to be something of  a  makeweight.   In
             paragraph  85  of  his  determination  the  judge   said   the
             following:

                  'In any event, the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
                  deportation  remains  high  simply  on  account   of   the
                  seriousness of his index offending  as  reflected  in  the
                  length of the sentence imposed.'

         22.  This followed three paragraphs, 82, 83 and 84  where  the  FtT
             accepted  that  the  appellant's  index  offending   was   not
             deliberate in the sense of being premeditated and that he  was
             genuinely remorseful.  He went on to say that the Tribunal  in
             MS held that the effect of Section 117C(6) is that  the  court
             or Tribunal must take into  account  the  seriousness  of  the
             particular  offence  for  which  the  foreign   criminal   was
             convicted,   together   with   any   other   public   interest
             considerations.  He also accepted that the public interest  in
             his deportation was not fortified by the appellant  presenting
             a significant risk of reoffending.  He noted what was said  by
             the Court of Appeal in AS (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1118.   That  was  also  a
             case of causing death by dangerous driving and in paragraph 22
             the court said the following:

                  'In the present  case  the  appellant  had  been  formally
                  assessed as presenting a low risk of re-offending, so  the
                  public interest in his deportation lies very much  in  its
                  deterrent effect.  However, I think there is some force in
                  Miss Knight's submission that  in  a  case  of  this  kind
                  deterrence is of less weight than in cases of serious  and
                  deliberate wrongdoing.  At all events, these  are  matters
                  that must be taken into account in  deciding  whether  the
                  interference with private and family life  resulting  from
                  deportation is proportionate to the objects sought  to  be
                  achieved by it.'

         23.  Mr Bazini said that paragraph 85 was in conflict with  AS  and
             showed that the FtT put too much weight on the nature  of  the
             offence.

         24.  We do not agree.  At paragraph 84 he said the following:

                  'With regard to deterrence, while I note what was said  by
                  the Court of Appeal in AS (Pakistan), I  do  not  consider
                  that the court was ruling  that  deterrence  cannot  be  a
                  significant public interest factor  in  dangerous  driving
                  cases, as distinct from holding that there is 'some force'
                  in the submission that deterrence is of less weight  in  a
                  case of dangerous driving than in  a  case  of  deliberate
                  wrongdoing.  I consider that it  is  appropriate  to  give
                  some weight to the public interest in deterrence as it  is
                  in the public interest to  deter  foreign  nationals  from
                  engaging in reckless behaviour  which  endangers  life  by
                  getting  them  to  understand  that,  whatever  the  other
                  consequences, one  consequence  of  engaging  in  reckless
                  behaviour which leads to  a  loss  of  life  may  well  be
                  deportation.'

         25.  As we have pointed out, in paragraph 85 the judge  found  that
             the public interest in the  appellant's  deportation  remained
             high simply  on  account  of  the  seriousness  of  the  index
             offending as reflected in the length of the sentence  imposed.
             We do not consider that this is materially  in  conflict  with
             what is said in AS.  Mr Melvin suggested that  AS  was  now  a
             doubtful authority in view of its age and  the  new  statutory
             provisions.  We are inclined to agree with Mr Bazini that this
             still represents the law.  We accept, however, that  what  the
             Court of Appeal said in AS must now be considered through  the
             lens of the  statutory  provisions  which  tell  us  that  the
             deportation of a foreign criminal is in the  public  interest.
             What the judge said at [85] is entirely consistent with s.117C
             (2).  We find that the approach taken by the judge was in  any
             event consistent with AS.   The  FtT  did  not  overstate  the
             interest in deportation in the appellant's case."

 6. The Appellant, SKA, J, B and Dr Balu attended the  hearing  before  me.
    They gave evidence. They were cross-examined by Ms Cunha.

The Legislative framework

 7. By section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, a person who is  not  a
    British citizen is liable to deportation from the United Kingdom if the
    Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive to the  public
    good.




 8. Provision is made for the automatic deportation of foreign criminals by
    section 32 of UK Borders Act 2007, which so  far  as  is  material  for
    present purposes states:

         "32  Automatic deportation


             (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person -

                  (a)  who is not a British Citizen,


                  (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
                      and


                  (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

             (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to  a  period
                  of imprisonment of at least 12 months.


             ...


             (4)  For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
                  1971 (c. 77), the deportation of  a  foreign  criminal  is
                  conducive to the public good.


             (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in
                  respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."

 9. Section 32 accordingly requires the deportation of a  foreign  criminal
    who has been sentenced to a term of at least 12  months'  imprisonment,
    as PG was, but is subject to the exceptions set out in  section  33  of
    the Act, which so far as material provides:

         "33  Exceptions

             (1)  Section 32(4) and (5) -


                  (a)  do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                      applies (subject to subsection (7) below),


                  ...


             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign  criminal  in
                  pursuance of the deportation order would breach -


                  (a)  a person's Convention rights, ..."

10. In this appeal, it is contended that deportation of the Appellant would
    result in breach of his rights, under  article  8  of  the  Convention,
    which provides:

         "(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.


         (2)  There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             wellbeing of the country, for the prevention  of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

11. With effect from 28th July 2014 part 5A of Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act  2002  has  made  specific  provision  in  relation  to  the
    consideration of article  8  in  circumstances  such  as  the  present.
    Section117C provides:-
    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
    (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
    (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies.
    (4)  Exception 1 applies where-
         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,
         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and
         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
    (5)   Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
    (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.
    (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken  into
         account where a court or tribunal  is  considering  a  decision  to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."

12. Also with effect from  28th  July  2014,  the  Immigration  Rules  were
    amended to make provision for consideration  of  article  8  claims  by
    persons liable to deportation.  So far  as  is  material,  the  amended
    Rules provide:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                  contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the
                  Human Rights Convention, and
                  ...


                  (b)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to  the  public  good  and  in  the  public
                      interest because  they  have  been  convicted  of  an
                      offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of less than 4  years  but  at
                      least 12 months;

                  ...

                  the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                  consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it
                  does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
                  outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case


                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and


                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  Citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and


                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and



                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                  remain in the UK

The resumed hearing

13. I was not greatly assisted by the parties. The written submissions  and
    skeleton arguments were out of date.  Ms Cunha relied on  Mr  Lindsay's
    submissions which were made before (and therefore  did  not  take  into
    account) Dr Balu's most recent evidence.  Mr Bazini cited a  number  of
    cases in  oral  submissions  which  were  not  raised  in  his  written
    submissions. He told me that a file of authorities had been sent to the
    Tribunal. This was not before me. The solicitors had sent a file to the
    UT containing only HA (Iraq) & RA (Iraq) v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  1225.
    Some of the cases cited by the parties  did  not  assist.  They  simply
    reinforced the need for a full  evaluative  assessment  of  the  facts.
    From the limited help given to me by the parties, I have  attempted  to
    summarise succinctly the diffuse submissions contained in  the  various
    documents together with oral submissions. Similarly, I  have  attempted
    to summarise relevant case law. The witnesses made a number of  witness
    statements. There had been no attempt to produce a single  up  to  date
    witness statement for each.  I have summarised their evidence, as  best
    I can.

Case law


14. I summarise the relevant law from the following cases;   KO (  Nigeria)
    v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53,  HA & RA (Iraq) v  SSHD  (where  the   Court  of
    Appeal clarified  Lord Carnwath's assessment of unduly  harsh  in  KO),
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662, NA (Pakistan) v SSHD, GM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1630, Akinyemi v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2098,   CI  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD EWCA Civ 2027 and  SSHD v Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ 1225.

The unduly harsh test (s.117C (5))

              i. The statutory test of unduly harsh has an elevated nature
                 but it is not as high as very compelling circumstances in
                 s117C (6). The degree of impact required to meet the test
                 sits between the "low level" which applies in non-
                 deportation cases and the high level required applying s117
                 C (6). Tribunals should make an informed evaluative
                 assessment.




             ii. The test requires an appellant to establish a degree of
                 hardship going beyond a threshold "acceptable level"



            iii. With reference to the "nothing out of the ordinary" this
                 should not be used to mean rare. There is nothing in
                 principle why cases of "undue harshness" may not occur
                 quite commonly




             iv. Lord Carnwath's approval of the self direction by the UT in
                 MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 is to be followed.

Socially and culturally integrated (s. 117C (4))

              v.  Criminal  offending  and  time  spent  in  prison  are  in
                 principle  relevant  to  whether  a  foreign  criminal   is
                 socially and culturally integrated in the UK; in so far  as
                 that indicates that a  person  concerned  lacks  legitimate
                 social and cultural ties in the UK. The impact will  depend
                 on the nature and frequency of offending and how deeply the
                 individual was socially and culturally integrated in the UK
                 to begin with


Very compelling circumstances (s. 117C (6))

             vi. There is no "exceptionality" requirement but cases in which
                 circumstances are sufficiently compelling to  outweigh  the
                 high public interest  in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
                 commonplace incidents of family life such as aging  parents
                 in poor health or the  natural  love  between  parents  and
                 children will not be sufficient. It is necessary  to  carry
                 out a full  proportionality  assessment  if  the  Appellant
                 cannot meet the requirements in s117C  (5).  In  conducting
                 this two stage assessment, the Tribunal does  not  have  to
                 "cudgel its brains" into making  a  definitive  finding  in
                 respect of the first stage where there is a clear answer in
                 the  Appellant's  favour.  "Very"  imports  a   very   high
                 threshold. "Compelling" means circumstances  which  have  a
                 powerful, irresistible and convincing effect.



            vii. The test for an assessment outside of the IR is  whether  a
                 "fair balance" is struck between the competing  public  and
                 private interests. Reference to  "exceptionality"  must  be
                 construed as NOT imposing any incremental requirement  over
                 and above that  arising  out  of  the  application  of  the
                 proportionality test.  The list of factors to be considered
                 is not closed.



           viii. The public interest is flexible and moveable: it is  not  a
                 fixed interest. The strength of the public interest will be
                 affected by factors in the individual case.


s.117B

             ix. The little  weight  provision  in  section  117B  (4)  only
                 applied to private life or family life formed when a person
                 was in the UK unlawfully.  It does not  apply  when  family
                 life  was  created  during  a  precarious  residence.   The
                 presence of someone here with ILR is not unlawful.

Public revulsion as a facet of the public interest

              x. Paragraph [70] of Lord Wilson's judgment in  Hesham  Ali  v
                 SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 expressed regret of  his  reference  to
                 society's revulsion in OH (Serbia) v Secretary of State for
                 the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 694, [2009]  INLR  109,
                 on reflection, too emotive a  concept  to  figure  in  this
                 analysis. However, he maintained that he  was  entitled  to
                 refer to the importance of public confidence  determination
                 of these issues and that courts should be sensitive to  the
                 public concern in the UK about the facility for  a  foreign
                 criminal's  rights  under  article  8   to   preclude   his
                 deportation.


The Appellant's evidence

15. The Appellant's adopted his witness statements as  evidence-in-  chief.
    He was cross examined.

16. The Appellant first arrived here in November 1998.  He lives  with  his
    wife  and  their  adult  children.  The  Appellant's  wife  has  health
    problems.  Before the incident he was happy here working hard  to  keep
    his family.  The  Appellant  is  currently  on  immigration  bail.  His
    licence expired on 31 January 2017.

17. He is sorry for the offence that he committed.  It is seven years since
    the incident but not a day goes by without him thinking about  it.   He
    was released from prison in 2015.  He  tried  contacting  the  victim's
    family several times in order to  ask  for  forgiveness.  He  tried  to
    contact the family through the police.  He wanted to visit the victim's
    grave.  After  the  accident  the  Appellant  suffered  depression  and
    stress.  He asks God for forgiveness.   Whilst  he  was  in  prison  he
    taught English and acted as a mentor.

18. The Appellant's daughter, J, was aged 16 at the time  of  the  accident
    and as a result attended Hounslow Youth Counselling under the NHS  from
    2015 to 2016.  She was depressed and had suicidal tendencies.  She  had
    an emotional breakdown.  She is completely dependent on the  Appellant.
    As a result of impending deportation her mental health has deteriorated
    and the Appellant describes her as "very disturbed".  She benefits from
    the Appellant's support.  Whilst he  was  in  prison  her  school  work
    deteriorated.

19. The Appellant's son,   B, was aged 13 at the time of the accident.   He
    suffered the most as a result and still does.  Whilst the Appellant was
    absent he became withdrawn and depressed.  He  stopped  gaining  weight
    and started to wet the bed.  He has tried to kill himself and was taken
    to West Middlesex Hospital on 10 November 2015.  He  was  admitted  for
    self-harm.  He was taken to the GP on 9 November 2015 and was  assessed
    as having suicidal tendencies.  He was put  under  the  observation  of
    Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS).  The  teachers  at
    school were very concerned about him.   He  has  been  described  by  a
    psychiatrist as "frail" and having failed  to  thrive  emotionally  and
    physically.

20. He has nothing and he would be homeless  in  India.   His  marriage  is
    interfaith and not accepted by his parents.   The  Appellant  does  not
    know whether he would take his family  back  to  India  with  him.   He
    cannot live without them but feels guilty and does not want to ruin and
    uproot their lives.  When his children visited  India  when  they  were
    younger they hated it.  He could not put his wife through the trauma of
    returning.  She has become mentally and physically weak over the years.



SKA's evidence

21. SKA adopted her witness statements as evidence -in chief and was  cross
    examined.  The family live with the guilt of  the  Appellant's  driving
    offence.  Since then the family has collapsed.  She was a single parent
    whilst the Appellant was in prison and had to support her  family  both
    morally and financially.   However,  they  needed  their  father.   His
    absence caused her major  stress  and  her  health  deteriorated.   She
    developed hypertension, high blood pressure, anxiety and depression.

22.  She is very distressed at the news of his possible  deportation.   She
    cannot envisage life without the Appellant.  Since he has  returned  to
    the home he is able to share parenting and  the  children  now  have  a
    father figure.  His relationship with the children is  special.   As  a
    result of the accident their son's health and  education  deteriorated.
    Their daughter became depressed.

23. The Appellant is now back in the family  home  having  completed  a  21
    month custodial sentence.  There has been a  drastic  change  since  he
    returned to the home, which is positive.  The children have started  to
    live again.   A  deportation  will  be  a  second  punishment  for  the
    Appellant as he will be forced to live without his family.   Since  the
    Appellant has come out of prison, he has become very spiritual.

24. What she should  do  if  the  Appellant  has  to  return  to  India  is
    impossible to answer. Her family will be torn apart.  If she  takes  B,
    his mental health will deteriorate.  He will be with his father but  he
    will be leaving behind the UK.  He will not have  any  friends  and  he
    will have to leave college which "will  kill  him".  J  will  lose  her
    career, family and friends.  She will  become  depressed.   She  cannot
    leave her children here and she could not ask them  to  follow  her  to
    India.  There would be no support in India.  She  married  against  the
    will of her family.  She gave up her family for her husband.

25. She has a secure job in the UK.  She has been  employed  for  the  past
    twelve years.  The Appellant has for a long time been the  main  income
    source however the situation presently has prevented him from  working.
    She has had to support the family which has depleted her  mentally  and
    physically.  The Appellant has always been a good  father.   She  needs
    her husband to help her parent the children.

B's evidence

26. B relied on his witness statements as  his  evidence-in-chief  and  was
    cross examined.   He was aged 13 when his father  went  to  prison  and
    since then life has been very difficult.  Not a day goes  by  when  the
    family does not think about the victim of the accident and her  family.
    The family go to the temple  and  pray  for  the  victim.   Before  the
    Appellant went to prison life was perfect.   He relies  on  his  father
    for guidance. When the accident happened everything changed. He  became
    depressed.  He attempted suicide.  He received counselling.   Life  was
    devastating  when  his  father  went  to  prison.   Since  his   return
    everything has changed for the better.  If he was to  go  to  India  he
    would consider this to be a punishment.  He feels as if his life  would
    end.  He has no home, no friends and he would have to leave his  degree
    course without completing it.  The family cannot afford  a  home  there
    and the quality of life would be less.  The family  would  be  starting
    from nothing.

27. He is in the  second  year  of  a  degree  in  civil  engineering  with
    sustainability.  It is an unusual course and he would not be able to do
    the exact degree in India.  The best  university  in  Mumbai  does  not
    compare to the UK course.  He has already started using a student  loan
    here.  He has been through the education system here.  He is a  British
    citizen so he would not be able to apply for a student  loan  in  India
    because he is not a citizen there.  In any event he would not  be  able
    to guarantee a loan.

28. Remaining here without his father would worsen his mental health.  Just
    thinking about it gives him panic attacks and makes him  feel  anxious.
    Separation would kill him.  His father is his role model and hero.

J's evidence

29. J adopted her witness statements as evidence- in - chief and was cross-
    examined. She was aged 16 when her father was sent to prison.  She  was
    confused and scared, having been extremely close  to  her  father.   It
    took a heavy toll mentally on her and her family.  She is dependent  on
    her father for advice and guidance.  Everything has improved  since  he
    returned to the home.  She will fall back into depression should he  be
    deported.  Should she go back to India it would jeopardise  her  career
    any everything that she has worked hard for.  She  now  has  a  job  in
    Canary Wharf for which she worked extremely hard  and  underwent  three
    interviews.  She has passed her probation period of six months and is a
    member of one of the biggest news publishers in the  UK.   She  has  no
    experience of the  media  industry  in  India  and  would  struggle  to
    communicate there.  She does not know how she could remain here without
    her father who has been there since the day she was born.  Her feelings
    about India echo those of her brothers.

Dr Balu's evidence

30. Dr Balu prepared three reports. He attended the hearing and  gave  oral
    evidence.  His first report is dated of the report is 3 June  2019.  He
    prepared an addendum report dated 28 February 2020. He has  prepared  a
    third report of 31 March 2021.

31. Dr Balu is a consultant psychiatrist.  He interviewed and examined  the
    family on 1 June 2019.  He spent three hours  reviewing  the  documents
    and witness statements of all the members of the family and 90  minutes
    interviewing B and speaking to his family. Whilst preparing the  report
    he had sight of a report of 12 November 2015 from  a  Consultant  Child
    and Adolescent Psychiatrist, Dr Joglekar.  A  CAMHS  Tier  3  Discharge
    Summary Letter of 30 September 2016 and letters from Feltham  Community
    College and Sixth Form about access arrangements for examinations and a
    letter from Dr Raj K Singh, GP Principal at St  Singh's  Surgery  which
    covers the medical history of the whole family.

32. He described an incident when B learnt of the possibility of his father
    being deported and he took a knife in anger and  damaged  some  of  the
    furnishings at  home.   He  records  suicidal  ideation  and  self-harm
    attempts upon hearing this and he was taken to West Middlesex Hospital.
     He was found to be actively suicidal and kept  in  hospital  overnight
    following an attempt by the Home Office  to  deport  the  Appellant  in
    November 2015.  However the Appellant was  successful  in  obtaining  a
    stay and B was discharged the following day.

33. Dr Balu is of the opinion  that  B's  symptoms  fulfil  the  diagnostic
    criteria for depressive disorder with  moderate  to  severe  depression
    without psychotic symptoms.  It is his opinion that  his  symptoms  are
    suggestive of depressive disorder. If his father was separated from the
    family, the consequences could be grave.  There  is  a  possibility  of
    attempted suicide.  The whole family is suffering, the Appellant's wife
    is described as "a very broken woman mentally and doesn't seem to  have
    the emotional strength  to  support  herself,  let  alone  support  her
    children.   She  suffers  from  panic  attacks  and  I  could  see  her
    children...getting distressed and tearful when seeing her  suffer".  Dr
    Balu is not confident that she would be able to care for B  should  his
    condition deteriorate. Any psychological or medical  intervention  will
    have diminished benefits if the  fear  of  separation  continues.   His
    psychological  condition  would  deteriorate  significantly   and   the
    probability of him recovering  would  reduce.  In  his  opinion  it  is
    "imperative for his psychological welfare that  he  should  be  assured
    strongly that he will not be separated from  his  father  permanently."
    Further in Dr Balu's opinion "living with his father and his  emotional
    support would be very important for his recovery and maintenance of his
    present high-level functioning". Continued uncertainty about the future
    of the Appellant's immigration status is not helping B's  mental  state
    and the fear of separation.

34. In the addendum report Dr Balu states that SKA has suffered from severe
    anxiety and panic attacks for several years and her mental  health  has
    worsened.  She collapsed with loss of consciousness and was admitted to
    the local hospital on 15 February 2020.  She presented with an abnormal
    ECG possibly because of loss of blood flow  to  certain  parts  of  the
    heart or enlargement of the heart muscle.

35. When she was seen by Dr Balu she was distressed  and  tearful.   In  Dr
    Balu's opinion her mental health condition and panic attacks have  been
    triggered by the fact that she could be  forcibly  separated  from  her
    husband.  He states that the difficult family circumstances worsen  her
    condition "and can cause irreversible harm".  He states that her mental
    state is affecting her physical health.  In the event of separation she
    will undoubtedly suffer more harm, intense anxiety  and  panic  attacks
    will worsen.  Chronic  anxiety  and  depression  would  be  the  likely
    consequences.

36. With respect of relocation, Dr Balu refers to her having no support  in
    India because her family have rejected her as a result of marriage with
    someone from another religion.  Having a mental health condition  is  a
    taboo in India and a sign of weakness.  She  will  feel  "uncomfortable
    and unsupported" and that this is likely to have  a  profound  negative
    effect on her mental health.  A  forced  move  would  make  her  mental
    condition significantly worse and get in the way of her recovery.   She
    will not feel accepted  and  supported  which  is  very  important  for
    recovery.

37. Should B be forced to relocate to India he would not be able to  pursue
    his choice of education and career.  He would lose  everything  he  has
    worked hard for.  The sense of loss and  limited  career  options  will
    cause mental anguish and stress.  He has a  history  of  mental  health
    issues which also led him to have suicidal thoughts.  Any further sense
    of loss and distress could cause more harm to his mental wellbeing  and
    trigger self-harm thoughts.   He was extremely distressed to the  point
    of feeling suicidal when his father was taken into custody.   They  are
    close.  It is likely that he "will not be able to function to his  best
    abilities if he remained in  the  UK  without  his  father".   He  will
    certainly suffer deterioration of his mental health as evident  by  his
    previous deterioration when his father was in prison.

38. In respect of J she is similarly close to her father.   Her  hard  work
    has managed to land her a "dream job" in a  major  UK  media  industry.
    She would not be able to secure a similar job on  relocation  to  India
    with a similar salary package.  She would not be able to adjust to  the
    new work culture.  She does not have any  social  support.   She  would
    find it difficult to integrate.   It  would  undoubtedly  place  severe
    strain on her mental health.  There  would  be  a  sense  of  loss  and
    limited future career options would cause mental anguish and  distress.



39. She witnessed her mother go through severe stress and her brother  have
    suicidal thoughts when her father went to prison and this has made  her
    very anxious and disturbed.  She almost  has  a  post-traumatic  stress
    type response when she has to recall the past.  She is very  likely  to
    develop anxiety disorder.

40. Dr Balu confirmed that when he originally assessed  the  Appellant  and
    his family he had before him evidence relating to the  CAMHS  referral.
    Dr Balu's evidence is that B's condition has not improved in  the  last
    three years.

41. Dr Balu prepared the third report when he had  sight  of  the  family's
    medical notes.  He concluded that in the  light  of  them  it  was  not
    necessary to re-examine the family and that  his  previous  conclusions
    remained valid.  He adds that SKA has needed emergency care at A &E  in
    March 2021 and is suffering from possible heart failure.  He  expressed
    agreement with the Appellant's  GP  that  stress,  depression  and  the
    uncertainty of the family's future contributed towards deterioration of
    the Appellant's diabetes. He notes that the  family  members  have  had
    several contacts with the GP and concluded that the medical  conditions
    of the family have not improved  in  the  last  three  years  and  have
    deteriorated to a certain extent. The  Appellant's  presence  has  been
    reassuring to the family which has coped reasonably with  his  support.
    Both the children are dependent on him. Any adverse decision will  very
    likely result in a deterioration of SKA's health in the  light  of  her
    mental and physical vulnerability.

42. The Appellant has diabetes. He is not  a  specialist  in  diabetes  but
    believes that poor mental health can impact on this.  He confirmed that
    the impact of deportation will be deterioration in the  health  of  the
    family.  The Appellant's presence is a protective factor although  they
    would be able to emotionally support each other if they were to  return
    together to India it would a  huge  shock  and  the  environment  would
    impact on their health.  The family is used to a certain way  of  life.
    There  are  environmental  factors  which   would   destabilise   their
    psychological wellbeing.

Submissions

43. Ms Cunha relied on Mr T Lindsay's skeleton argument of 12 January  2021
    and those of Mr Melvin of 2  March  2020.  This  was  not  particularly
    helpful as much of what was in the former is repeated  in  the  latter.
    Both predate the latest report from Dr Balu. Ms  Cunha  said  that  she
    also relied also on the decision letter.  I will attempt  to  summarise
    the main points to accurately set out the Respondent's case.

44. It is argued that no weight should be attached to the  evidence  of  Dr
    Balu. He did not have before him medical notes pertaining to the family
    and with reference to  paragraphs  10.10  and  10.11  of  the  Practice
    Directions of the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal. Moreover, the  expert  was  asked  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors to address "the  detrimental  effect  on  family
    members".  This detracts from the weight  that  should  attach  to  its
    conclusions.  It is submitted  that  Dr  Balu  exceeded  his  remit  in
    purporting to give evidence regarding conditions in India.   This  fell
    outside his expertise (paragraph 10.6 of the Practice  Direction).  Any
    further evidence from Dr Balu should include full GP  records  for  the
    Appellant's family, including for the period March 2017 to date.

45. Ms Cunha did not, however, seek to persuade me not to attach weight  to
    Dr Balu's evidence, despite  indicating  she  relied  on  Mr  Lindsay's
    skeleton argument.  She urged me to consider the  medical  evidence  in
    the round.  However, she said that Dr Balu's  findings  were  based  on
    what he was told by the Appellant.

46. The family is anxious and they have exaggerated. It would not be unduly
    harsh for the family to return to India or for  them  to  be  separated
    from the Appellant.

47. When B was aged 14 he was clearly upset by the prospect of  removal  of
    his father.  He underwent counselling (CBT and DBT) for  low  mood  and
    suicidal thoughts.  He was discharged from  CAMHS  in  September  2016.
    The team were satisfied that the immediate risk was low  and  that  his
    father was the main protective factor.

48. There is little in the way of medical evidence of further treatment  of
    B between the discharge from CAMHS and the further  psychiatric  report
    of Dr Balu produced for the hearing in June 2019. He is  now  an  adult
    and a student. Removal of the Appellant would  not  present  a  serious
    risk of suicide self-harm that would show compelling  circumstances  or
    undue harshness.  Dr Balu has not adequately considered that B maturity
    and that he was successfully treated  by  Mental  Health  Services.   B
    evidence does not support that he has  suicidal  ideation  as  Dr  Balu
    states.  The family can use Skype and B will  be  able  to  access  the
    support of his mother, sister, university and support  services  within
    the NHS.  It is not accepted that the Appellant's removal would  create
    a situation whereby B would not be able to cope.

49. In respect of the Appellant's diabetes and the evidence of Dr Balu,  Ms
    Cunha submitted that Dr Balu's evidence is unsupported by any  academic
    analysis about the impact of mental health on diabetes.

50. SKA coped adequately whilst  the  Appellant  was  in  prison  when  the
    children were younger.  She is in stable employment.  J is working  and
    B is studying. It  is  understandable  that  the  Appellant's  wife  is
    anxious about her husband's relocation but  this  does  not  amount  to
    deportation being unduly harsh.  It may be unreasonable  and  difficult
    but it is not unduly harsh. It would not be unduly  harsh  for  her  to
    return with the Appellant to India. The Appellant and his wife  married
    in 1994 and spent seven years of their lives together  in  India  where
    the Appellant had a job.  There is no reason why B could  not  relocate
    to India with his father and attend a university course there.

51. In respect of J, when her father was in prison in 2013  (when  she  was
    aged 16), she did not appear to have needed any counselling  or  mental
    health treatment.  She went on to  complete  a  university  degree  and
    obtain employment in publishing.  She now works full-time  and  assists
    the family financially.  The assertions of mental  health  difficulties
    in relation to J are not reflected in the medical evidence.

52. Neither B nor J has been  medicated.   Neither  has  counselling.   The
    involvement of CAMHS has ceased.  Both  have  managed  to  successfully
    educate themselves.

53. Mr Bazini relied on his skeleton argument of 2 March 2020. In  addition
    he made oral submissions.

54.  In respect of the evidence  of  Dr  Balu,  in  respect  of  his  first
    reports, he had before him (AB, page 165) a report from Dr Joglekar,  a
    consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist of 12 November  2015.   It
    is a new patient assessment summary relating to B.  Under the heading "
    History of presenting problems/current concerns" it is said that B  has
    been deeply affected by "adverse life events over the past  two  and  a
    half years". When finding out  about  the  Appellant's  deportation  he
    "reportedly took a knife in anger and damaged  some  furnishings.   SKA
    was concerned he  may  harm  himself  and  managed  to  deescalate  the
    situation acquiring a promise from B he would not repeat such behaviour
    again".   There is a very long history  from  various  sources  of  the
    Appellant's family's mental health problems which  have  continued  for
    years.

55. It is submitted that the impact on the Appellant's wife  of  separation
    would be unduly harsh because of her  medical  problems.   The  medical
    evidence going back to at least  2013  is  indicative  of  the  serious
    mental health issues that the family suffered and continue to suffer in
    view of the Appellant's deportation with the impact  of  separation  on
    her adult children.

56. It would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife to return with him to
    India.  She has been here for a long time.  She  has  a  part-time  job
    here.  She has no family or connections in India.  She  would  have  to
    deal with her own mental health problems in  addition  to  coping  with
    separation from her son and daughter and their mental health  problems.
    If they returned as a family to India, it would be unduly harsh on her.
    There is  no  home  or  support  system  in  India.  The  children  are
    completely integrated into the British way of life.  Neither is able to
    speak or write Urdu/Punjabi.  They are at pivotal times in their career
    and education.  Relocation to  India  would  be  devastating  to  their
    prospects.  The  impact  would  be  greater  than  normal  given  their
    existing mental health vulnerabilities. The adult children  would  lose
    fundamental life opportunities.  They  have  no  friends  or  effective
    family in India.   They  have  significant  student  loans  approaching
    �70,000 which they will not possibly be able to repay should they leave
    the UK.

57. The family was reunited for  the  first  time  in  May  2015  when  the
    Appellant was released.  However, in October he  was  detained  by  the
    Home Office (he was then bailed).  There was a decision made to  remove
    the Appellant pursuant to the deportation order on  12  November  2015;
    however, he obtained a court injunction preventing his removal.   As  a
    result of the decision to remove, B felt "agitated and  suicidal".   He
    conveyed these thoughts to the staff at school and was  taken  to  West
    Middlesex Hospital for an urgent assessment. Once there he was found to
    be "actively suicidal".  He was a bit better when he  learnt  that  the
    Home Office had cancelled the removal.

58. B became increasingly sad and isolated when his father was  in  prison.
    He would struggle to get to sleep and have nightmares.  He  was  13  at
    the time events began.  He had no previous  history  of  mental  health
    problems however he started to wet the bed.  However, this reduced  and
    then stopped on his father's return home.  B  confirmed  that  he  gets
    into states of agitation and at times feels lost.  He  described  being
    very distressed and upset with his mind preoccupied with thoughts about
    losing his father.  He confirmed that he would see no point carrying on
    without him.  He described his closeness to his father.

59. The reason why counselling did not continue is  because  the  Appellant
    returned to the family home to  provide  support  to  his  family.   Mr
    Bazini referred to B's oral evidence that he has "counselling" with his
    father every couple of weeks.

60. The Appellant is  a  supportive  and  loving  husband  and  father  and
    contributes hugely to  the  wellbeing  of  his  family.   If  his  wife
    accompanied him to India there  would  be  immense  anguish  concerning
    leaving  their  adult  children  here.    B's   mental   health   would
    deteriorate.  If she were to remain here she would lose the support  of
    her husband and witness the deterioration of her daughter and son.  The
    consequence of the impact of deportation is not the same as it would be
    on a person of good health.  If he were to return alone, she would know
    that he would suffer there without a family or income.

61.  Taking  into  account  the  evidence,  there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances.  The Appellant was lawfully settled in  the  UK  at  the
    time of the offence.  His wife and children are British and no doubt he
    could have become British if he had so applied. In any event there  are
    very compelling circumstances.  The Appellant has very  strong  private
    life here.

62.  Mr Bazini referred me to the sentencing remarks of the judge  and  the
    offence committed which triggered deportation.  The sentence was at the
    lowest range. The Appellant is extremely remorseful and is at low  risk
    of reoffending.  The sentencing judge described him as "a fundamentally
    decent man" and gave him a sentence at the low range of the guidelines.
     Mr Bazini referred me to communication from the Probation Service  and
    the content and conclusions of the OASys assessment. He has always been
    employed when lawfully entitled to work.

Findings and reasons


63. Despite the focus by Ms Cunha on whether or not B has suicidal ideation
    at the date of the  hearing,  though  a  relevant  factor,  it  is  not
    determinative of this appeal which  is  not  an  appeal  on  Article  3
    (health grounds).

64. I had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from the family  members.  I
    found them to be straight forward and credible. While it  is  the  case
    that at the time of the assessment, Dr Balu did not have sight  of  the
    Appellant and his family's medical notes, he did have sight of  crucial
    documentation  significantly  concerning   CAMHS   intervention   which
    supported his conclusions.  In addition, he updated his evidence having
    seen the medical notes. These have now been produced by the  Appellant.
    Ms Cunha did not raise any issue  about  the  content  of  the  medical
    notes. She did not submit that they undermined Dr Balu's conclusions. I
    have considered them for  myself  and  they  would  support  Dr  Balu's
    conclusions.  The  evidence  undermines  the   Secretary   of   State's
    challenges to the report.  Any  defects  in  the  presentation  of  the
    report do not undermine the conclusions.


65. I heard evidence from Dr Balu. His evidence was impressive.  There  was
    no  meaningful  challenge  to  it  that  was  capable   of   materially
    undermining his conclusions as regard the health of the family.


66. I attach weigh to his evidence. I accept that the instructions from the
    solicitors are not very helpful. This is a criticism of the solicitors,
    however and not Dr Balu.  Having considered his evidence, together with
    the evidence of medical notes including the evidence from  CAMHs,  this
    does not in my view undermine his conclusions. The challenge  concerned
    Dr Balu not having seen the medical notes  pertaining  to  the  family;
    however, these are now available and support his conclusions. Ms  Cunha
    having indicated that she relied on Mr  Lindsay's  written  submissions
    (which urged the UT to attach no weight to Dr Balu's evidence) asked me
    to  consider  it  in  the  round.  This  may  be  because  the  written
    submissions pre-date the medical notes having been  produced.  However,
    this was not made clear  by  Ms  Cunha.  Her  approach  to  the  expert
    evidence lacked clarity. In any event, there is medical evidence in the
    form of medical notes and correspondence from the family's GP which  is
    consistent with the conclusions of Dr Balu. It is  immaterial  that  Dr
    Balu is not an expert in diabetes which was a point raised by Ms Cunha.
    It is not challenged that the Appellant has diabetes and any connection
    between diabetes and stress in not material  to  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal.

67. I turn my mind to the impact of deportation on the Appellant's wife  in
    the context of her remaining here without him. She did  not  cope  well
    when her husband was incarcerated. She has a number of health  problems
    which are not necessarily serious (she is waiting for a  cardiac  MRI),
    but cumulatively they are problematic. Her mental health is  poor.  She
    is anxious. Part of her anxiety is caused by  the  uncertainty  of  the
    situation, but I find that the major cause is fear of the family  being
    separated. I accept that this family as a whole and individually relies
    heavily on the Appellant. While B is now an adult and is  studying,  he
    still lives at  home  within  the  family  unit  and  he  is  dependent
    emotionally on his father. I find that his mental health is fragile. On
    any account, he suffered terribly when his father was sent  to  prison.
    While he no longer has treatment, he is heavily reliant on his  father.
    While he was not suicidal at the date of the hearing before  me,  I  am
    satisfied  that  his  mental  health  will  deteriorate  following  his
    father's deportation. It is reasonably likely that  another  separation
    will cause him to have suicidal ideation. While he is not a  child,  he
    is still vulnerable and dependent.


68. Ms Cunha made the point that neither B  nor  his  sister  is  currently
    seeking therapy, counselling or medication. While this  is  true,  they
    have had the benefit of the Appellant having returned to the family.  I
    do not find that this is indicative of the family being  able  to  cope
    any better  with  separation  than  they  did  when  their  father  was
    imprisoned and when he was first informed of  the  decision  to  deport
    him.

69.  While I accept that B is now an adult, I find that his  mental  health
    is likely to deteriorate on separation of the family. J is more  robust
    than B. She is, however, still heavily reliant on her  father  and  the
    family unit remaining intact.  The negative consequences on  them  will
    exacerbate the Appellant's wife's mental health problems  and  her  own
    sense of loss. I am satisfied that the degree of hardship  goes  beyond
    the acceptable level described by Underhill LJ in HA & RA.

70. I have to consider the impact of deportation on  the  Appellant's  wife
    should she return with him to India.  The adult  children  are  British
    citizens.  J has a job which she described in evidence is her dream job
    and B is in the second year of an Engineering Degree.  They are British
    citizens and entitled to remain here.  I must consider  the  impact  on
    their mother of returning to India without them.  I have no doubt  that
    the impact of this would be an unacceptable level  of  hardship.    Not
    only are there unacceptable risks in  respect  of  the  health  of  the
    family  because  of  the  separation,  these  are  exacerbated  by  the
    inevitable financial hardship which is reasonably likely to  impact  on
    B's ability to remain in full-time education here.  The impact  on  the
    Appellant's wife would be unduly harsh.  It  is  the  position  of  the
    Appellant's wife which falls to be considered and whether it is  unduly
    harsh cannot be conditional on B and J returning with her.  I  did  not
    hear any argument on this point.  It would be open  to  the  family  to
    return together as a unit.  This would not meet the unacceptable level.
    This is because it is the separation of this family which is causes the
    Appellant's wife such distress that the unacceptable level is  reached.
    However, there would be very significant difficulties  for  the  family
    relocating as a unit. I have no hesitation in concluding that there are
    very compelling circumstances in the context of s.  117C  (6)  for  the
    following reasons.

71. While they are not minors, both B and J are  emotionally  dependent  on
    their father. They live together as a family unit. I have no hesitation
    in concluding that they  have  Kugathas  dependency  (Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31).  Proportionality must be considered on this basis.
       As regards the separation of the family,  I  remind  myself  of  the
    approach taken by the House of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] 2  AC  167,
    186:

             "[T]he main importance of the  [Strasbourg]  case  law  is  in
             illuminating the core value which article 8 exists to protect.
             This is not, perhaps, hard  to  recognise.  Human  beings  are
             social animals.  They  depend  on  others.  Their  family,  or
             extended family, is  the  group  on  which  many  people  most
             heavily depend, socially, emotionally and  often  financially.
             There  comes  a  point  at  which,  for  some,  prolonged  and
             unavoidable separation  from  this  group  seriously  inhibits
             their ability to live full and fulfilling lives. Matters  such
             as the age, health and vulnerability  of  the  applicant,  the
             closeness and previous history of the family, the  applicant's
             dependence on the  financial  and  emotional  support  of  the
             family, the prevailing cultural tradition  and  conditions  in
             the country of origin  and  many  other  factors  may  all  be
             relevant."



|                                                                         |




72. I must consider proportionality. Deportation of the Appellant is in the
    public interest and this weighs very heavily in favour of the Secretary
    of State. I have taken into account OH (Serbia) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  694,
    [2009] INLR 109 qualified by Lord Reed's later comments. Though  it  is
    clear that risk of  re-offending  is  only  one  facet  of  the  public
    interest, I am satisfied that there is a low risk  of  re-offending.  I
    have taken into account the  comments  of  the  sentencing  judge.  The
    outcome of the Appellant's criminality is serious and  devastating.  In
    assessing the public interest, I accept that there is lower culpability
    where the outcome was not intended or even envisaged.

73. The Appellant did not rely on private  life  grounds  (exception  1  of
    s.117C (4)) because it was conceded  that  he  has  not  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his life.   I raised the other two limbs
    of s.117C (4) with the parties at the hearing;  however,  neither  made
    meaningful submissions on the issue. There is no  evidence  that  there
    would be very significant  obstacles  to  integration  so  far  as  the
    Appellant is concerned; however, I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
    social and culture ties were not broken by the conviction and custodial
    sentence.  While it is the case that social and cultural integration in
    the UK connotes integration as a law-abiding  citizen  (see  Binbuga  v
    SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 551), the Appellant was settled  here  before  his
    crimes. I find that his criminality did not break this integration.  He
    had a significant family life here before and after  his  incarceration
    which is an aspect of private life. I attach some weight to this.

74. There would be a huge impact on  the  whole  family  by  uprooting  and
    living in India. I find that it would be devastating for B and J.  They
    are British citizens who have never lived in India. I accept that there
    is no extended family  in  India.   There  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to their integration applying Kamara v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    813 and conducting a  broad  evaluative  judgement.  They  are  British
    citizens who have been educated here. They both  have  vulnerabilities,
    especially B. The evidence relating to the  Appellant  and  his  wife's
    mixed marriage and estrangement from family was not  challenged  by  Ms
    Cunha. The Appellant and witnesses were broadly speaking consistent  on
    the issue.

75. In order to maintain family life in India, I am satisfied that B  would
    have to leave university here and J her job. The family would  have  to
    start again.  They  have  no  property  there.  They  live  in  council
    accommodation in the UK.  While they would be together, even  if  there
    are not very significant obstacles in the Kamara sense and I  am  wrong
    about  that,  there  would  be  significant  economic   and   practical
    difficulties facing them and indeed the whole family. There would be  a
    significant interference with their private lives.   It  would  not  be
    fair or reasonable to expect dependent adult children to re-locate as a
    result of their father's lack of judgement and carelessness giving rise
    to his criminality.


76. It is not only the uncertainty of the situation  that  is  causing  the
    family so much upset and distress. The main cause is  the  prospect  of
    separation. However, the family as a whole  struggle  living  with  the
    knowledge that the Appellant is responsible for taking a life. It plays
    heavily on their mind.  There is a black cloud continually hanging over
    the  family,  resulting  from  the  Appellant's  poor   judgement   and
    carelessness. The last few years have been very difficult for them.

77. The Appellant's actions and consequences flowing there from have  taken
    their toll on his family. While mindful of what was said by  Sedley  LJ
    in Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 about the impact  of  deportation  on
    families, the Appellant  that  case  had  been  sentenced  to  7  years
    imprisonment having pleaded guilty to a number of counts of  possession
    with intend to supply class A drugs. I have taken full account  of  the
    Appellant having a previous conviction (despite  Ms  Cunha  having  not
    made reference to this in oral submissions). I take into  account  that
    he received a custodial sentence of 8 months.  I attach weight  to  the
    OASYs assessment and correspondence from  the  probation  service.  The
    evidence supports the Appellant's evidence of remorse and that he is at
    low risk of re-offending. I find that he is  rehabilitated  and  attach
    some weight to this.

78. Whether they go with their father or stay here without him, the  impact
    of the decision on the Appellant's  family,  (a  material  factor  when
    assessing proportionality (Beuko-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39)  will  be
    devastating.     It is significant in this case that the adult children
    are Kugathas dependents. If they were under 18, this appeal would  have
    been allowed under s117C (5). Should the Appellant be removed to India,
    whatever his family chooses to do; the impact will be  bleak  and  grim
    for all of them. Poor  health  issues  and  dependency  exacerbate  the
    problems for this family.


79. There are very compelling circumstances in the context of  s.117C  (6).
    In the light of all relevant factors, having  conducted  an  evaluative
    assessment, I conclude that the decision of the Respondent breaches the
    Appellant's rights under Article 8.


80. I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.



Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 28 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
