
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15294/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2019                         |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ROHAN DUHARRIS BAKER
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R H Rashid instructed by The Legal Guys


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 4  September  1978.   His
    appeal against deportation was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Anthony on 18 October 2018.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected herself in law in finding that  there  was  no  justifiable
    ground to support the Respondent's position that the previous  sentence
    of more than four years in  2000  should  trigger  the  application  of
    paragraph 398A.  The judge erred in law in failing to  have  regard  to
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department v Johnson (Sierra Leone)
    [2016] UKUT 282.  Secondly, the judge had failed to  attach  sufficient
    weight to the public interest in  deportation  and  in  assessing  very
    compelling circumstances. The judge had erred in law in concluding that
    the Appellant's deportation was disproportionate.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 20 November 2018 on the grounds that the judge had arguably erred in
    law in making material misdirections including failing to  follow  case
    law, failing to properly apply Section 117 and paragraphs 399 and 399A,
    and failing to give sufficient weight to the public interest.


The Appellant's immigration history and previous convictions

4.   The Appellant came to  the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  February  1989.  He
    returned to Jamaica and re-entered the UK on 27 August 1993 when he was
    almost 15 years old. He had leave to enter as a visitor and  on  expiry
    of his leave he remained in the UK and became  an  overstayer.  He  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 26 September  1997.  He  has  six
    convictions for 14 offences. In July 1997, he was convicted of  robbery
    and handling stolen goods for which he was sentenced to two years in  a
    young offenders' institution.

5.   On 11 August 2000, the Appellant was convicted of robbery at  Guildford
    Crown  Court  and  was  sentenced  to  66  months'  imprisonment.   The
    Respondent informed the Appellant that he was subject to deportation on
    20 September 2002 and the Appellant appealed against the decision on 31
    July 2002. The Appellant's appeal was allowed on 7 February 2003 and he
    was issued with a warning letter on 11 April 2003. On 21 November  2003
    the Appellant was convicted of possessing a class  A  controlled  drug,
    driving without insurance and driving otherwise than in accordance with
    a licence and was fined �50.  On 29 November 2017,  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of six counts of  supplying  a  class  A  drug  (heroin)  and
    sentenced to three years and eight months' imprisonment.


The judge's findings

6.   The Appellant's previous appeal  against  deportation  was  allowed  in
    2003. The judge found that the gap of fourteen years between  2003  and
    the current sentence did reduce the  significance  of  the  Appellant's
    sentence of more than four years. It was on this basis that  she  found
    that the previous sentence did not trigger the application of paragraph
    398A.

7.   In this case  there  were  no  qualifying  children  but  a  qualifying
    partner. The judge found that, although it would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect her to relocate as a British citizen who has spent all her  life
    in the UK, the care she provided for her brother  and  mother  did  not
    present any difficulties to relocation nor did her  ability  to  access
    treatment for her condition of low mood and anxiety. There were also no
    linguistic difficulties in relocating to Jamaica.

8.   The judge concluded at paragraph 42: "I find that there is a  world  of
    difference between expecting a foreign national settled here, to return
    to his country of origin against expecting a British  citizen  who  had
    lived in the UK all her life and had an inalienable right of  abode  in
    the UK, to live and work and find accommodation in another  country  or
    else forfeit her marriage.  I find this is  effectively  the  situation
    facing the appellant's partner who has to choose between forfeiting her
    marriage or saving her marriage and uprooting her from her home and the
    only country she has ever lived".

9.   The judge made the following relevant findings:

         "51. I have already accepted she suffers from low mood and anxiety.
             I find her mental health and the stress  of  relocation  would
             cause  her  very  significant  difficulties  in  adapting  and
             accessing work and finding accommodation. I find to expect her
             to  uproot  would  cause  very  serious   hardship   for   the
             appellant's partner over and above those in EX.2  of  Appendix
             FM.


         52.  As I have found that it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             appellant's partner to remain in the UK without the appellant,
             I find the appellant cannot succeed  under  paragraph  399(b).
             This is because  the  use  of  the  word  'and'  in  paragraph
             399(b)(ii) connotes  a  conjunctive  requirement.   Similarly,
             neither can the appellant succeed under Exception 2 in Section
             117C".


         ...


         73.  I take into account the  fact  that  when  the  2003  Tribunal
             allowed his appeal, there  was  one  further  offending  which
             resulted in a fine and no  custodial  sentence.  I  find  that
             there was a fourteen-year period in which the appellant led  a
             blameless life. I accept from the evidence  of  the  witnesses
             who attended that the appellant has an extremely caring nature
             and has cared for various members of the family.


         74.   I  find  from  the  sentencing  judge's  remarks   that   the
             appellant's stepmother's [CB] diagnosis of terminal cancer has
             unhappily led to the appellant's relapse into class A drug use
             and that the appellant took to dealing in order  to  fund  his
             habit. There is further independent evidence of  CB's  illness
             and disabilities in the documentary evidence before me. I take
             on  board  the  remarks  of  the  sentencing  judge  that  the
             appellant  only  supplied  drugs  to  which  he  himself   was
             addicted. I find from the Relapse Prevention certificate  that
             the Appellant has since addressed his drug addiction.  I  take
             into  account  his  exemplary  behaviour  in  prison  and  his
             willingness to undertake voluntary work  and  to  comply  with
             every instruction a prison officer gives.


         75.  I see the 14 year gap in which the appellant stayed away  from
             drugs and the circumstances which led to his current offending
             as a paradigm of a very compelling circumstance sufficient  to
             protect the appellant against expulsion.


         76.      I find having  regard  to  all  factors  for  and  against
             deportation that the balance is just tipped in his favour  and
             for these reasons it would be disproportionate for him  to  be
             removed".


Submissions

10.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    finding that the Appellant was able to benefit from the exceptions.  In
    the case of Johnson, the court held that  any  four-year  sentence  was
    sufficient to put an appellant in the  category  of  the  most  serious
    offences and therefore the exceptions were not applicable in this case.
     The judge erred in law in taking  into  account  the  public  interest
    considerations set out in Section 117C (3), (4) and (5) and  paragraphs
    399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.  However,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    accepted that this was not material to the decision because  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant could not benefit from those exceptions in
    any event and therefore went on  to  assess  whether  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances. However, the judge's error  was  relevant  to
    her assessment of the public interest and the weight to be attached  to
    it in considering very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
    Immigration Rules.

11.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  it  was  clear  from  the  judge's
    findings that the Appellant could not satisfy the exceptions on  family
    life or the exceptions on private life. However, the judge diluted  the
    public interest in carrying out the balancing exercise.  She  concluded
    that because of the  significant  passage  of  time  and  the  previous
    successful appeal, it was not in the  public  interest  to  deport  the
    Appellant. These two reasons were not open to  the  judge  because  the
    Appellant's  further  conviction  enhanced  the  public  interest;  the
    Appellant had been given an opportunity to reform and had not done  so.



12.  The judge  assessed  very  compelling  circumstances  at  paragraph  71
    onwards. She found that the Appellant had a  British  partner  and  was
    stepfather to her adult son who was 26 years old. There  was  no  OASys
    Report because the Appellant was  considered  to  be  at  low  risk  of
    reoffending. The judge took into account the previous successful appeal
    and the one  further  conviction  which  resulted  in  a  fine  and  no
    custodial sentence.

13.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge had  failed  to  look  at
    very compelling circumstances through the prism of the  exceptions  set
    out in the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had to show something over
    and above the exceptions. The weight to be attached to his  family  and
    private life was reduced because he could not satisfy the exceptions in
    the Immigration Rules and therefore he could not show  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above his right to family and private life.  The
    judge found it would not be unduly harsh to separate the Appellant from
    his partner or adult child. This should not be given enhanced status in
    the balancing exercise. The low risk of reoffending, lack of  an  OASys
    Report  and  rehabilitation  did  not  make  a  significant  difference
    amounting to very compelling circumstances.

14.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on paragraph 17 of Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department v Olarewaju [2018] EWCA Civ 577 which states:

         "The Court of Appeal addressed the significance  of  rehabilitation
         in Taylor v Home Secretary [2015] EWCA  Civ  845.   Moore-Bick  LJ,
         with whom McCombe and Vos LJJ agreed, said (in paragraph 21):


             'I would certainly not wish  to  diminish  the  importance  of
             rehabilitation in itself, but the cases in which it can make a
             significant  contribution  to  establishing   the   compelling
             reasons  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
             deportation  are  likely   to   be   rare.   The   fact   that
             rehabilitation has begun but is as  yet  incomplete  has  been
             held in general not to be a relevant factor: see SE (Zimbabwe)
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
             256 and PF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596.  Moreover, as  was  recognised
             in  SU  (Bangladesh)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ  427,  rehabilitation  is  relevant
             primarily to the reduction in the risk of re-offending.  It is
             less relevant to the other factors  which  contribute  to  the
             public interest in deportation'".

15.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the Appellant's  rehabilitation  in
    this case was not a weighty factor and could not make the difference in
    tipping  the  balance  to  show  that  there   were   very   compelling
    circumstances. The judge had erred in law in minimising the criminality
    involved and focusing on a period of non-offending rather than focusing
    on the Appellant's behaviour and the public  interest,  which  required
    his deportation. She referred me to the sentencing remarks of the judge
    who found that there was no evidence of the Appellant's  vulnerability.
    There were aggravating features  to  the  latest  offence  because  the
    Appellant was caught on a number of occasions over a  period  of  eight
    weeks dealing drugs to an undercover police officer.  The Appellant had
    received a sentence of 44 months'  imprisonment  for  this  offence,  a
    substantial period of time, and he  had  previously  committed  a  very
    serious offence in 2000 which had led to a sentence of five and a  half
    years. He had been given an opportunity to reform in 2003  and,  whilst
    he had not offended for fourteen years, this in itself was  not  enough
    to amount to very compelling circumstances. The judge had not  properly
    balanced the reasons for deportation.

16.  The Appellant had committed two very serious  offences  and  the  judge
    appeared to have imported reasons  for  his  latest  offence  into  the
    offence which were not correct and ignored  the  earlier  very  serious
    offence.  Given that little weight could be attached to his family  and
    private life, the judge's assessment of balancing the  public  interest
    against the Appellant's  circumstances  was  fundamentally  flawed.  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller relied on Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    v SS (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 2817 at paragraph 39 which states:

         "In my view, the FtT in this  case  plainly  failed  to  apply  the
         approach set out in MF  (Nigeria)  later  approved  in  Hesham  Ali
         (Iraq). Although the Judge referred in paragraph 60 of the decision
         to giving heavy weight to the [the Secretary of State's] view  that
         the Respondent's deportation was necessary for  the  protection  of
         society, she did not in fact do so. There was  no  reference  to  a
         crucial step in the necessary analysis of the position outside  the
         Rules:  namely,  whether  there  were  circumstances   which   were
         sufficiently compelling (and therefore exceptional) to outweigh the
         public interest in deportation, see MF (Nigeria) at [46].   To  the
         contrary, the FtT's findings were that the public interest did  not
         require the deportation of the Respondent (paragraph 62);  and  the
         judge's conclusion was  that,  having  balanced  the  factors  that
         weighed on each side, that deportation is  neither  appropriate  or
         necessary  (see  paragraph  78),  [emphasis  added].  The   judge's
         approach fatally undermined her conclusion".


17.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge paid lip service  to  the
    relevant assessment of very compelling circumstances and she failed  to
    identify anything over and above the exceptions  in  paragraph  399  or
    399A. The Appellant did not have an enhanced family life and the  judge
    incorrectly focused on a fourteen-year gap and low risk of reoffending.
    This was not a very strong claim and did not meet  the  high  threshold
    test of very compelling circumstances. The judge had erred in  law  and
    the decision should be set aside and re-made.

18.  Mr Rashid relied on his Rule 24 response. He submitted  that  ground  1
    was not material and conceded that the four-year offence  committed  in
    2000 meant that the Appellant fell  into  the  very  serious  category.
    However, since the judge had considered very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above the Immigration Rules any error of law  in  relation  to
    the application of the exceptions was not material. Mr Rashid relied on
    paragraph 27 of Johnson which showed that the Appellant, a  young  man,
    had received four years but had since led a blameless life for 40 or 50
    years. The court found that the significance of the  previous  sentence
    would have receded to the point of irrelevance and this was capable  of
    amounting to a very compelling circumstance. It was not the  case  that
    the fourteen-year gap was a trump card as submitted by the Respondent.

19.  The judge found that the Appellant's partner  could  not  relocate  but
    that separation was not unduly harsh, so in considering Article  8  the
    judge  looked  at  the  family  life  of  other  family  members.   The
    Appellant's partner had lived in the UK all her life and the  Appellant
    had been in the UK for over twenty years. She was a  credible  witness,
    had a history of mental illness and no family in Jamaica.

20.  Mr Rashid submitted that, looking at  the  decision  as  a  whole,  the
    judge had adopted the correct approach because the judge was  balancing
    negatives   against   positives   in   considering   very    compelling
    circumstances  and  in  dealing  with  the  inability  to  satisfy  the
    exceptions. The judge  clearly  stated  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    convicted of a serious offence. There was no OASys Report because  this
    would only be prepared if the Appellant was a risk to the public, which
    he was not. This again was only one  of  the  factors  that  the  judge
    considered in assessing very compelling circumstances. The judge made a
    significant number of  findings  on  family  and  private  life  before
    assessing very compelling circumstances  and  then  the  judge  brought
    together all those findings and had regard to all relevant  factors  in
    concluding that the balance tipped just in the Appellant's favour.

21.  Mr Rashid submitted that the judge did not dilute  the  seriousness  of
    the  offence  in  carrying  out  the  proportionality   exercise.   The
    Appellant's previous offence was more serious than his last offence and
    it took place when he  was  just  forming  his  family  life  with  his
    partner. The judge in that appeal obviously found that the interference
    with his family  life  was  disproportionate  because  the  appeal  was
    allowed. The judge was not speculating  as  to  what  happened  in  the
    decision, but it was apparent that the Appellant  succeeded  on  appeal
    when he was convicted of a much  more  serious  offence  and  when  his
    Article 8 claim was somewhat weaker.

22.  The judge recognised that deportation lies not only in  the  prevention
    of further offences but in deterring others  and  expressing  society's
    revulsion. She applied Devaseelan and found that the Appellant's family
    and private life had increased since the  previous  appeal.  The  judge
    took into account the seriousness of  both  offences,  the  Appellant's
    rehabilitation and the  risk  of  reoffending.  The  fourteen-year  gap
    without offending was a relevant factor and the judge  considered  what
    weight should be attached to it.  Again, it was only one  factor  of  a
    number of factors.

23.  Looking at the decision as a whole the judge  had  considered  all  the
    circumstances and carried out a proper  assessment  of  proportionality
    and very compelling circumstances.  Her conclusions were open to her on
    the evidence before her and there was no material  error  of  law.  The
    Respondent had not shown that the judge attached limited weight to  the
    public interest because the judge was fully aware of the  circumstances
    of both offences.  It  was  unfair  to  say  that  the  judge  did  not
    understand the weight to be attached to the public  interest  when  all
    aspects of the public interest were reasoned.  The  challenge  amounted
    to a difference of opinion, not an error of law.

24.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted  that  the  Immigration   Rules   and
    legislation in relation to deportation had changed since  the  previous
    appeal and it was not possible to  apply  Devaseelan  in  the  abstract
    without the decision being before the judge. It was necessary  to  look
    at the substance of this decision. It was not sufficient for the  judge
    to merely recite case law. The Appellant could not succeed on three out
    of four of the findings in relation to family life. The  Appellant  did
    not have a very compelling case.  The factors identified by the  judge,
    the passage of time and rehabilitation, were not sufficient to outweigh
    the public interest. If the Appellant's family life was not  sufficient
    to make out his Article 8 case, then what factors were there to show  a
    very compelling case over and above the Immigration Rules?   The  judge
    had  failed  to  realise  the  interplay  between  the  Rules   and   a
    freestanding Article 8 claim.

25.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the Appellant's  serious  offending
    was not reconciled with the judge's findings at 73 and 74 where she had
    diluted the public interest. The scales tipped against the Appellant in
    failing to satisfy the Article  8  exceptions  and  by  virtue  of  his
    criminality,  which  meant  that  he  could  not  benefit  from   those
    exceptions. The judge had failed  to  identify  what  factor  made  the
    balance tip in the Appellant's favour. The fourteen-year  gap  and  the
    circumstances which led to his current offending were not sufficient.


Discussion and Conclusion

26.  It is not  in  dispute  that,  following  Johnson,  the  Appellant  was
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of more than four years in August
    2000 and therefore he could not benefit from the exceptions in  section
    117C of the 2002 Act or paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules.
    He had to demonstrate that there were  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above the exceptions,  such  that  his  deportation  would  be
    disproportionate.

27.  The judge's failure to apply Johnson was not material to  the  decision
    because the judge went on to conclude  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    benefit from either Exception 1 or Exception  2.  She  considered  very
    compelling circumstances in any event.

28.  The judge took into account the circumstances identified  at  paragraph
    71 onwards, namely:

    (i)  The Appellant had a partner who is a British citizen  and  it  was
         not reasonable for her to return with the Appellant to Jamaica;


    (ii) He also had a stepson aged 26 who lived in the family home and the
         Appellant's deportation would affect his stepsister as well;


    (iii)    There was no OASys Report and the Appellant was considered  to
         be at low risk of reoffending.


    (iv) The Appellant's previous appeal against  deportation  was  allowed
         and there had been no period of offending for fourteen years.


    (v)  The judge's sentencing remarks took into account  the  Appellant's
         relapse into class A drug use and the Appellant only supplied drugs
         to which he himself was addicted.


    (vi) His behaviour in  prison  was  exemplary  and  he  had  undertaken
         voluntary work.

29.  At paragraph 75, she found that the  fourteen-year  gap  in  which  the
    Appellant had stayed away from drugs and the circumstances which led to
    his current offending were very compelling circumstances sufficient  to
    protect the Appellant from expulsion.
30.  I find that the judge has erred in law  in  assessing  very  compelling
    circumstances.  The fourteen-year gap and the circumstances  which  led
    to the Appellant's current offending are not sufficient to outweigh the
    public interest in deportation. I find that the matters  relied  on  by
    the judge at paragraph 71 onwards are not sufficient to amount to  very
    compelling circumstances on the particular facts of this case.

31.  Given that the Appellant cannot satisfy Exceptions 1 and 2, the  weight
    to be attached to his family and private life  was  limited.  The  fact
    that he was at low risk of reoffending  was  only  one  aspect  of  the
    public interest in relation to protecting the public.  It  did  not  go
    towards  deterring  others  from  committing  offences  or  to  express
    society's revulsion. Although the judge acknowledges these  aspects  of
    the public interest at paragraph 70, she goes on  to  state  that  "the
    appellant's scale of  offending  even  taking  into  account  the  2000
    conviction is not as serious as the  offence  of  the  appellant  in  N
    (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 and the appellant in AO (Nigeria) v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  250.  I  find  that  she  has  failed  to  attach
    significant weight to the public interest in this case.

32.  Given the serious nature of both offences committed  by  the  Appellant
    and the lengthy periods of imprisonment to which he has been  sentenced
    (66 and 44 months), it could not be said that the fourteen-year gap  in
    which the Appellant did not offend was sufficient to render  the  first
    conviction irrelevant. The Appellant committed a very serious crime and
    was given the opportunity to reform and failed to do so.

33.  The circumstances which were before the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    amount to very compelling circumstances over and above  the  exceptions
    in section 117C or the Immigration Rules. The matters  relied  upon  by
    the judge were not sufficient to satisfy this high threshold  test  and
    it is clear that, although the judge has set out all  relevant  factors
    and relevant case law, she has not attached sufficient  weight  to  the
    public interest in accordance with section 117C. It  is  apparent  from
    looking at the decision as a whole that,  even  adopting  a  structured
    balance sheet approach, the judge failed to attach  significant  weight
    to the public interest in concluding that the balance  just  tipped  in
    the Appellant's favour.

34.  Accordingly, I find that the judge erred in law and  I  set  aside  the
    decision to allow the appeal and re-make it. There was  no  dispute  on
    the facts and there has been no strengthening of the Appellant's family
    or private life such that it would affect the judge's findings that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant to be  separated  from  his
    partner and there were no very significant  obstacles  to  integration.
    There was no change in circumstances  since  the  decision  in  October
    2018.

35.  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to  show  very  significant
    circumstances over and above the exceptions in  section  117C  and  the
    Immigration Rules. The weight to be attached to the public interest  is
    significant in this case and the factors in favour of the Appellant  do
    not outweigh it. Accordingly, I dismiss the Appellant's appeal on human
    rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The decision of 18 October 2018 is set aside and re-made.

I dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  deportation  on  human  rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


