
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/15346/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 November 2019                      |On 23 December 2019                |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                              Mr LOUIS MARSDEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Mall, Counsel instructed by Kalsi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Appellant against the decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Parkes dated 20 June 2019 in  which  the  judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 9
    July 2018 refusing the Appellant's human rights claim.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Jamaica and entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 19 June 1996 in what  he  says  is  his  true  identity  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  He appears then to have been  administratively
    removed from the United Kingdom but returned back a short  time  later,
    he says still in 1996,  in  a  different  identity.   He  has  remained
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom ever since, on his case.

3.   An application for leave to remain was made on  5  April  2017  seeking
    leave to remain on the basis of his private life.  The Appellant relied
    in particular on the provisions in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) and  argued
    that he had been continuously present in the United Kingdom for  twenty
    years.  He also sought to rely upon a family life that he had developed
    with his partner, a Ms Cardy, and three children, one with Ms Cardy,  a
    son born on 21 June 1998, and two other children by a different partner
    although by the time of the appeal the Appellant  had  been  unable  to
    gather any evidence that he had any relationship  with  those  children
    other than his own assertion that he contacted them via WhatsApp.

4.   The Respondent considered that application and  refused  it  in  fairly
    short terms in relation to the  alleged  20  year  residence  issue  by
    saying that:

         "You have claimed to have lived in the UK for 20 years however  you
         have failed to provide evidence of continuous residence  throughout
         the period 1996 until 2016 in  particular  from  1996  until  2009.
         Therefore it is not accepted that you have  lived  continuously  in
         the UK for at least 20 years".


    The respondent also considered the other elements  of  the  Appellant's
    claimed private and family life and rejected his application.

5.   The Appellant appealed, the appeal coming before the judge  on  5  June
    2019.  The judge heard evidence from the Appellant, from Ms  Cardy  and
    from  the  Appellant's  adult  son.   The  judge  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's account that the Appellant had been present in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1996 and gave a number of reasons for so finding.   These
    are, in summary, as follows:

    (1)   that  the  Appellant  had  used  false  identities  reducing  his
         credibility (20);


    (2)  that he had been less than frank even with the various  solicitors
         who he had engaged from  time  to  time  to  assist  him  with  his
         immigration matters (21);


    (3)  that his claim to have cohabited with Ms Cardy since 2005 was  not
         supported by  the  evidence  of  his  son  who  recalled  that  the
         Appellant had resided in that household since the son had been aged
         3 or 4 which would have been from 2001 or 2002 (reading  paragraphs
         18 and 27 together);


    (4)  various letters of support provided from friends  were  of  little
         assistance in establishing continuity of residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom (paragraphs 29 to 30);


    (5)  the only reliable evidence of the date of the Appellant's entry to
         the United Kingdom in the false identity of Dean Cooper was  itself
         a false document (32);


    (6)  although it was accepted that the Appellant was the father of  his
         son Travis, which was established by  DNA  evidence,  the  date  of
         registration  of  Travis'  birth,  being  14  December  2011,   was
         unexplained; it was difficult to see how  this  could  be  a  first
         registration; the document did not support the Appellant's claim to
         be present in the UK in June 1998 (34);


    (7)  it was also unexplained why on that  birth  certificate  different
         addresses were given for the Appellant and for Ms Cardy (35);


    (8)  there was no evidence from anyone  with  whom  the  Appellant  had
         worked over the years.


6.   The judge concluded his decision as follows:

         "37.  The  evidence  that  has  been  provided   is   inconsistent,
             unreliable and has  significant  gaps  that  are  unexplained.
             There is a complete absence of any supporting documentation in
             the form  of  photographs  even  with  the  Appellant  in  the
             background,  wage  slips,  bank  statements  or  support  from
             employees  or   employers.    Given   that   the   Appellant's
             willingness to mislead  his  legal  advisors  and  ability  to
             obtain and use false identities I am not  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant's claim to have been in the UK since  December  1996
             is remotely reliable.  There is no fixed date  since  when  it
             can be said that the Appellant has remained  in  the  UK  with
             there being further gaps since 2011.  For the reasons given  I
             find that the Appellant has not shown that he has  any  period
             of continuous residence in  the  UK  and  does  not  meet  the
             Immigration Rules with regard to long residence".

7.    The  judge  also  briefly  considered  the  Appellant's   ability   to
    reintegrate  into  Jamaica  and  his  remaining  Article  8  issues  at
    paragraphs 38 to 41.  The judge dismissed the appeal.

8.   Although the Appellant was at the time of that appeal  represented,  he
    made an application for permission to  appeal  in  person  and  without
    assistance on 10 July 2019.  With respect to  the  Appellant  there  is
    nothing within the terms of his handwritten application which  arguably
    raises an error of law.  However, that application  was  considered  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M Simpson who granted permission  to
    appeal on 5 August 2019.  She did  so  directing  herself  that  it  is
    appropriate to consider a decision of the Tribunal  in  detail  for  an
    unrepresented applicant for permission to appeal and she  thought  that
    permission should be granted on the grounds that the judge had  focused
    his attention on the lack of documentary evidence  in  support  of  the
    application and appeal "arguably  absent  of  real  cognisance  of  the
    frequently endemic predicament of those such as the  Appellant  without
    status and thereby oral evidence of the  Appellant  and  his  witnesses
    appearing to have formed the central plank of the appeal".   Permission
    was also granted on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  had
    been unclear in credibility findings  or  inconsistent  in  respect  of
    three material witnesses being the Appellant, his partner and their son
    Travis, more particularly the last two witnesses and  where  addressing
    those witnesses' evidence specifically, 'arguably concerns  arose  that
    findings made were ... not ... reasonably open to an objective judicial
    decision maker on the evidence'.  That is a sufficient summary  of  the
    grant of permission to appeal for the purposes of my decision.

9.   The Appellant has now  instructed  representatives  again  and  I  have
    heard submissions from Ms Mall in support of  the  Appellant's  appeal.
    She relies upon the grant of permission to appeal by Judge Simpson.

10.  I also raised with both parties  myself  a  concern  that  I  had  when
    reading the judge's decision, applying my mind in  the  same  way  that
    Judge Simpson did, being conscious not to permit any  Robinson  obvious
    error of law  to  go  unaddressed.   My  concern  was  that  given  the
    potential significance of the witness evidence of  Ms  Cardy,  and  the
    Appellant's reliance  upon  the  birth  certificate  demonstrating  the
    Appellant was registered as the father of Travis,  that  paragraphs  34
    and 35 of the judge's decision appeared to include concerns  that  were
    raised by the judge only in the decision, rather than having  been  put
    to the witnesses in the hearing. I  have  had  regard  to  the  judge's
    Record of Proceedings and I cannot myself find any question  being  put
    to the Appellant or to Ms Cardy by any party or the  judge  to  explain
    these matters relating to the birth certificate.

11.  Mr Mills defended the judge's decision, summarising the  points  raised
    by the judge, and arguing that there were ample reasons  given  by  the
    judge for finding the Appellant incredible.  Mr  Mills  was  candid  in
    accepting that he was unable to identify a specific finding within  the
    judge's decision in which the credibility of Ms Cardy was  specifically
    addressed.  Nonetheless, he argued that if a lack of  finding  on  that
    witness's credibility was an error of law, it was not a material  error
    of law.

    Discussion


12.  I find with respect to  the  judge's  otherwise  detailed  and  careful
    decision that there are material errors  of  law.   One  error  is  the
    matter raised by Judge Simpson, that there did not appear to be a clear
    finding made on the evidence of either Travis or Ms Cardy, both of whom
    had asserted that the Appellant had been continuously  present  in  the
    United Kingdom, Ms Cardy's evidence clearly being the more relevant  of
    the two.  She had stated  that  the  Appellant  had  been  continuously
    present since the birth of Travis.  There is no discrete finding by the
    judge rejecting Ms Cardy's evidence in that regard.  Further, Ms  Cardy
    does not appear to have been asked about  the  information  within  the
    birth certificate which caused the judge  concern.  These  two  matters
    together cause me to find that there is a material error of law in  the
    judge's decision. For that reason I  find  that  the  judge's  decision
    overall is not sustainable and I set it aside.

13.  On a question of relief, due to the extent  of  the  findings  of  fact
    which will need to be re-made in this appeal I direct that  the  appeal
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

     Decision

     The decision involved the making of a material error of law.

     I set the decision aside.

     I remit the appeal to the First -tier Tribunal

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                     Date 17.12.19

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



