
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15184/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2019                           |On 05 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              Mr khurram shazad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant to the decision of a panel of  the
    First-tier Tribunal constituting of First-tier Tribunal Judges  O'Keefe
    and Hughes (the panel), promulgated on 10 October  2018,  whereby  they
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 2
    July 2018.  The Respondent's refusal of  the  Appellant's  human  right
    claim was based upon  an  allegation  of  deception  practised  by  the
    Appellant in respect of an English language test taken in May 2012.  In
    short, this was one of the very familiar ETS cases.




The panel's decision

 2. Importantly for the purposes of this appeal,  the  Respondent  was  not
    represented at the hearing (something I find to be somewhat  odd  given
    the importance of the issues to both parties).

 3. On the evidence as a whole the panel concluded that the Respondent  had
    discharged the initial evidential burden (see [20]).   The  panel  then
    went on to consider whether or not  the  Appellant  had  been  able  to
    provide  an  innocent  explanation  to  the  allegation  made  by   the
    Respondent.

 4. In concluding that he had "manifestly  failed"  to  do  so,  the  panel
    relied on two matters: first, that the Appellant had failed to  request
    and/or obtain a voice recording of the relevant English  language  test
    in question; second, that the Appellant had failed to provide  detailed
    information about the format of the test  or  why  he  had  chosen  the
    particular college (see [22] and [27]).

 5. In light of the Appellant's failure to rebut the allegation, the  panel
    concluded that the Respondent had, in effect by default, discharged the
    legal burden of proof resting upon  him.   As  a  result  of  this  the
    Appellant had practised deception in the past  and  this  significantly
    undermined his Article 8 claim as a whole.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds of appeal  are  succinct.   The  absence  of  a  Presenting
    Officer, and  therefore  any  specific  challenge  to  the  Appellant's
    evidence at the hearing, is emphasised.  It is then said that  the  two
    points relied upon by the panel  had  not  in  fact  been  put  to  the
    Appellant at the hearing.  It is also said that in the absence  of  any
    specific challenge to the Appellant's evidence by the Respondent  as  a
    result of the failure to provide a Presenting Officer,  the  Respondent
    could not have discharged the legal burden of proof and the panel erred
    in concluding otherwise.

 7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Resident  Judge  Zucker  on  31
    December 2018.




The hearing before me

 8. Following a pre-hearing discussion between the representatives Mr Tufan
    accepted that the panel had materially erred in law.

 9. He accepted that neither of the two points relied upon by the panel had
    been put to the Appellant at the hearing and this,  combined  with  the
    absence of a Presenting  Officer  rendered  the  decision  unsafe.   He
    accepted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




Decision on error of law

10. In my view Mr Tufan's concession  was  quite  properly  made.   In  the
    absence of a Presenting Officer it was incumbent on the panel to  raise
    any particular issues of concern (particularly if these  were  to  form
    the basis of a finding of deception on the Appellant's part) and ensure
    that they were properly put to the Appellant at the hearing.   This  is
    so particularly where the contents of the  witness  statement  may  not
    contain a great deal of detail.

11. I have looked through  the  Record  of  Proceedings  produced  by  both
    members of the panel.  For my part  I  can  see  no  reference  to  any
    question being asked about either a request for the voice recording  or
    any details about the format of the test itself or  why  the  Appellant
    chose the particular college that he did.  I conclude  that  there  was
    procedural unfairness in this regard.

12. I would add that I had considered whether it was necessary  to  adjourn
    and ask the panel for any comments on this particular challenge, but in
    view of the clarity  of  the  Record  of  Proceedings  and  Mr  Tufan's
    position, concluded that the hearing should proceed.

13. The failure to have sought specific explanations relating to matters of
    concern seriously undermined the panel's conclusion that the  Appellant
    had failed to provide  an  innocent  explanation  to  the  Respondent's
    serious allegations against him.  I bear  in  mind  that  the  innocent
    explanation is not a particularly high threshold; it  requires  nothing
    more than rebuttal evidence that is capable of belief. Thus, there is a
    real danger that the panel had in effect placed a legal burden upon the
    Appellant in this case.  This is a  further  error,  connected  to  the
    first.

14. I set the decision of the panel aside.




Disposal

15. This appeal must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  complete
    rehearing.  Both  parties  will  be  well  aware  of  their  evidential
    obligations.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1. The remitted appeal will take the form of a complete  rehearing,  with
      no preserved findings of fact;



   2. The appeal shall not be reheard by First-tier Tribunal Judges  O'Keefe
      and Hughes.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 24 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

