
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15006/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 14 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Daria [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of  Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Kaler of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) posted  on  14
    January 2019 dismissing his appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 2 July 2018 refusing him leave to remain.  The  appellant
    had applied for leave to remain on the basis of his being in a parental
    relationship with two British citizen children.

2.   The focus of the appellant's  grounds  is  what  the  judge  stated  at
    paragraphs 18-21:

         "18. There is a distinct lack of evidence as to how frequently  the
             Appellant sees his children or how often they come to stay  at
             his place.  I am not told when the last occasion was; it could
             have been many years ago.  Whilst the mother of  the  children
             and her relatives provided statements for the applications  in
             2012 and 2015, they have not  provided  supporting  statements
             for the present application.  The photographs produced by  the
             Appellant were taken on numerous occasions in 2013.  There are
             two occasions when they were taken in 2014, none in 2015,  one
             in 2016, one in 2017 and several in 2018.  Some of  them  also
             show [MT].


         19.  The evidence suggests that  the  Appellant  and  [M]  are  not
             getting on together at the moment.  The  Appellant  says  that
             her family members have tried  to  intervene  to  improve  the
             situation, but there are no statements from  them  as  to  the
             regularity  of  any  access  between  the  Appellant  and  his
             children or what impact he has  on  their  lives  at  present.
             There is nothing from their school or their  grandmother  (who
             is their legal guardian) to indicate what  impact  removal  of
             the Appellant would have on their lives.  There are no reports
             from social workers or anyone else  who  plays  a  significant
             role in their lives.  The previous applications were supported
             by evidence from the people these  children  live  with;  this
             application is not.


         20.  I accept that the Appellant has qualifying children in the UK.
              They were born here and are British citizens.   He  does  not
             have a subsisting relationship with their mother.  He has  had
             leave to remain in the UK, and so any  relationship  that  has
             been developed with the children has  been  with  leave  since
             2012.  I know little of his private life: he lives  in  rented
             accommodation, he is in  receipt  of  benefits,  he  sees  his
             children and takes them out, he also sees them at their  homes
             at times.  There is no evidence about  the  frequency  of  his
             contact with them and no direct evidence of  what  impact  his
             removal would have  on  them.   The  Appellant  has  submitted
             articles stating how important a father's role is in the lives
             of children but these are not specific to  the  Appellant.   I
             have no evidence of how significant a role he plays  in  their
             lives.  He does not have any school reports  about  them.   He
             said he is trying to play a more active role  in  their  lives
             but he does not have CBT clearance; I see no evidence  of  his
             having applied for such clearance.  He has not been  appointed
             next of kin for the children.  He says he wishes to take legal
             action about regularising his role with the  children  but  he
             has not taken any active steps.


         21.  Whilst I accept that the Appellant has two  children  who  are
             British citizens, I do not find that he plays any  significant
             role in their lives.  He does not have parental responsibility
             for them.  Their needs are  being  met  by  their  mother  and
             grandmother.   I  have  little  evidence  of  the  impact  the
             Appellant  has  on  their  lives  and  wellbeing.   I  am  not
             persuaded that the absence  of  the  Appellant  would  have  a
             significant impact on the well-being of  these  children.   It
             has not been  demonstrated  that  the  best  interest  of  the
             children require that the Appellant be given leave  to  remain
             in the UK.  He has  not  shown  that  he  has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with the children."

3.   Ground 1 asserts that the judge's findings of  no  evidence  of  recent
    contact with the children failed to take  account  of  (i)  the  letter
    dated 25 June 2018 from the mother of  the  appellant's  children;  and
    (ii) the letter from  [Mr  BH],  dated  8  May  2018,  the  appellant's
    landlord, noting a recent visit made by the appellant to  the  home  of
    his children and stating that the appellant is "closely  involved  with
    his sons".

4.   Ground 2 alleges that in finding at paragraph  20  that  the  appellant
    "sees his children and takes them out, he also sees them at their  home
    at times" and at paragraph 18  that  "I  am  not  told  when  the  last
    occasion was; it could have been many years ago" the  judge  fell  into
    contradiction betraying a lack of adequate reasons.

5.   I am persuaded the judge erred in law.

6.   Whilst the judge did refer descriptively to the letter from Mr  [H]  at
    paragraphs 3 and 5, the judge's subsequent findings  fail  to  indicate
    that he took this letter into account.  The judge stated  at  paragraph
    18 that "I am not told when the last occasion [the appellant  has  seen
    his children]; it could have been  many  years  ago".   In  so  finding
    either the judge forgot about this letter or failed to explain  why  he
    decided to attach any weight to it.

7.   The judge's statement that there was no evidence of recent  contact  is
    also at odds with his apparent finding at paragraph  20  that  [in  the
    present tense] "he sees his children and takes them out, he  also  sees
    them at their home at times".

8.   The judge's treatment of the issue of  contact  with  the  children  is
    further undermined by his failure make any mention of the  letter  from
    the children's mother dated 25 June 2018.  Indeed, in view of the  fact
    that this letter  was  before  the  judge,  the  judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 18 that "the mother of the children  and  her  relatives  ...
    have not provided supporting statements for the present application" is
    incorrect.  If by this the judge meant only to refer to  the  documents
    submitted with the appellant's application,  that  leaves  the  problem
    that the judge makes no reference to it at all.

9.   I consider the judge's errors in respect of the  evidence  relating  to
    the  appellant's  contact  with  his  children  were  plainly  material
    inasmuch as I cannot exclude that if he had  taken  proper  account  of
    them it may have made  a  difference  to  his  assessment  of  parental
    responsibility.

10.  For the above reasons I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  judge  for
    material error of law and remit the case to the FtT.

11.  None of this is to suggest that the appellant is  entitled  to  succeed
    on the merits of his appeal; that must be entirely  a  matter  for  the
    judge.  In order to assist the judge, I make the following direction:

     Direction

    That  the  appellant's  representatives  produce  to   the   First-tier
    Tribunal, with a copy to the respondent, within  eight  weeks  of  this
    decision being sent, a social welfare report  on  the  appellant's  two
    children focussing on the nature and extent of the appellant's  contact
    with his children since the appellant and the children's mother  ceased
    living together up to the present.  If the appellant's  representatives
    encounter difficulties in obtaining such  a  report  (e.g.  because  of
    private funding difficulties or if the mother  should  not  consent  to
    such a report) they are to notify the FtT forthwith and it may be  that
    a CMR will be held to ascertain what other avenues could be provided to
    obtain better information about the circumstances of the  children  and
    their relationship with the appellant.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 7 August 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

