
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15356/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC            |Decision Reason Promulgated        |
|On 24 August 2021                  |On 05 October 2021                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                       DOROTEIA MANUEL F BERNARDO NETO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         AN ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms M Hussain of Maya & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. On 8 April 2019 the appellant, a female citizen  of  Angola  born  on  29
   August 1980, applied for entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
   present and settled in the United Kingdom. That application  was  refused
   by an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) on 18 July 2019.



Background


     2. The reason for the refusal is that although  it  was  accepted  the
        application did not fall for  refusal  on  grounds  of  suitability
        pursuant to Section S-EC Appendix  FM,  and  it  was  accepted  the
        appellant  met  the  eligibility  relationship   requirements   and
        financial requirements, it was not accepted the appellant  met  the
        eligibility English language requirement of E-ECP.4.1 to  4.2.  for
        the following stated reasons:


        You are not exempt from  the  English  language  requirement  under
        paragraph E - ECP.4.2. In addition, you are not  a  national  of  a
        majority English speaking country listed in paragraph GEN  1.6  and
        have not passed an  English  language  test  (A1  Level  of  Common
        European Framework) with a provider approved by UKVI and/or do  not
        hold an academic qualification recognised by NARIC  UK  to  be  the
        equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or  Master's  degree  in
        the UK, which was taught in English.


        You have stated that there are circumstances that would prevent you
        from meeting the English language requirement.


        As evidence of this you have provided a Medical  Report  signed  by
        Avenida Deolinda Rodrigues from Clinica Santo Antonian  in  Luanda,
        which states that you are hospitalised  on  20/2/2019  with  mental
        health problems. However, this document does  not  detail  why  you
        would be unable  to  sit  or  take  an  English  language  test  as
        required. This letter is also dated two weeks prior to your date of
        application. It's not unreasonable to expect that a test could have
        been taken earlier. Furthermore, you have stated on both your  Visa
        Application Form and Appendix 2 form  that  you  and  your  husband
        communicate with each other in both English and Portuguese.


        I am satisfied, with the  above  information,  that  there  are  no
        exceptional  circumstances  permitting  you  from  not  sitting  an
        English language test.


        I therefore refuse your application under paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) the
        Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (E-ECP.4.1 and 4.2).


     3.  The  decision-maker  went  on  to  consider  whether  there   were
        exceptional circumstances in the case rendering refusal a breach of
        Article  8  ECHR,  as  it  would  result  in  unjustifiably   harsh
        consequences for the appellant or the  family  but  found  no  such
        consequences had been made out on  the  basis  of  the  information
        before the decision-maker.
     4. In the Visa application  form  relating  to  the  English  language
        requirement the appellant was asked two questions  in  relation  to
        which she provided the following answers:


        87. Are you exempt from the English language requirement?      Yes
        88. How are you  exempt  from  the  English  language  requirement?
                                                          Medically   exempt
                                                          from  sitting   an
                                                          English   language
                                                          test.


     5. The appellant appealed the refusal which came before a judge of the
        First-tier Tribunal who expressed concerns  regarding  the  medical
        evidence provided.
     6. It was  not  disputed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
        appellant could not take the English language  test  in  Angola  as
        there is no approved test centre there and that  the  nearest  test
        centre was probably in Windhook in Namibia.
     7. It was accepted before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  UK-based
        sponsor has health issues of his own and whilst expressing sympathy
        for the appellant  and  sponsor  it  was  found  that  neither  the
        appellant nor sponsor had made any attempt to explore  whether  the
        appellant could attend the centre in another country and  was  just
        proceeding on the basis that her health issues prevented  her  from
        taking the test.
     8. The First-tier  Tribunal  also  noted  that  there  was  inadequate
        evidence to explain why the UK-based sponsor  could  not  accompany
        the appellant to the test centre in Namibia; for although he has  a
        disability he had travelled to Angola in the past it had  not  been
        suggested before the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant  could
        not access an English language course to assist  in  preparing  for
        the test in Angola.
     9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside by the  Upper
        Tribunal for the reasons set out at [12] of the decision  of  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Jackson  dated  23  April  2021,  which  is  in  the
        following terms:


        12.  The factual  circumstances  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
             which include limited evidence of mental health  problems  for
             the Appellant, her care of a young child, the Sponsor, who  is
             disabled, being in the United Kingdom  caring  for  a  British
             citizen child in education here; together  with  a  very  long
             journey  required  to  another  country  to  take  an  English
             language test, at least raised prima facie issues, not only of
             practicality but also of reasonableness prior  to  arrival  in
             the United Kingdom. The failure to expressly consider this  or
             the Respondent's guidance (albeit not relied on  expressly  in
             the First-tier Tribunal) was a  material  error  of  law.  The
             Appellant's  ability  to  meet   the   requirements   of   the
             Immigration Rules is a material factor in  the  assessment  of
             proportionality,  as  is,  arguably,  the  reasonableness   of
             undertaking the English language test on  the  facts  of  this
             case, such that the error is material  to  the  outcome  of  a
             human rights appeal. For these reasons, the decision  must  be
             set aside and remade.

Discussion

    10. The requirement for an individual to prove their ability  to  speak
        English to the requisite standard  is  not  new.  The  respondent's
        guidance  on  this  issue  'English  language  requirement:  family
        members under Part 8, Appendix FM and Appendix Armed Forces Version
        7.0, 6 April 2021' sets out a useful summary of the  chronology  of
        developments in this area in the following terms:

An English language requirement was  introduced  on  29  November  2010  for
those applying for entry clearance or leave to remain under Part  8  of  the
Immigration Rules as a fianc�(e),  proposed  civil  partner,  spouse,  civil
partner, unmarried partner or same sex partner of a  British  citizen  or  a
person settled in the UK.

From 6 April 2011, the  English  language  requirement  was  introduced  for
those applying for entry clearance or leave to  remain  as  the  post-flight
spouse, civil partner, unmarried partner or same sex partner of a person  in
the UK with refugee or humanitarian protection status.

From 9 July 2012, Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules extended the  English
language requirement to those applying  for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
remain as a parent of a child in the UK.

The English language requirement has  applied  since  29  November  2010  to
those applying under Part 8 as the partner of a member of HM Forces  who  is
a British  citizen  or  has  settled  status.  From  1  December  2013,  the
requirement was extended to the partners of foreign or Commonwealth  members
of HM Forces who apply under Appendix Armed Forces and to  the  partners  of
British or settled members of HM Forces who apply under that Appendix.

From 28 July 2014, section 19 of the Immigration  Act  2014  reinforces  the
public interest under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
(right to respect for private and family life) in  migrants  being  able  to
speak English, to reduce burdens on the taxpayer and promote integration.

The lawfulness of the pre-entry English language requirement  in  the  Rules
was upheld by the Supreme Court in its 18 November 2015 judgment  in  Ali  &
Bibi v SSHD [2015] UKSC 68.

On 3 November 2016, Immigration Rules changes for  a  new  English  language
requirement at level A2 of the Common European Framework  of  Reference  for
Languages (CEFR), announced in principle on 18 January 2016, were  laid  for
those applying for further leave in the UK as a  partner  or  parent,  after
completing 30 months in the  UK  on  a  5-year  route  to  settlement  under
Appendix FM. This new requirement applies to those whose previous period  of
leave expires on or after 1 May 2017.

     11. The requirement to prove the ability to meet the required level  is
         not, however, absolute. It is also recognised in the guidance  that
         there  may  be  circumstances  which  may  prevent  an   individual
         complying with  this  requirement.  In  that  regard  the  guidance
         states:

Exceptional circumstances exemption

The applicant is  exempt  from  the  English  language  requirement  if  the
decision maker considers  that  there  are  exceptional  circumstances  that
prevent the applicant from meeting the requirement.

This exemption is only applicable where there are exceptional  circumstances
specifically relating to the ability of the applicant to  meet  the  English
language requirement.

An applicant granted an exemption on the basis of exceptional  circumstances
at the entry clearance stage will be required to meet the  English  language
requirement at A1 level when they apply for further leave  to  remain  after
30 months, unless they remain exempt on this or another basis.

On 24 July 2014 the automatic exemption for an applicant who is a  long-term
resident of a country with no approved A1 test provision was withdrawn.

Consideration of exceptional circumstances

Each application for an exemption on the basis of exceptional  circumstances
will be considered on its merits on a case-by-case basis.

The applicant must demonstrate, in their application for entry as a  partner
or parent, that as a result of exceptional circumstances they are unable  to
learn English  before  coming  to  the  UK  or  it  is  not  practicable  or
reasonable for them to  travel  to  another  country  to  take  an  approved
English  language  test.  Partners  of  members  of  HM  Forces  must   also
demonstrate this.

Evidence of the nature and impact of the exceptional circumstances  must  be
clearly provided, for  instance  examples  of  previous  efforts  to  access
learning materials or to travel overseas to take an approved  test  and  the
obstacles  to  doing  so.  This  must  include  evidence  provided   by   an
independent  source  (for  example,  an  appropriately   qualified   medical
practitioner) or capable of being verified by the decision maker.

Examples of  situations  in  which,  subject  to  the  necessary  supporting
evidence, the decision maker might  conclude  that  there  were  exceptional
circumstances, might include where the applicant:

        .    is a long-term resident  of  a  country  in  international  or
             internal armed conflict, or where  there  is  or  has  been  a
             humanitarian   disaster,   including   in   light    of    the
             infrastructure affected
        .    has been hospitalised for several months immediately prior  to
             the date of application . is the full-time carer of a disabled
             child also applying to come to the UK Page 23 of 31  Published
             for Home Office staff on 06 April 2021
        .    is a long-term resident of a country with no approved A1  test
             provision and it is not  practicable  or  reasonable  for  the
             applicant to travel to another country to take such a test
        .    is a long-term resident of a country in  which  the  applicant
             faces very severe practical or logistical difficulties,  which
             cannot reasonably  be  overcome,  in  accessing  the  learning
             resources required to acquire English  language  speaking  and
             listening skills at CEFR level A1


         Lack of or limited literacy or education  will  not  in  itself  be
         accepted as exceptional circumstances.


It will be extremely rare for exceptional circumstances to apply  where  the
applicant is in the UK. However, in an exceptional case, the applicant  must
set out the relevant  circumstances  in  their  application  as  a  partner,
parent or partner of a member of HM Forces, and submit  relevant  supporting
evidence.


        Countries with no approved A1 test provision


        From 24 July 2014, applicants who are resident in a country with no
    approved A1 English
language test are expected to travel to  another  country  to  take  such  a
test, subject to the transitional arrangements in the next  paragraph.  Only
where they can demonstrate in their entry clearance application that  it  is
not practicable or reasonable for them to do so will  they  be  exempt  from
the requirement prior to entry  to  the  UK.  This  exemption  will  not  be
applicable where an  approved  A1  test  is  available  in  the  applicant's
country of long-term residence.
From 24 July to 14 August 2014, partner and parent visa applicants  who  are
a longterm resident  of  one  of  the  following  countries,  which  had  no
approved A1 test provision prior to 24  July,  could  continue  to  rely  on
their residence in  that  country  as  the  basis  for  exemption  from  the
requirement for A1-level English  language  speaking  and  listening  skills
prior to entry to the UK in a partner or parent application submitted by  14
August 2014:
. Brunei
. Burkina Faso
. Cape Verde
. Central African Republic
. Chad
. Comoros
. Congo
. Darussalam
. Democratic Republic of Congo
. Equatorial Guinea
. Eritrea
. Guinea-Bissau
. Haiti
. Ivory Coast
. Kiribati
. Rwanda
. Samoa
. Sao Tome Principe
. Seychelles
. Sierra Leone
. Somalia
. Swaziland
. Togo
. Turkmenistan
. Wallis and Futuna Islands

From 24 July 2014 (or from 14  August  2014  in  respect  of  the  countries
listed above), an applicant seeking exemption because there is  no  approved
A1 test provision in their country of long-term residence should provide  in
their visa application a detailed explanation of why it is  not  practicable
or reasonable for them to take a test in another  country.  Where  relevant,
they should provide details of  what  steps  they  have  taken  to  take  an
approved A1 English test and submit any supporting evidence with their  visa
application.

Applicants should check the availability of  approved  A1  English  language
testing in  their  country  of  long-term  residence  before  submitting  an
application which seeks  to  rely  on  this  exemption.  Annex  A  sets  out
countries where there was no approved A1  test  provision  as  at  29  March
2017. This list is subject to change and the Home  Office  is  working  with
the approved test providers to  establish  A1  testing  in  countries  where
there is no current provision. From 6 April 2015  pop-up  testing  has  been
introduced for the first time in places where  there  is  lower  demand  and
where testing may not have previously existed.

Some applicants as a partner or parent already travel overseas  to  take  an
approved A1 test because this is  more  convenient  than  travelling  to  an
approved test centre in their own country. Many applicants as a  partner  or
parent are already required to travel to another  country  to  submit  their
biometrics at a Visa Application Centre in order to apply for  a  settlement
visa.

Reasons why it is not practicable or reasonable for an applicant to take  an
approved A1  test  in  another  country  will  normally  require  more  than
inconvenience or  reluctance  to  travel  overseas.  Subject  to  supporting
evidence, such reasons might exist where for example:
        .    exit visa requirements or restrictions make it very  difficult
             for the applicant to travel overseas
        .     the  applicant  faces   insuperable   problems   in   meeting
             immigration requirements to visit a country with  an  approved
             test centre
        .     the  applicant  faces  unreasonable  additional   travel   or
             accommodation costs to visit a country with an  approved  test
             centre. Some applicants as a partner or parent  already  incur
             travel and accommodation costs  to  attend  an  approved  test
             centre in their own country or to give their biometrics  at  a
             Visa  Application  Centre.  In  addition,  applicants  for   a
             settlement visa as a partner or parent are required to meet  a
             financial requirement and it is reasonable to expect that they
             (or their sponsor in a partner application) will generally  be
             able to afford  reasonable  costs  incurred  in  making  their
             application
        .    other exceptional circumstances prevent the  applicant  taking
             an approved A1 test in another country Each application for an
             exemption from the requirement for A1 English prior  to  entry
             to the UK because it is not practicable or reasonable for  the
             applicant to take an approved A1 test in another country  will
             be considered on its merits on a case-by case basis.


    12. Although it was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal  there  was  no
        approved A1 test centre in Angola that country does not  appear  on
        the list above or at Appendix A to the guidance, but as this matter
        was not raised before the Upper  Tribunal  and  as  the  First-tier
        Tribunal refers to  what  appears  to  be  a  concession  that  the
        required test facility was not available in Angola, the  merits  of
        the appeal shall be determined on the basis that the  nearest  test
        centre is that in Namibia.
    13. The only ground on which the appellant claimed to be entitled to an
        exemption in her application form was that of her inability to take
        the  test.  The  medical  report  relied  upon  as  proof  of  this
        entitlement is criticised by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  That
        report is in the following terms:

"This is a patient who was admitted to  our  Clinic  on  20  February  2019,
being hospitalised with mental health  problems.  The  patient  was  feeling
unwell for a few days and self medicated without consulting  a  doctor.  The
symptoms made the patient unable  to  understand  the  questions  that  were
being asked by the doctors and sometimes giving answers that  did  not  have
anything to do with the questions asked.

Mentally, the patient presented a clinical picture of acute mental  dullness
when perceiving the information, she has learning disability."

    14. For the purpose of  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
        appellant seeks to rely upon a further report dated  10  May  2021,
        the translation of which reads:

                             Republic of Angola
                             Ministry of Health
                       Provincial Government of Angola
                         Cajueiros General Hospital

I, Marta Ngola, having held a degree for the past 25 years from Antonio
Agostino Neto University in the speciality of Psychology and having worked
at the Bom Jesus clinic for over 15 years with the General Council of
Angola No 18045.

Having observed the patient DOROTEIA MANUEL FRANCISCO BERNANDO NETO, I have
concluded that she is suffering from psychological stress and due to that
condition is incapable of taking the English test, either at the current
time or in the future, due to mental incapacity.

The aforementioned stress has worsened due to the fact that her husband is
away and due to recent childbirth.

    15. It was not suggested that the  claim  the  appellant  is  suffering
        psychological stress lacks credibility. Psychological stress is the
        mental and/or emotional strain from activities and events in  life.
        The birth of a child and  caring  for  a  young  baby  without  the
        further support and being apart from another child and her husband,
        who is in the United Kingdom, together with  the  stresses  of  the
        visa refusal are all factors that may contribute to this.
    16.  The  term  "mental  incapacity"  has  a  specific  meaning  within
        psychiatry, but there  is  no  formal  diagnosis  of  a  recognised
        condition or the reasons why such could be shown  to  be  met.  The
        report does not specify any psychiatric  illness,  and  indeed  the
        author is noted to be a psychologist. It appears that what is being
        said is that due to the  stress  faced  by  the  appellant  she  is
        claiming that she cannot at this stage undertake the required test.


    17. Even if that is how the appellant feels the guidance requires more.
        Whilst the guidance is not a  rule  or  statute  it  sets  out  the
        Secretary of State's position in relation to circumstances in which
        the requirements for entry clearance approved by Parliament can  be
        bypassed. The statement that the situation is one that will prevail
        now and in the future is also too generalised and not supported  by
        adequate reasoning or evidence.
    18. There is sympathy for the appellant in relation to the situation in
        which she finds herself, but that is not enough  as  recognised  in
        the guidance.
    19. It must be remembered that A1 CEFR is at the  bottom  of  the  CEFR
        language levels  hierarchy.  At  this  level,  the  focus  is  upon
        exchanging basic information such as the ability  of  a  person  to
        introduce themselves and demonstrate capacity for small talk around
        such  issues  as  where  they  come  from,  and   general   matters
        communicated at a slower pace and using very simple words. In  this
        respect it must be noted that the evidence suggests  the  appellant
        and sponsor communicate in both English and  Portuguese.  This  may
        indicate their standard of conversation  is  at  the  requisite  A1
        level with no evidence of issues of  stress  or  "mental  capacity"
        impacting upon the appellant's ability to speak  English  with  her
        husband. It is hard to see how the appellant's claim  is  supported
        by the psychologist That she cannot take the test is not made  out.
        She may not wish to do so but that is a different matter.
    20. There was also discussion at the hearing about the ability  of  the
        appellant to be able to travel to Namibia to sit the test. I  agree
        with the submission of Mr McVeety that  insufficient  evidence  was
        provided to show the appellant could not travel  to  Namibia.  That
        country's borders are open and insufficient evidence  was  provided
        to establish that the appellant would not be  admitted  to  Namibia
        under the Covid -19 regime in place, or for any other reason.
    21. The claim of inability to travel as Angola is a country  and  state
        of war was not made out. Whilst the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
        website  referred  to  at  the  hearing  advises  against  all  but
        essential travel for British citizens travelling to Angola to:

            . the province of Cabinda (but not including Cabinda city)
            . within 1km of the border with the Democratic Republic of
              Congo in Lunda Norte province, except at official border
              crossings and their access roads.
            . the remainder of Angola based on the  current  assessment  of
              COVID-19 risks

it is not made out the conditions within the country itself are such  as  to
make prospects of travel unreasonable for those  who  live  in  the  country
such as the appellant. The  appellant's  home  address  given  in  the  Visa
application form is in Luanda, from where flights to Namibia depart,  making
travel outside the capital unnecessary.
    22. It was not made out that the country conditions in Namibia make  it
        unsafe as a  result  of  armed  conflict,  or  otherwise  for,  the
        appellant to travel there.
    23. The appellant has  provided  no  evidence  to  show  that  she  has
        attempted to secure a visa or to complete the  formal  requirements
        required to enable entry to Namibia, which undermines her claim not
        to be able to travel there or gain access.
    24. There are two main means of travel from Angola to Namibia being  by
        aeroplane and by bus. It is noted from the  Visa  application  form
        that the reason given by  the  appellant  for  why  she  could  not
        complete the English language  test  was  that  she  was  medically
        exempt rather than that  it  was  impractical  or  unreasonable  to
        expect her to travel to another test centre. That claim arose at  a
        later date after the refusal.
    25. All the evidence of the family finances, including evidence of  the
        purchase of a return flight  ticket  to  Angola  by  the  UK  based
        sponsor, and ability  to  satisfy  the  financial  requirements  of
        Appendix FM is insufficient to rebut the presumption that there are
        adequate financial resources available. As Mr McVeety noted in  his
        submissions it was not claimed there are insufficient resources for
        the appellant and the child to fly to the United Kingdom, which  is
        probably far more expensive than the cost of flying from Angola  to
        Namibia, although details of such costings were  not  part  of  the
        evidence as no such enquiries appear to have been made.
    26. It is not made out the appellant could not study  for  the  English
        language test in Angola and then travel  to  Namibia  to  take  the
        test, which would not require an extended stay.
    27. I do not find the appellant has  made  out  an  entitlement  to  an
        exemption from the requirement to demonstrate the minimum level  of
        English  language  required  to  satisfy  the  Immigration   Rules.
        Accordingly, I find the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
        that the appellant had failed to explain why she should  be  exempt
        from meeting the English language  requirement,  resulting  in  the
        refusal referred to above  has  not  been  shown  to  be  wrong  or
        contrary to the law or guidance, or an unreasonable  or  irrational
        exercise of the ECO's discretion. I find the appellant has not made
        out she can satisfy the Appendix FM of the Rules for this reason.
    28. This is a  human  rights  appeal  and  therefore  even  though  the
        appellant cannot meet  the  Immigration  Rules  a  full  article  8
        assessment is required.
    29. It was not disputed that the appellant has  family  life  with  her
        husband, with her older child in the UK, or with the youngest child
        who lives with the appellant in Angola, or they with each other.
    30. It was not made out that the needs of the child in the UK  are  not
        being met by her father.
    31. The generalised statement made by Ms Hussain that  the  best  place
        for children is to be with their parents is accepted, but  that  is
        not the determinative issue. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
        and Immigration Act 2009 requires the Home Office to carry out  its
        existing functions in a way that takes into  account  the  need  to
        safeguard and promote the  welfare  of  children  in  the  UK.  The
        difficulty for the appellant is one that has run through  the  case
        from start to finish, namely the lack of evidence to prove what  is
        being alleged.
    32. There was nothing from an Independent Social Worker  or  any  other
        source to support the contention that the best interests of the  UK
        based child required the appellant to be admitted  to  the  UK  and
        that any refusal to do so would be disproportionate to  the  impact
        upon the child.
    33. It is accepted that families are best kept together and there is at
        this stage an application pending  for  the  younger  child  to  be
        recognised as a British citizen. That is, however, not the position
        at the date of the hearing, and although Ms Hussain submitted  that
        the child being granted citizenship  was  inevitable  that  is  not
        necessarily the case; especially as it appears  that  the  Passport
        Office require an interview. If the younger child is recognised  as
        a British citizen that may be a material  change  in  circumstances
        that warrants an application in the future.
    34. When considering the  proportionality  of  any  interference  in  a
        protected right, in this case the family life relied  upon  by  the
        appellant, it is necessary to consider the  provisions  of  section
        117 of the Nationality, Immigration Asylum Act. In Rhuppiah  [2016]
         EWCA  Civ 803 it  was  held  that  if   the   Claimant   had   not
        been  able  to  speak  English, that would  have  been  a  negative
        factor under section 117B(2).  That was  accepted  by  the  Supreme
        Court in Rhuppiah  [2018]  UKSC 58.
    35. In this appeal there is insufficient evidence to establish that the
        appellant could not take reasonable steps to ensure she was able to
        comply with the requirements of  the  Rules.  This  is  a  material
        factor.
    36.  I  do  not  find  the  medical  evidence  establishes  exceptional
        circumstances sufficient to outweigh the public  interest  in  this
        case, either individually or cumulatively. As noted above, there is
        no firm  clinical  diagnosis  or  an  explanation  of  how  such  a
        diagnosis was reached by reference to accepted diagnostic criteria.
        There was no evidence that the appellant's circumstances  are  such
        that the child in Angola is not being well cared for.
    37. British citizenship of the child in the United  Kingdom  is  not  a
        trump card. There is adequate evidence to show  a  disproportionate
        effect of the ECO's decision. The English language requirement  has
        been recognised  as  being  an  important  element  of  ability  to
        integrate into the United Kingdom.
    38. It has not been shown the best  interests  of  any  child  are  the
        determinative issue.
    39.  Having  undertaken  the  necessary  balancing   exercise,   whilst
        recognising the appellant wishes to be able to join her husband and
        daughter in the United Kingdom and  they  her,  the  appellant  has
        failed to establish to  the  required  standard  applicable  in  an
        appeal of this nature that the balance is tipped in her  favour.  I
        make a specific findings that the  respondent  has  discharged  the
        burden  upon  her  to  the  required  standard  to  show  that  the
        determinative factor which requires greater weight being  given  to
        it than the points relied upon  by  the  appellant  is  the  public
        interest and that the decision is therefore proportionate.
    40. The solution for the appellant may lie in the future, either by her
        demonstrating  an  ability  to   satisfy   the   English   language
        requirement by taking and passing the required test or as a  result
        of a qualifying material change in the family circumstances.

Decision

    41. I dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    42. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 25 August 2021





