
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15808/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On December 21, 2018                         |On January 18, 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                mr Raju Miah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom in April  1999
    and on  July  13,  1999  he  applied  for  leave  to  remain  but  this
    application was refused on March 3, 2010.  On February 11, 2015 he  was
    encountered and served with form IS151A and on May 20, 2015 he  made  a
    human rights claim.  The respondent refused this application on May 26,
    2015 and on June 3, 2015 he appealed  that  decision  and  following  a
    hearing his appeal rights were deemed exhausted.

 2. On February 19, 2016  he  lodged  an  application  to  remain  via  the
    family/private life route, but this was refused by  the  respondent  on
    June 14, 2016.  The appellant appealed this decision on June  23,  2016
    under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    and his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Boyes  on
    November 23, 2017 who in a decision promulgated  on  January  17,  2018
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on the following grounds:

      a) He did not accept the appellant and Ms [NB] were in a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship.

      b) There were no very significant obstacles to his reintegration  into
         Bangladesh.

      c) There were no compelling circumstances justifying a grant of  leave
         outside of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Grounds of appeal were then lodged with the  Tribunal  on  February  1,
    2018 but Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever refused  permission  to
    appeal on July 12, 2018.  Permission to appeal was  renewed  on  August
    16, 2018 and Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan granted permission to  appeal
    finding it arguable the Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the witness evidence or make credibility findings in relation
    to whether the appellant and his partner were in a  genuine  subsisting
    relationship.  However the Judge cautioned that such an error  may  not
    be  material  as  the  appellant  would  have  to   show   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  United
    Kingdom given the fact he had resided here  unlawfully  throughout  his
    time in this country.

 4. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr Islam submitted that the sponsor's  daughter  and  two  friends  had
    attended and given evidence and had provided witness  statements.   The
    Judge had not given any reasons why the witness evidence  did  not  tip
    the balance or make any specific findings about  their  evidence.   The
    Judge was required to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  evidence  and  he
    submitted that the Judge had failed to do this.   The  Judge's  finding
    was that the Judge held against the appellant the fact that he may have
    been assisting Ms [NB] for pay  bills  etc.  and  this  may  well  have
    influenced how he felt about the relationship that was  said  to  exist
    between the appellant and Ms [NB] but he failed to consider why or  how
    their witnesses may have been involved in this scheme.  Mr  Islam  also
    raised the issue that the sponsor was undergoing dialysis and  although
    this did not appear to have been fully highlighted to the Judge at  the
    hearing this could also have amounted to insurmountable obstacles.  The
    Judge also failed to give due weight to the fact that the appellant had
    family in this country.  Whilst accepting  there  were  inconsistencies
    between the evidence of the appellant  and  sponsor  he  submitted  the
    error of law centred on the failure to consider  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses as stated above.

 6. Mr Duffy responded  to  those  submissions  and  stated  there  was  no
    evidence that any insurmountable obstacles were advanced  and  to  meet
    the Immigration  Rules  under  Section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules this had to  be  shown.   He  argued  the  Judge  did
    consider the evidence in the round and the appellant  lacked  knowledge
    in important areas about his and the  sponsor's  relationship  and  the
    Judge took those inconsistencies and lack  of  knowledge  into  account
    when considering credibility.  The Judge did note  the  witnesses,  who
    attended and gave oral evidence and provided  witness  statements,  did
    support the appellant's case but he referred to  paragraph  38  of  the
    decision when effectively the Judge rejected their evidence against the
    background of the inconsistencies.  He submitted this was a matter  for
    the Judge and that the decision had been adequately reasoned  but  even
    if there had been an error he  relied  on  the  observations  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan who had indicated that  there  was  no  evidence
    before the Tribunal  of  insurmountable  obstacles  and  therefore  the
    appeal was bound to fail in any event.

 7. Mr Islam responded to those submissions referring to paragraphs 38,  39
    and 42 of the Judge's decision.  He pointed  out  that  the  Judge  had
    incorrectly referred to the test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) HC  395  by
    referring to insurmountable obstacles at paragraph 42 of  the  decision
    when in fact it should have been very significant obstacles.  Mr  Duffy
    submitted that this was a slip of the pen and the Judge had  identified
    the correct test  in  paragraph  41  and  observed  that  the  test  of
    insurmountable obstacles was a lower test in any event  than  the  very
    significant obstacles test.

    FINDINGS

 8. This is an appeal against the decision  by  the  Judge  to  refuse  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 9. The key issue was whether or not there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and the Judge had  to  take  into  account  not  only  the
    written and oral evidence of the appellant, his wife and witnesses  but
    he also  had  to  take  into  account  inconsistencies  that  had  been
    highlighted.  Those inconsistencies can  be  found  from  paragraph  30
    onwards in the Judge's decision.

10. The Judge had to decide was whether the evidence of the appellant,  his
    wife and the three witnesses outweighed the inconsistencies that  arose
    in the hearing bearing in mind the respondent had  raised  the  genuine
    and subsisting nature of the relationship.

11. It is argued by Mr Islam that the Judge had failed to make findings  in
    respect of the evidence but looking at the evidence and  in  particular
    paragraphs 34 to 37 I am satisfied the Judge noted the evidence of  the
    wife and the three witnesses and importantly at paragraph  38  recorded
    the fact that the witnesses did support the claim the appellant and his
    wife were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

12. The Judge then had to consider whether he accepted that evidence and as
    can  be  seen  in  paragraph  38  he  did  not,  and   he   found   the
    inconsistencies outweighed the other evidence.

13. It is argued that he should have given further reasons, but  the  Judge
    took the evidence of the three witnesses on face value and subsequently
    concluded that the inconsistencies outweighed  their  evidence  and  he
    then concluded in paragraph 49 that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRP1.7 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

14. The Judge did consider the issue of  the  relationship  and  whilst  he
    could have given more reasons for not  accepting  the  evidence  it  is
    clear from paragraph 38 he did not accept the evidence put  forward  by
    the  appellant  and   his   wife   because   there   were   significant
    inconsistencies in that evidence.  That finding was open to  the  Judge
    and therefore his core finding that they were  not  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship was open to him.

15. I do not go on to deal  with  the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles
    because that, as has been accepted at the hearing before me, would only
    arise if there had  been  an  error  in  respect  of  the  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship finding.   However,  I  do  note  the  lack  of
    evidence in the appellant's bundle of such obstacles.

16. The next issue that was tentatively raised at the  hearing  related  to
    paragraph 42 and that is the private  life  claim  that  was  advanced.
    There was little or no evidence of  this  private  life  and  whilst  I
    accept the point Mr Islam advanced in relation to the appropriate  test
    to apply I am satisfied the  correct  test  was  properly  recorded  at
    paragraph 41 of the decision and I accept  the  point  advanced  by  Mr
    Duffy that  it  was  probably  a  slip  of  the  pen  rather  than  the
    application of an incorrect test.

17. Turning finally to the consideration outside of the Rules it  seems  to
    me that this whole appeal centred around  the  genuine  and  subsisting
    nature of the relationship and on the basis of the Judge's finding  the
    findings made under Article 8 were clearly open to the Judge.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

18. I therefore dismiss the appeal.


Signed                              Date         10/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date     10/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
