
                                                              [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15877/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 May 2019                                 |On 7 June 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                          Ellen Joy Susan Enriquez
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slater, Counsel instructed by Douglas Simon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 6 August 1999.
    On 28 July 2017 she applied for entry clearance to join her father, who
    is a British citizen, in the UK.  Her application was refused on the
    basis that it had not been demonstrated that her father has had sole
    responsibility for her within the meaning of paragraph 297(i)(e) of the
    Immigration Rules and that there were not serious or compelling
    circumstances under paragraph297(i)(f).  The appellant appealed to
    First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Obhi.  In a decision promulgated on 3 December 2018 the judge
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that
    decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. At paragraph 28 of the decision the judge summarised some of the
    evidence given by the appellant's father. Amongst other things, the
    judge stated that the appellant's father claimed that the only
    involvement the appellant's mother has had with the appellant is that
    she met her sometimes for birthdays and other special occasions.

 3. The judge did not accept that the relationship between the appellant
    and her mother was as limited as the appellant's father claimed. At
    paragraph 29 the judge found that both of the appellant's parents have
    played a role in her life, and that the role of her mother had been
    "played down".

 4. The judge found at paragraph 31 of the decision that there was an
    absence of evidence about the appellant's mother.  The judge observed,
    in this regard, that the appellant had not submitted a statement even
    though she was clearly capable of doing so; and found that information
    about the mother had been withheld.

 5. At paragraph 32 the judge stated, inter alia, that there was no
    evidence of any direct contact between the appellant's father and the
    appellant's school or doctor and that:

         "The only important decision which he appears to have made are
         firstly to come to the UK so that he could earn more money and
         provide for her, but by his own evidence he has not always been
         able to do that because he has not held employment consistently and
         to support her application, on the threshold of her attaining her
         majority to come to the UK.  He has prioritised being with her and
         has, as he invites me to find her mother has, moved away and
         started a new family.  Her mother has moved away in the Philippines
         and he has moved away to a different country."

 6. The judge found that the appellant has lived firstly with her
    grandparents and then with her uncle.  In terms of financial support,
    at paragraph 30 the judge stated that although there is evidence of the
    appellant's father providing the appellant with financial support for
    three years from 29 April 2014, this has been done jointly with his
    brother.  The judge also found at paragraph 30 that there is little
    evidence of direct decision making by the appellant's father in respect
    of the appellant.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 7. The grounds of appeal argue, firstly, that the decision contains a
    factual error.  At paragraph 28 the judge stated that the appellant's
    father said that the appellant meets her mother sometimes for her
    birthdays and other special occasions.  The grounds of appeal assert
    that there was no evidence to support this finding and it is factually
    incorrect.  The grounds contend that no source is provided for this
    crucial evidence and that this erroneous factual finding goes to the
    core of the appeal because it led the judge to treat this as a "two-
    parent case" rather than then a case where a parent has abandoned the
    child.

 8. The second ground of appeal argues that the judge misconstrued the test
    of sole responsibility by imposing an excessive requirement as to
    financial support and that the judge imposed too high a standard by
    requiring that the appellant's father to demonstrate that he - and only
    he - cares for and supports the appellant.

 9. The third ground of appeal argues that the judge erred by finding that
    evidence in relation to the appellant's mother's involvement had not
    been provided fully.  This ground states that it is unclear how the
    judge could have concluded that the evidence had not been presented
    transparently if she also believed - wrongly - that there was candid
    evidence of ongoing occasional in person contact between the appellant
    and her mother that undermined the core of the appellant's appeal.

10. The fourth ground of appeal argues that the judge was wrong to consider
    that it was not in the appellant's best interests to relocate to the UK
    and that the judge failed to take into account the views of the
    appellant and her family.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on the
    basis that the judge arguably made a finding of fact that the appellant
    met with her mother on occasions, which was contrary to the evidence
    before her.

12. At the error of law hearing Mr Slater acknowledged that there was, in
    fact, evidential support for finding that the appellant maintained
    contact with her mother and met her on occasions as at paragraph 9 of
    his statement dated 24 July 2017 the appellant's father stated:

         "I understand that the appellant's mother maintains some form of
         contact with her daughter.  The appellant has told me that they
         meet sometimes for birthdays or other special occasions."


13. Mr Slater also acknowledged that at paragraph 11 of his statement dated
    25 October 2018, the appellant's father stated:

         "I know that the appellant has had very limited contact with her
         mother who has sent her birthday and Christmas cards hence the
         appellant's mother's involvement in her life can be best described
         as casual and rare."


14. Mr Slater argued that although the judge did not make a factual error
    at paragraph 28 of the decision, the level of involvement described by
    the appellant's father falls considerably short of undermining the
    appellant's claim that the appellant's father has sole responsibility
    for her.




15. Mr Slater referred to the distinction drawn in the case law on "sole
    responsibility"(notably in Buydov v Entry Clearance Officer Moscow
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1739 and TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e) 'sole responsibility')
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049) between "two parent cases" and "one parent
    cases" and highlighted that even where there is a degree of contact
    with a second parent the other parent can nonetheless have sole
    responsibility.  He noted in particular the reference to Buydov to
    Alagon v ECO, Manila [1983] Imm AR 336, a case where a mother was found
    to have sole responsibility even though the child's father occupied the
    same house as the child.  The mother in that case was found to have
    sole responsibility on the basis that even though the father lived in
    the same house, he had only a passive role and was not consulted in and
    took no major decisions about the child.

16. Mr Slater's central argument, in sum, was that although the judge did
    not factually err by stating that there is some degree of contact
    between the appellant and her mother, he erred in-law by treating that
    limited contact as being inconsistent with the appellant's father
    having sole responsibility for the appellant.

17. Mr Slater also argued that the judge appears to have misdirected
    herself as to the required level of financial support from the father.
    He maintained that it was not necessary to show that the father has
    always provided financial support, or that he makes day-to-day
    decisions. He also argued that the judge failed to take into account
    the evidence of the appellant's father's involvement with the
    appellant's school.

18. Mr Avery argued that the judge accurately described the factual
    evidence about the involvement of the appellant's mother in the
    appellant's life and was entitled to reach the view that the
    appellant's father had tried to downplay it. He argued that the judge
    was entitled to find that the appellant had not discharged the burden
    of showing that her father had sole responsibility for her.

Analysis

19. The first ground of appeal argues that it was factually incorrect for
    the judge to find - and there was no evidence to support the finding -
    that the appellant's mother maintains contact with the appellant and
    meets her on special occasions.

20. This argument is plainly wrong. Firstly, if the judge had made this
    finding (which she did not) there would have been a clear evidential
    basis to do so because the appellant's father stated in his witness
    statement that his understanding was that there was contact of this
    type between the appellant and her mother.

21. Secondly, this ground is misconceived because it is based on a
    misconception that the judge made a finding of fact that the level of
    contact between the appellant and her mother was as described by the
    appellant's father (and as summarised by the judge at paragraph 28 of
    the decision). But that is not what the judge found. The judge did not
    accept the appellant's father's claim that the only contact between the
    appellant and her mother was that they met on special occasions.
    Rather, the judge found that the appellant's father had downplayed the
    level of the mother's involvement and that she was involved, to a far
    greater extent than claimed, in the appellant's life.

22. The written evidence of the appellant's father - where a degree of
    contact between the appellant and her mother was acknowledged - is
    inconsistent with his oral evidence where, according to the grounds of
    appeal (at paragraph 8 of the grounds), when asked about contact
    between the appellant and her mother he denied there had ever been any
    in-person contact and said that the appellant's mother had only sent
    birthday cards when the appellant was a baby. A statement by the
    appellant (who is clearly the person best placed to give evidence about
    her contact with her mother) would undoubtedly have assisted the judge
    in forming a view about the appellant's relationship with her mother
    but, as highlighted by the judge, she did not submit a witness
    statement.

23. In these circumstances, I have no hesitation in finding that the judge
    was entitled to conclude that the involvement of the appellant's mother
    was downplayed and that the evidence before her did not establish that
    the appellant's father has had greater responsibility for, or
    involvement with, the appellant then her mother.

24. Based on the judge's findings of fact (which, as I have explained, she
    was entitled to make), it follows that this is a case where both
    parents are involved in the appellant's upbringing and therefore, as
    set out in the headnote to TD, it would be "exceptional that one of
    them will have sole responsibility".

25. Once it is recognised that this is a "two-parent case" it becomes clear
    that the appellant cannot succeed on any of the grounds of appeal. The
    other grounds of appeal presuppose that this is a "one parent case"
    where the judge was considering the extent of the responsibility the
    appellant's father took for the appellant in the context of him being
    the only responsible parent who was relying on his family in the
    Philippines to provide a home and day-to-day care for the appellant.
    However, this is a case where the judge found that the appellant's
    father did not have sole responsibility within the meaning of paragraph
    297(i)(e) because he, more likely than not, has not taken any more
    responsibility for the appellant than has her mother.

26. I am satisfied that the judge, for the reasons she gave, was entitled
    to find that the appellant did not discharge the burden of showing that
    on the balance of probabilities her father has had sole responsibility
    for her upbringing. The appeal is therefore dismissed.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 5 June 2019                   |

