
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15641/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                           |On 21 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                             Muhammad Usman ASIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal of Counsel, NR Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 3 June 1985.  He  first
    entered the United Kingdom on 22 July 2007 with entry  clearance  as  a
    student, which leave was subsequently extended and varied to that of  a
    post-study worker and a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.

 2. On 13 April 2016, he applied for  leave  to  remain  out  of  time  and
    outside the Immigration Rules and subsequently varied that  application
    for indefinite leave to remain, which  was  ultimately  refused  on  10
    November 2017 with the right of appeal.  The Appellant lodged an appeal
    against that decision on 21 November  2017.   His  appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rothwell for hearing on 8 August 2018.
     In a decision and reasons promulgated on 30  August  2018,  the  Judge
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that,  whilst  it  was  accepted  the
    Appellant had continuous leave to remain until 18 March 2016, the issue
    was whether his repeated  applications  made  from  that  date  onwards
    counted towards the ten year qualifying period for indefinite leave  to
    remain.  The Judge noted  that  the  Appellant  stated  he  made  these
    applications with 28 days and then varied them and asserted  that  this
    does count towards ten years' lawful  continuous  leave.  At  [16]  the
    Judge found the applications did not count towards that  leave  due  to
    the fact that the leave was extended pursuant  to  Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and thus the  Appellant  had  only  amassed  eight
    years and eight months' continuous lawful leave to remain.   The  Judge
    noted at [17]  that  the  Appellant's  counsel  disavowed  reliance  on
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and she proceeded to  dismiss
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made, in time, against this
    decision on the basis that the judge had failed to  take  into  account
    Article 8 of the ECHR and it was incumbent upon her to do so given that
    this was a human rights claim.  A number of other points  were  raised,
    including the assertion that the judge had abused her discretion;  that
    there were no adequate reasons for making the decision and there was  a
    failure to make factual findings.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes  in
    a decision dated 10 October 2018, solely in respect of  the  Article  8
    issue and no renewed application for permission to appeal was  made  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Iqbal  submitted  that
    Article 8 was clearly raised in the grounds of appeal that had not been
    determined by the Judge; that the Judge had remained focused on whether
    or not the Appellant was able to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules and did not direct her mind  outside  the
    Rules to consider the Appellant's private life in the  United  Kingdom.
    Whilst it is the case that the Appellant's wife  and  daughter  are  in
    Pakistan, it was still necessary to consider  the  Appellant's  private
    life pursuant to Article 8. Mr Iqbal stated that Mr Nasim, counsel  for
    the Appellant at  that  time,  whilst  he  had  abandoned  reliance  on
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, had not abandoned Article 8 and  it  was
    clear from [9] of the Judge's decision that the Appellant had raised  a
    private life claim.  He submitted that the Respondent's refusal  letter
    does address the issue of exceptional circumstances  for  consideration
    of Article 8 outside the Rules and the Appellant had relied on this and
    whether his reliance is strong or weak it still requires determination.
     With reference to the fact that at  [9]  of  the  decision  the  Judge
    recorded that the Appellant has been in the UK for eleven years and has
    family and friends here, but that they  had  not  come  to  the  appeal
    hearing before the Tribunal, this still does not absolve  the  Tribunal
    from determining the Appellant's private life claim.

 6. In her submissions, Ms Everett acknowledged  that  the  judge  had  not
    dealt with Article 8 of the ECHR and she was not seeking to persuade me
    that she had. Her submission was that, having gone through  the  bundle
    of evidence and the Record of Proceedings, the  claim  could  not  have
    succeeded under Article 8, in that there were no  statements  from  the
    Appellant's family and friends and the Appellant could  not  reasonably
    have an expectation that he could  remain  permanently  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Ms Everett submitted, in the alternative, that  it  would  be
    appropriate to determine  the  appeal  today.   Whilst  the  Respondent
    accepts in general terms that ten years' lawful  residence  would  meet
    the proportionality test, the Appellant does not have ten years' lawful
    residence, his wife and daughter remain in Pakistan and it is difficult
    to see how the judge could reach a different decision.

 7. In reply, Mr Iqbal submitted that Ms Everett's submissions amounted  to
    an invitation to remake the  decision,  as  opposed  to  defending  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in principle.  He invited  me
    to find a material error of law and then to  address  the  question  of
    disposal.  He submitted in respect of disposal that it was procedurally
    unfair and that the Article 8 aspect required determination, either  by
    the Upper Tribunal or by way of remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I permitted Ms Everett to reply on the question of  disposal  only,  to
    which she submitted that the Appellant did have an opportunity to fully
    ventilate the issues surrounding his private life and for his appeal to
    be prepared on that basis.  She submitted that there was no dispute  in
    respect of the evidence.

     Notice of Decision

 9. I found a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which is the failure to make any findings in respect  of  the
    Appellant's private life in the United Kingdom.  Whilst it is the  case
    that counsel for the Appellant  at  that  time  disavowed  reliance  on
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, as is recorded by the Judge at  [17]  of
    the decision, it is unclear whether or not the Appellant's claim  based
    on his private life was also disavowed. Given that the Appellant  right
    of appeal was based on his human rights i.e. his private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, this was a matter addressed in the Respondent's refusal
    decision and raised in  the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal,  I  have
    concluded that it was incumbent upon the Judge to  address  whether  or
    not there were exceptional circumstances  justifying  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

10. Having sought submissions from the parties, Ms Everett, accepting  that
    there was no factual dispute and thus there was no requirement to cross-
    examine the Appellant, I preserve the findings  of  fact  made  by  the
    First tier Tribunal Judge and proceed to remake the decision myself  in
    respect of Article 8, based on the evidence on the Tribunal file.

11. I make the following findings:

11.1.    the Appellant has lived continuously in the UK  since  his  arrival
on 22 July 2007 with   entry clearance as a student. He subsequently  varied
that leave  on  a  number  of   occasions  until  he  became  appeal  rights
exhausted on 18 March 2016. He then made     an  application  for  leave  to
remain out of time on 13 April 2016,  which  was  refused  on       7  March
2017, with no right of appeal. He made a further  application  on  14  March
2017 and varied this on 27  June  2017  to  an  application  for  ILR.  This
application was   refused on 10 November 2017 and the  Appellant  lodged  an
appeal on 21 November  2017;

11.2.    thus I find that the Appellant has resided for the most  part  with
leave to remain,  until 18 March 2016  and  he  has  since  that  time  been
endeavouring to resolve his     immigration status.

11.3. I accept  given  his  length  of  residence  that  the  Appellant  has
established a private life      in the  United  Kingdom.  However,  reliance
upon paragraph 276DE of the     Immigration Rules was disavowed  before  the
First tier Tribunal thus the question is     whether there  are  exceptional
circumstances which mean that removal of the     Appellant from  the  United
Kingdom would be unjustifiably harsh. Whilst no  arguments were put  forward
on this basis,  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the  fact  that       the
Appellant has resided for  8  years  and  8  months  lawfully  and  that  he
submitted     his application for further leave to remain within 28 days  of
becoming appeal rights     exhausted and then  for  a  second  time  7  days
after  the  refusal  of  that  application  that    this  does   amount   to
exceptional circumstances meriting  consideration  of  his  private     life
outside the Rules.

11.4.    I find that removal of the Appellant to Pakistan  would  amount  to
an interference   with his established private life in the  United  Kingdom.
The question is whether    removal would be disproportionate.

11.5.     I  have  taken  account  of  the  public  interest  considerations
pursuant to section 117B of     the NIAA 2002. I am prepared to accept  that
the Appellant speaks English, given that      he  successfully  completed  a
Science degree at Oxford Brookes University and  has    passed  the  English
language test. The Appellant in his statement at [17] states that  he    has
financially supported himself, albeit I have  not  been  provided  with  any
details of    how he  has  done  so.  However,  it  is  the  case  that  the
Appellant's leave has at all times   been  precarious  cf.  Rhuppiah  [2018]
UKSC 58 at [44] and he  has  not  adduced  any    evidence  that  he  has  a
qualifying partner or children.

11.6.    whilst the Appellant  alludes  in  his  statement  to  having  many
friends and some  relatives, there is no evidence that he has a family  life
in the UK and there is no  evidence before me to show that it would  not  be
possible for him to maintain  his     private  life  ties  in  the  UK  from
Pakistan. I bear in mind [49] of Rhuppiah where their     Lordships held:

         "49...as both parties agree, the effect of section 117A(2)(a) is
clear. It recognises that the
         provisions of section 117B cannot put decision-makers in a strait-
jacket which           constrains them to determine claims under article 8
inconsistently with the article itself.          Inbuilt into the concept
of "little weight" itself is a small degree of flexibility; but it is in
     particular section 117A(2)(a) which provides the limited degree of
flexibility recognised          to be necessary in para 36 above. Although
this court today defines a precarious            immigration status for the
purpose of section 117B(5) with a width from which most        applicants
who rely on their private life under article 8 will be unable to escape,
section       117A(2)(a) necessarily enables their applications
occasionally to succeed. It is          impossible to improve on how, in
inevitably general Page 17 terms, Sales LJ in his         judgment
described the effect of section 117A(2)(a) as follows:

          "53. ... Although a court or tribunal should have regard to the
consideration that little       weight should be given to private life
established in [the specified] circumstances, it is       possible without
violence to the language to say that such generalised normative
guidance may be overridden in an exceptional case by particularly strong
features of the        private life in question ..."

12.  Consequently, in light of the statutory public interest  considerations
and  the   jurisprudence,  and  given  the  absence  of  evidence  that  the
Appellant's private life has    particularly strong features,  I  find  that
removal of the Appellant to Pakistan    would  not  be  unjustifiably  harsh
and thus removal would be proportionate.

     Notice of decision

13.  The decision of the First tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
error of law in  that    it  failed  to  consider  whether  removal  of  the
Appellant would be proportionate. I re- make that aspect of the appeal  with
the result that the appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
