
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15968/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision and reasons           |
|On: 27 February 2019                      |Promulgated                    |
|                                          |On: 14th March 2019            |
|                                          |                               |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                                                                MS TAHMINA
             AKTER                                     Appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

                               THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant: Mr M Bhuiyan, Legal Representative
For the respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant born on 1 January 1983, a citizen  of  Bangladesh  appealed
   against the decision of the respondent dated 29 October  2017  for  entry
   clearance to enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of a  person  present
   and settled in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  immigration
   rules. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan  dismissed  the  appellant's
   appeal.




2. The appellant's permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien who stated that it is arguable  that
   the Judge has fallen into error by failing to consider the appellant  and
   her spouses situation  holistically  as  to  whether  Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights was  engaged  because  the  appellant
   satisfied the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  therefore  that  would
   signify that refusal was disproportionate.




3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
   and stated that the appellant and the sponsor share family life  for  the
   purposes of Article 8. The Judge stated at paragraph 13, "I am  satisfied
   that there is a genuine and subsisting relationship between them and that
   they intend to live together as spouses". The judge concluded that having
   considered all the evidence he finds that the refusal does not  interfere
   with the right to respect for family life pursuant to Article  8  because
   the appellant and the sponsor have lived together in Bangladesh and there
   is nothing to show that it would be unreasonable or harsh for them to  do
   so again.




4. The appellant's legal representative submitted at the  hearing  that  the
   appellant satisfied appendix FM of the immigration  rules  and  that  the
   only  issue  taken  by  the  respondent  was  whether  the  marriage  was
   subsisting and genuine. He submitted that the Judge having found that  it
   was subsisting and genuine, fell into legal error by considering  Article
   8 in refusing the appellant's appeal.




5. Mr Tarlow accepted that the appellant had satisfied Appendix  FM  of  the
   immigration rules and that had been the only issue raised in the  reasons
   for refusal letter as to whether the appellant and her sponsor's marriage
   was subsisting and genuine. He accepted that there was no  need  for  the
   Judge to have gone on to consider Article 8 given that the appellant  had
   satisfied the requirements of the immigration rules to be  granted  entry
   clearance to join her sponsor in the United Kingdom.




6. I agree with the very sensible and fair submissions  made  by  Mr  Tarlow
   that the appellant has met the requirements of the immigration rules  and
   that her marriage to the sponsor was found to be genuine  and  subsisting
   and that they intend to live together in the United Kingdom  as  spouses.
   The Judge by then considering Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
   Human Rights and refusing the appeal was a material error.




7. I find that this is a material error of law in the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal and I set it aside. I remake the  decision  and  allow  the
   appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.




DECISON

The appellant's appeal is allowed under the immigration rules.


Signed by
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal                       Dated  this  12th
day of March 2019

Ms S Chana
