
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15133/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Van Tuan to
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Monica-Mac, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 8 August  1990.   However
    for the sake of convenience I shall continue to refer to them  as  they
    were referred to before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   A First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision dated 7  March  2019  allowed
    the appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  in  a  decision
    dated 23 April 2019 where he stated that the  grounds  appeared  to  be
    made out in that there was no decision before the judge for him to have
    considered because the appellant had left the country during his appeal
    and therefore his appeal is deemed abandoned.

3.   At the hearing it was accepted by  the  appellant's  counsel  that  the
    appellant voluntarily left the United Kingdom on 12 September 2018  due
    to what he said was his mother's  ill-health.   Section  92(8)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies because Section  8
    says that where an appellant brings an appeal from  within  the  United
    Kingdom but leaves the United Kingdom  before  the  appeal  is  finally
    determined, the appeal is to be treated as abandoned unless  the  claim
    to which the appeal relates has been certified under Section  94(1)  or
    under Section 94(b).

4.   There was no issue before me at the hearing  as  there  was  no  appeal
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh to  determine.   I  therefore
    allow the respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

5.   The respondent's appeal is allowed.

6.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 10th day of June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made. No anonymity direction is made


Signed                                  Date 10th day of June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

