
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/15456/2017
                                                               hu/15449/2017
                                                               hu/15445/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2019                        |On 05 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Farhana [l] (first appellant)
                          [Pi H] (second appellant)
                          [Pa h] (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Bustani, Paul John & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. However, for convenience I
    will refer to the parties as they were referred to in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 7 April 1980.
    In 2005 she met and married Mr [H] ("the sponsor") in Bangladesh.

 3. The sponsor is a British citizen by descent who was working and living
    in Bangladesh at the time he met the first appellant.

 4. The second appellant, who was born on 14 June 2011, and the third
    appellant, who was born on 14 September 2006, are the children of the
    first appellant and the sponsor. They were both born in, and are
    citizens of, Bangladesh.

 5. In June 2016 the sponsor returned to the UK and the appellants entered
    the UK as visitors.  Following expiry of their leave the appellants
    applied to remain in the UK on the basis that their removal would
    breach Article 8 ECHR.  The respondent rejected the application on the
    basis that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were not satisfied
    and there were not exceptional circumstances to justify allowing the
    appeal outside of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appellants appealed and their appeal was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Lawrence at Hatton Cross.  In a decision
    promulgated on 4 March 2019 the judge allowed the appeal.  The
    Secretary of State is now appealing against that decision.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal focused primarily on the third
    appellant.  The judge found that even though the third appellant had
    only been in the UK for two and a half years her removal (with her
    mother and sibling) would represent a disproportionate interference
    with her right to a family and private life in the UK because:

      a) she is settled in the UK educational system and is well-integrated
         into it (paragraph 13);

      b) her focus is on her studies and the relationships she has formed
         with her class mates, not merely her parents and siblings
         (paragraph 16);

      c) every time the subject of relocating to Bangladesh is brought up
         she weeps uncontrollably and she is mature enough to be aware of
         the relationships she will lose if returned to Bangladesh
         (paragraph 17);

      d) she is sufficiently old and mature enough to express her opinion
         about wishing to remain in the UK (paragraph 18);

      e) the appellant's father is a British citizen and his "birth right,
         as a British citizen" would be affected by the decision to refuse
         the third appellant leave as he would return with her to Bangladesh
         (paragraph 20(v)); and

      f) had the third appellant's father been born in the UK she would
         automatically be a British citizen and this is a quirk not
         addressed in the Immigration Rules (paragraph 10).

 8. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred by failing to follow
    Sections 117B(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") which mandates that only little weight should be
    attached to the third appellant's private life in the UK. The grounds
    also submit that there was no basis to attach significant weight to the
    appellant's private life in the UK when she had only been in the
    country for 33 months and in education for two years. In addition, the
    grounds submit that the judge erred by treating as relevant to the
    proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR that if the second and
    third appellants had been born in the UK they would be British
    citizens.

 9. Before me, Mr Avery submitted that the judge failed to engage with the
    fact that the 2002 Act required him to give little weight to the third
    appellant's private life. He also argued that is irrelevant that the
    second and third appellants might have been British if the law in
    respect of nationality was different.

10. Ms Bustani argued that the judge was correct to focus on the best
    interests of the third appellant.  She submitted that although the
    judge referred to case law relating to children who have been in the UK
    for seven or more years, he kept in mind that the third appellant had
    been in the UK for a substantially shorter period of time.  She
    maintained that the judge identified a range of factors which
    cumulatively entitled him to reach the conclusion that removal would be
    disproportionate.  These factors include that the third appellant's
    father is a British citizen, that she would have been British had she
    been born in the UK, that she wept uncontrollably when told she may
    have to go to Bangladesh and she has been an excellent student in the
    UK who is very well integrated.

11. The decision contains several material errors of law and therefore
    cannot stand.

12. The first error of law is that the judge failed to adequately explain
    why weight has been attached to his finding that if the second and
    third appellants had been born in the UK they would have been British
    citizens.  The appeal must be decided based on the facts as they are
    and the undisputed fact is that the second and third appellants were
    not born in UK. What might have been, if the circumstances were
    different, is immaterial.

13. Secondly, the judge has failed to adequately explain why substantial
    weight has been attached to the wish of the third appellant to remain
    in the UK.  In immigration appeals it is invariably the case that
    appellants desire to remain in or gain entry to the UK - that, after
    all, is why they are appealing. There is no explanation in the decision
    why in this case that desire has been elevated to a significant factor
    in the article 8 assessment.

14. Thirdly, the judge has failed to adequately explain why he has attached
    significant weight to the third appellant's private life in the UK when
    she had only been living in the UK for two and a half years and, if
    removed, would be leaving with her family to a country in which she has
    spent most of her life. No health problems or special needs were
    identified and it appears from the findings of fact that the third
    appellant is a healthy and well adjusted child who has done well
    integrating into the UK during the short time she has been in the
    country. There is no consideration in the decision of why the third
    appellant would not be able to integrate in Bangladesh, as she has done
    in the UK.

15. Fourthly, the judge has failed to consider the appeal through the prism
    of the Immigration Rules as there is no assessment of the obstacles (if
    any) the family would face returning to Bangladesh.

16. Both Mr Avery and Ms Bustani submitted that in the event I were to find
    an error of law the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  I agree.  The remaking of the decision will require the
    facts to be considered afresh and in these circumstances the First-tier
    Tribunal would be a more appropriate forum.  The appeal will therefore
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard before a judge other than Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Lawrence.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 3 June 2019                   |

