
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/15839/2019
      HU/15843/2019
      HU/15845/2019
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by UK Court Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 October 2020                             |On 15 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS

                                   Between

                                     JGSS
                                     KRR
                                    EGRS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by Juris Law
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellants appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Head sent on 6 March 2020 dismissing their appeals  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State dated 1 March 2019  refusing  their
      human rights  claims.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper
      Tribunal Pitt on 12 August 2020.



   2. The hearing was held remotely. Neither party objected to  the  hearing
      being held by video. Both parties participated by UK Court Skype. I am
      satisfied that a face to face hearing could not be held because it was
      not practicable and that all of the issues could be  determined  in  a
      remote hearing. Both parties confirmed that the hearing was fair.

Anonymity

   3. I make a direction for anonymity because E is a vulnerable child  with
      significant disabilities. I consider that in these  circumstances,  it
      is proportionate to protect his identity to prevent any  further  harm
      to him.

Background

   4. The appellants are all nationals of the Philippines. They are a family
      consisting of father, mother and child.  The first and second
      appellants arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2010. The third
      appellant was born in the UK on 1 October 2013. A second child L who
      is not an appellant in this appeal was born on 5 September 2017.



   5. The first and second appellants initially had valid leave as students
      until 2013. In January 2013 the appellants applied for leave to remain
      outside of the immigration rules. The application was initially
      refused on 8 October 2013 and then refused again on 16 September 2016.
      The appeal against that decision was dismissed on 8 December 2017
      ("the 2017 decision"). On 8 October 2018 the appellants applied again
      for leave to remain outside the rules on the basis of their Article 8
      ECHR right to family and private life in the UK.


   6. The third appellant, E, the eldest child of the family has Down's
      Syndrome and is profoundly disabled with significant needs. The
      appellants' position is that because of the severity of the child's
      condition, and the lack of specialist treatment he would receive in
      the Philippines, returning him to the Philippines would have a
      seriously detrimental effect on his ability to communicate, his mental
      health and his ability to participate in society. He would also be
      subject to discrimination. It would be unduly harsh to remove him to
      the Philippines and the balance of proportionality should fall in his
      favour.

The decision of the Secretary of State

   7. The Secretary of State considered that the appellants did not meet any
      of the requirements of Appendix FM in respect of family life. There
      would be no very significant obstacles to the appellants returning to
      the Philippines because the first and second appellants have cultural,
      family and social ties to the Philippines and can assist their
      children to integrate to the Philippines. It was considered that there
      was no medical evidence that medication and treatment would not be
      available to E. It would neither be a breach of Article 3 ECHR nor
      Article 8 to remove E to the Philippines on medical grounds. It is in
      the best interests of E to remain with his parents. It is not a
      disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR to remove the appellants to
      the Philippines.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   8. The appeal proceeded by way of submissions only. It was conceded by
      the appellants that the child was not a "qualifying child" in
      accordance with section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002.



   9. The judge's starting point was the 2017 decision in which it was found
      that it would not be disproportionate to Article 8 ECHR to remove the
      family from the UK. The judge considered the Independent Social Worker
      ("ISW") report and concluded that the child does not communicate at
      all and had recently adapted to a change of school in the UK which
      indicated the child's ability to adjust. The judge found that there
      were facilities in the Philippines to meet the child's specific needs
      and given the extent of his learning difficulties it is unclear how
      his learning and understanding level would be negatively impacted or
      how the child's learning capacity would not be maximised. The judge
      concluded that the family would be returning to the Philippines
      together and could reside near facilities to assist their son. The
      judge concluded that there was no evidence before him which could lead
      her to depart from the findings of First-tier Judge Callow in the 2017
      decision.



  10. The judge found that there are no very significant obstacles to
      integration in the Philippines given that the first two appellants had
      lived there most of their life, that English is the official language
      and that there is support and facilities available for children with
      Down's Syndrome. The judge found that it was reasonable to expect the
      children to leave the UK. The judge turned to Article 8 ECHR outside
      of the immigration rules. The judge referred to the best interests of
      the child and then considered the factors for and against removing the
      appellants. The judge concluded that the public interest in
      maintaining effective immigration control outweighed the appellant's
      private life in the UK and that removal of the appellants was
      proportionate to Article 8 ECHR.

The Grounds of Appeal

  11. The appellant advances several grounds of appeal.

Ground 1 - Failure to take into account evidence in respect of the child's
ability to commicate/Inadequate reasons/Error of fact

The judge has erred in consideration of the supporting evidence.  The judge
has failed to take into consideration all of the evidence before her of E's
educational, medical and psychological needs.  The judge failed to give due
regard to the entirety of the documents, thereby coming to conclusions
which could not be supported by the evidence as a whole.  Alternatively,
the judge failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting this evidence.

Ground 2 - Failure to take into account evidence in respect of the
availability of medical treatment/Inadequate reasons

The judge erred in her approach to the evidence of the availability of
treatment in the Philippines which included further evidence in respect of
the availability of services which was not before the previous judge
including passages in the ISW report with regard to the provision of
treatment and services. Alternatively, the judge failed to give adequate
reasons for rejecting this evidence.

Ground 3 - Failure to take into account material matters

The judge failed to give any consideration at all to the discrimination and
social stigmatisation that E would face as a consequence of his Down's
syndrome upon return to the Philippines.  This evidence was ignored by the
judge.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  12. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on the basis that
      it was arguable that an error of law arises from the approach to the
      medical and social circumstances evidence concerning E's difficulties
      and his needs and treatment, for example his use of Makaton, which is
      a sign language rather than a spoken form of communication, and the
      real options for specialist treatment in the areas of the Philippines
      where his family live and that arguably the judge erred in not taking
      into account the country evidence provided on the discrimination in
      the Philippines towards those with special needs.

Rule 24 response

  13. The respondent did not produce a rule 24 response.

Discussions and Conclusions

Ground 1

Failure to take into consideration relevant evidence in relation to E's
special needs/failure to give adequate reasons for rejecting
evidence/making an error in the findings on the evidence before her.

  14. The judge considered E's ability to communicate at [31] to [40].  When
      assessing E's ability to communicate the judge had regard to the ISW
      report.  At [36] the judge states:

"Unfortunately, there was no updated evidence referenced by the ISW,
indicating that Evan is in fact successfully communicating using Makaton or
that he is familiar with and responding well to the use of Makaton to
communicate.  The reports seem to indicate that E does not communicate at
all.  There was nothing from E's current school to confirm his use of
Makaton." (My emphasis)

  15. At [37] the judge continues:

"I note at page 9 of the ISW, the ISW confirms that he was unable to engage
directly with E and that it was only thought (sic) the first appellant's
focussed help and support that E was able to draw.  There was no indication
that the ISW was able to use Makaton or that E's family communicated with E
using Makaton during the course of the assessment."

  16. At [38] it is said:

         "page 15 of the ISW report it states: "E has severe learning
         disability, his learning and understanding level is that of a 0 to
         12 month old child, in contrast to his current age of 5."

  17. And at [39]:

         "At page 25 of the ISW report the ISW states: "E is unable to
         express his views directly due to his learning difficulties and
         communication difficulties.  As he is non-verbal it has not been
         possible to have any discussions with him to ascertain his views."

  18. Mr Spurling's submission was that the judge failed to consider all of
      the evidence before her in relation to E's ability to communicate,
      focussing exclusively on the ISW report rather looking at the evidence
      before her holistically.  The judge's finding at [36] is that E cannot
      communicate at all. Mr Spurling submits that this is a clear error of
      fact because there was evidence before the judge of E's ability to
      communicate.

  19. Mr Spurling also submitted that the judge had confused the words
      "verbal" with "communication" and failed to take into account that
      communication can also be non-verbal.

  20. Mr Diwnycz did not make any submissions in respect of this ground and
      did not defend the respondent's position.

  21. I am satisfied that there was additional evidence before the judge in
      respect of E's ability to communicate.  For example, in the Hampshire
      County Council "Specialist Teacher Advisory Service: Hearing
      Impairment Report" dated June 2017 it is specifically identified that
      "E is developing communication skills".  Moreover, the report very
      clearly identifies that "Makaton should be used to support spoken
      language at all times" and that E would benefit from "use of Makaton
      (all staff and family)".  Importantly the "Short Speech and Language
      Therapy Report and Therapy Target Sheet" compiled by Karen Noakes
      dated 19 October 2018 (which post-dates the 2017 decision)
      specifically addresses the fact that E is using Makaton in his daily
      life.  She states that: "E is using a limited number of Makaton signs
      such as 'milk', 'finish', 'biscuit', 'more', 'food' and 'mummy' and
      'daddy'" and that "he has used the Makaton sign for 'finished' to
      indicate he didn't want to do an activity."

  22. In June 2017 E was being encouraged to use Makaton. By 30 January
      2019, eighteen months later, a second report was prepared by Hampshire
      County Council which stated that:

 "E is using the PECS and responding to the pictures really well; he got
frustrated when he was told we were going to one place and then got delayed
- he was ready to go!  LING sounds were demonstrated using laminated cards;
this is an activity similar to E's activities bag and he is ready to start
listening now."

  23. From [32] to [40] the judge sets out the evidence of the independent
      social worker. There is no reference to the report by Karen Noakes.

  24. The judge of course is not required to set out or refer to all of the
      evidence before her and in general it should be assumed that a
      specialist judge has given consideration to the evidence in the
      bundle. Further I am conscious that it is not in general appropriate
      to interfere with a decision where adequate reasons have been given
      and the reasons for the decision are tolerably clear. Nevertheless, I
      am satisfied from the judge's comment at [13] that the judge
      considered that E cannot communicate at all and that this finding was
      at odds with the evidence which the judge set out at [40] where she
      quotes the ISW report, which states:

           "He is non-verbal in terms of communication.  He does not have
           familiarity to any other language than English, in the sense
           that he is familiar with commands given in English in the use of
           Makaton sign language."

  25. Although quoting this paragraph, the judge manifestly failed to state
      what significance she gives to the fact that E is familiar with
      English commands and responds to a mixture of English words and UK
      Makaton and her finding at [13] fails to acknowledge that
      communication can be non-verbal as well as verbal.

  26. At Annex 10 the judge was provided with an article on the Makaton
      website which confirms that in different countries there are different
      Makaton languages and that the language used by the deaf community in
      each country is different from the next, even in English-speaking
      countries.  American Makaton is different from UK Makaton, which is
      different from Australian Makaton. There is also no reference to this
      evidence in the decision.

  27. I agree with Mr Spurling that there was evidence before the judge
      which indicated that E had made progress in non-verbal communication
      since the last appeal and that he is able to communicate on a basic
      level using UK Makaton. There was also evidence in the ISW report and
      elsewhere that he is familiar with the English medium.

  28. I am satisfied that the judge erred in her approach to the evidence in
      respect of the level of E's communication and that this is a material
      error because the judge's view of the level of E's communication
      skills fed into her assessment of (a) what change there had been since
      the previous appeal which was held on 10 November 2017, (b) an
      assessment of E's best interests and (c) the impact on him of a
      potential lack of treatment and any discrimination he would  be
      subject to in the Philippines.

      Ground 2 - failure to take into account evidence in respect of the
      lack of availability of treatment in the Philippines/ inadequate
      reasons

  29. The ISW in his report at pages 16 to 19 sets out extracts from the
      Education Health and Care Plan ("EHCP") which provides a number of
      recommendations in respect of the comprehensive package of support
      that E requires due to his very complex needs which include, inter
      alia, specialist expertise in an appropriate language-rich environment
      where all teachers and surroundings are able to follow the same
      alternative and augmentative communication techniques; access to a
      consistent speech model in a quiet environment;  and one-to-one
      support to support his learning, development and keep him safe, one to
      one support to assist him to use Makaton signs and specialist
      provision that offers the opportunity to incorporate life, independent
      and self-care skills.

  30. At [48] the judge finds:

           "I find that there are facilities available to E to meet his
           specific needs, I accept that it might be that those facilities
           are expensive and are not identical to the ones available in the
           UK". (My emphasis)

  31. The judge's finding is based on an analysis of a letter from E's
      paediatrician Louise Wight which is said to be identical to the letter
      provided to FtT Judge Callow.

  32. It is Mr Spurling's submission that the judge overlooked the evidence
      of the ISW at pages 20 to 22 of the report where he goes into some
      detail about the availability of specialist provision in the
      Philippines based on his own research. The ISW's conclusion is that
      there are limitations in facilities and resources for people with
      disabilities in the Philippines and at page 20 that there is very
      unlikely to be tailor-made services in any of the state run facilities
      in the Philippines.

  33. In particular, the judge is also said to have overlooked the evidence
      from the Cagayan Valley Medical Centre, from the Dean of the College
      of social work from the University of Cagayan and a from a licensed
      social worker Kriszelle Balisi. In summary the evidence from these
      individuals is that facilities in the rural areas where E's parents
      are from are not equipped with services that cater to Down's Syndrome
      cases, some provision is available in urban areas but waiting lists
      are lengthy and private treatment is very expensive.

  34. Mr Diwnycz did not make any submissions on this point.

  35. I am satisfied that the judge's  assessment of what treatment is
      available to E in the Philippines fails to take into account or give
      adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of the ISW and other
      evidence provided in respect of what support is available to E in the
      Philippines. In particular, it is difficult to see how the judge made
      the finding that E would be able to access facilities to meet his
      specific needs. I am satisfied that this is an error on the part of
      the judge which also impacted her finding that he was not able to
      depart from the findings of FtT Judge Callow at [56] since at [28] of
      FtT Judge Callow's decision there is reference to a complete lack of
      any evidence before him of what treatment or facilities would be
      available to E in the Philippines. There was new evidence before the
      judge, which if she had taken it into account, could have potentially
      resulted in a finding that she was able to depart from those earlier
      findings.

  36. Mr Spurling also submitted that following on from this error the judge
      failed to make adequate findings on the effect on E of not receiving
      the specialist treatment he requires.

  37. The views of the judge on the effect on E of moving to the Philippines
      are set out at [48] where the judge states:

           "However, the evidence presented from the ISW confirms that in
           the summer of 2019, when Evan was five years and 8 months,
           having attended pre-school since the age of three, his learning
           and understanding level was that of a 0-12 month child It is
           therefore unclear how, if E utilised the facilities available in
           the Philippines, why his learning and understanding level would
           be negatively impacted or that E's learning potential would not
           be maximised".

  38. The implication is that the judge considers E to be so disabled that
      the provision of treatment and facilities would make no difference to
      him. I am satisfied that this view fails completely to engage with the
      professional opinion of the ISW who at having prepared a lengthy
      report reaches the conclusion:

           "based on over 30 years' experience of working with people with
           a wide range of disabilities including Down Syndrome, I believe
           without the necessary stimulation and support E will be at risk
           of not only backsliding but his progress will be hampered,
           therefore not maximising his full potential."

  39. The ISW's opinion that it was in E's best interests to remain in the
      UK was as a result of a five-hour consultation, examination of the
      EHCP and the expert's own knowledge of working with individual's with
      disabilities. The report contained conclusions about the impact on E
      of returning to the Philippines including a lack of stimulation which
      meant the difference in being able to increasingly communicate rather
      than ceasing to communicate altogether, the risk of him suffering
      depression, the barriers to him participating in society and the risk
      of stigmatisation. The ISW stated specifically at page 20:

           "that it is worth emphasising that the provisions identified
           within the EHCP if they were not considered to be beneficial to
           the local education social care ad heath authorities would not
           have identified and invested in such resources for E".

  40. It is not recorded that the respondent challenged in anyway the
      expertise of the ISW or the contents of the report. In these
      circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge's conclusion at about the
      impact the lack of treatment would have on E is flawed in that the
      judge failed to explain or give adequate reasons for rejecting the
      conclusions of the ISW.  This is relevant to the assessment of the
      best interests of the child and the Article 8 ECHR proportionality
      assessment and is material to the outcome of the appeal.

      Ground 3 - Failure to take into account the evidence on the
      discrimination E might suffer in Philippines

  41. Finally, in respect of the issue of discrimination, Mr Diwnycz for the
      respondent acknowledges that there is a complete failure by the judge
      to make any reference to the evidence in the bundle that E would
      suffer stigmatisation and increased discrimination in the Philippines
      and the effect on him of this. This was set out in the report of the
      ISW and Ms Balisi the social worker. The ISW's opinion of the effect
      of this on this severely disabled appellant is not factored at all
      into the decision and is relevant to the assessment of the best
      interests of the child and the Article 8 proportionality assessment.
      I am satisfied that this also amounts to a material error.

  42. I accept Mr Spurling's submission that had the judge taken into
      account properly the evidence from the ISW in respect of
      stigmatisation, that she may well have formed a different conclusion.
      There was a failure to take into consideration and evaluate all of the
      evidence, there was a failure to make findings on material issues and
      there was a failure to provide adequate reasons for rejecting
      evidence.

  43. Mr Diwnycz for the respondent did not seek to defend the decision in
      any way, other than to state that the decision was in my hands and to
      point to the fact that there is no Country Policy and Information Note
      on the Philippines and that he had no strong arguments to counter the
      grounds of appeal.

  44. During the appeal Mr Spurling also drew my attention to a potential
      error which was not pleaded in the grounds of appeal in that there is
      no concrete finding on whether it is in E's best interests to remain
      in the UK.  At [64] the judge refers to Section 55 Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

  45. The judge then goes on to say:

"It could be said that other things being equal it was in the best
interests of E and L that they and their parents stayed in the United
Kingdom and they continued with their lives here undisrupted.  But other
things are not equal.  The boys are not British citizens and as such have
no right to future education and healthcare in this country.  Like in the
case of Zoumbas the boys are part of a close-knit family with educated
parents and of an age where their emotional needs can only be fully met
within immediate family unit."

  46. I also note that there is potentially an error of law in this approach
      because the judge appears not to have made a firm finding based on the
      evidence before him of whether it is in E's best interests to remain
      in the United Kingdom or not with regard to his individual
      circumstances and without consideration of his parent's or his own
      immigration status.    Indeed, when the judge turns to [68] and [69]
      where she balances up the various factors  in the proportionality
      exercise, the best interests of the children do not feature either in
      factors in favour of removing the appellants or in factors in favour
      of maintaining the family life in the United Kingdom.

  47. For all these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision is vitiated by
      an error of law and should be set aside in its entirety because I find
      that the factual findings are flawed.

Disposal

  48. Both parties agreed that given the extent of the factual findings
      which need to be made, the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal to be heard de novo in front of a judge other than FtT Judge
      Head. While mindful of statement 7 of the Senior President's Practice
      Statements of 10 February 2010, I am in agreement with this course of
      action because of the extent of the factual findings required.

Decision

  49. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  50. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

  51. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo
      by a Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Head.

Anonymity Direction

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules,  the
Upper Tribunal makes an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.




Signed      R J Owens                                     Date   9  December
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens
