
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15230/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th September 2019               |On 26th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  LEON [S]
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. H Rashid, Counsel instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
         the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this  appeal  is
         Mr Leon [S].  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this
         decision I adopt the parties' status as it was before the  FtT.   I
         refer to Mr [S] as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the
         respondent.


      2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe. He arrived in  the  United
         Kingdom on 1 November  2000  and  claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was
         refused in November 2000 and an appeal against  that  decision  was
         dismissed in March 2001. In 2003 the appellant married Ms [MN] in a
         traditional  ceremony  and  there  are   two   children   of   that
         relationship. [DN] was born on 12 November 2004 and is now 14 years
         old.  [DL] was born on 1 September 2010 and is now 9 years old.


      3. The appellant's partner and their eldest child,  DN,  were  granted
         indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  on  14  October   2010,
         exceptionally, outside the immigration  rules.  The  appellant  and
         their youngest son, DL, were granted indefinite leave to remain  in
         the  UK  on  22  July  2014,  again  exceptionally,   outside   the
         immigration rules.


      4. The appellant has been convicted of  a  number  of  offences,  both
         prior to, and since the grant of indefinite  leave  to  remain.  In
         January 2016, the  appellant  was  convicted  at  South  Derbyshire
         Magistrates Court of using a motor vehicle while uninsured, driving
         whilst disqualified, taking a motor vehicle  without  consent,  and
         driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol. He received a sentence
         of 18 weeks imprisonment and was disqualified from driving for five
         years. Following that conviction, the respondent sent a  letter  to
         the appellant dated 4 March  2016,  informing  the  appellant  that
         should he come to the adverse attention of the  respondent  in  the
         future, the respondent would be  obliged  to  consider  whether  he
         should be deported.  Notwithstanding  that  letter,  the  appellant
         reoffended, and on 23  October  2017  he  was  convicted  at  South
         Derbyshire Magistrates Court of failing to provide a  specimen  for
         analysis, failing to stop when required by  a  constable,  using  a
         vehicle while uninsured, and driving whilst  disqualified.  He  was
         sentenced to 20 weeks  imprisonment  and  again  disqualified  from
         driving for five years.


      5. On 1 November 2017, the respondent served  a  deportation  decision
         upon the  appellant.  As  a  result  of  the  appellant's  repeated
         offending,  the  respondent  considered  his  deportation   to   be
         conducive to the public good and the appellant was advised that  he
         is liable to deportation by virtue of s3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration
         Act 1971.  The respondent  decided  to  make  a  deportation  order
         against the appellant under s5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.


      6. The appellant made representations to the respondent under cover of
         a letter dated  7  December  2017,  setting  out  reasons  why  the
         appellant should not be deported from the UK. For the  reasons  set
         out in a decision dated 6 July 2018,  the  respondent  refused  the
         human rights claim made by the appellant, giving rise to a right of
         appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT").   The  appellant's
         appeal was allowed for the reasons set out in the decision  of  FtT
         Judge Gurung-Thapa ("the judge") promulgated on 29 January 2019.


    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa


      7. The judge summarises the appellant's criminal history at  paragraph
         [6] of her decision:


             "... Between 13/11/2002 and 23/10/2017 the appellant  received
             9 convictions for 29 offences the majority of  which  appeared
             to be driving a motor vehicle  with  excess  alcohol,  driving
             whilst disqualified and using a vehicle  while  uninsured.  He
             was sentenced to imprisonment  as  follows,  on  10/06/2004  a
             total of 10 weeks, on 23/03/2005 for 4 months, on 04/11/2005 2
             months  but  this  was  wholly  suspended  for  2  years,   on
             19/09/2008 for 5  months,  on  24/06/2013  for  18  weeks,  on
             06/01/2016 for 18 weeks, and on 23/10/2017 for 20 weeks."


      8. The judge summarises the appellant's case at paragraphs [8] to [16]
         of the decision. The judge's findings and conclusions are  set  out
         at paragraphs [30] to [75] of the decision. The judge  referred  to
         paragraphs 398, and 399 of the immigration rules, and s117C of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge found that
         the appellant is a persistent offender.   At  paragraphs  [35]  and
         [36] she stated:


             "35. The respondent asserts that the  appellant's  deportation
             is conducive to the public good and  in  the  public  interest
             because he is a persistent offender.  In  his  submission,  Mr
             Hogg relied on the case of SC (Zimbabwe) v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
             Civ  929  and  submitted  that  in  view  of  the  appellant's
             convictions he is a persistent offender.


             36.  It would be fair to say that there was  no  challenge  to
             this assertion by Mrs Alfred in  her  submission.  I  am  also
             aware of the case of Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016]
             UKUT 00187 and I have noted  the  guidance.  In  view  of  the
             appellant's nine convictions for 29 offences, I find  that  he
             is a persistent offender."


      9. At paragraph [44]  of  the  decision,  the  judge  notes  that  the
         respondent accepts that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship with his two children who are under  the  age
         of 18, are in the UK, and are settled here. She states:


             "... The issues to be  considered  are  whether  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the children to live in the country to  which
             the appellant is to be deported and in this case Zimbabwe  and
             whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the  UK
             without the appellant pursuant to paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a)  and
             (b)."


     10. At paragraphs [47] and [48] of the decision the judge refers to the
         decisions of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53  and
         the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015]  UKUT  223  and  MAB
         (USA) [2015] UKUT 435, noting that "unduly harsh" does  not  equate
         with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely  difficult.
         She notes that it poses an elevated threshold and that  "harsh"  in
         this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. She notes that it
         is the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable, and the  addition  of
         the adverb "unduly" raises  an  already  elevated  standard,  still
         higher.


     11. At paragraphs [52] to [ 54],  the  judge  refers  to  the  evidence
         regarding DL, who is autistic, and refers to the  Education  Health
         and Care Plan drawn up in September 2016, and a  letter  from  DL's
         school that confirms that the appellant  takes  DL  to  school  and
         collects him most days, attends  parents  evenings  and  any  other
         meetings associated with his  schooling.  The  judge  accepted,  at
         [55], that the appellant plays an active  role  in  his  children's
         upbringing.  The judge accepted, at [56], that DN is now  aged  14,
         and is attending secondary school which is a critical  juncture  of
         his life. At paragraphs [57] and [58],  the  judge  refers  to  the
         evidence given by the appellant's wife. Her evidence, as set out at
         paragraph [58] was:


             "... The children were born here and it would be difficult for
             them to relocate to Zimbabwe. It would be difficult for her to
             support her children on her own and when the appellant was  in
             prison she struggled even with the support of her friends.  It
             would be difficult  to  carry  on  with  her  job  because  it
             requires her to move from one town to another. She stated that
             it would be impossible for their relationship to  continue  if
             the appellant is deported to Zimbabwe. She has spoken  to  her
             older son and this worries him a lot."


     12. The judge accepted, at [59], that the appellant and his wife  enjoy
         a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.  The  judge  accepted  her
         evidence that she will not be able to manage to look after the  two
         children and pursue her career and accepted that  she  has  no  one
         else to turn to, who could provide the support that  the  appellant
         provides.  At paragraphs [60] to [64], the judge states:


             "60. I take into account the fact that both the children  were
             born in the UK and are now aged  14  and  8  respectively  and
             although they have visited Zimbabwe on two occasion sic,  this
             would not be  the  same  as  having  to  live  permanently  in
             Zimbabwe. Considering  the  level  of  their  integration  and
             support structures in place in the UK and the interruption  to
             their current education, I find that living in Zimbabwe  would
             have a serious impact on the children.


             61.  I also accept that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             children to remain in the UK without the appellant as  I  find
             that it is in the best interests of the children to  be  cared
             for and to be raised by both parents.


             62.  I am satisfied that their mother would  have  significant
             difficulties in managing and looking after  the  children  and
             hold the family together without the help  she  receives  from
             the appellant.


             66.  Applying the approach set  out  in  MM  (Uganda)  and  KO
             (Nigeria), I find that in the circumstances of  the  appellant
             and his family, his deportation would be unduly harsh for  the
             children  and  his  partner  and  that  the  requirements   of
             paragraph 399(a) and (b) are met."


     13. The judge found, at  [65],  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
         requirements  of  paragraph  399A  of  the  immigration  rules.  At
         paragraphs [66] to [75] of the decision, the judge  considered  the
         human rights claim outside the immigration rules. The judge  found,
         at [69], that the appellant's deportation would be an  interference
         with his right to respect for his  family  life  and  that  of  his
         family. She found it is in accordance with the law and is  for  the
         legitimate aim of preventing  disorder  and  crime  within  Article
         8(2).   The  judge  referred  to  Part  5A  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She noted that s117C requires her
         to consider whether the effect of deportation on a partner or child
         would be unduly  harsh  and  that  this  provision  raises  factors
         virtually identical to those considered under paragraph 399 of  the
         immigration rules. At paragraphs [73] to [75], the judge  concluded
         as follows:


              "73.    I take into consideration what I have already said in
             relation to the children's best interests and to  the  reasons
             why I find that it would be unduly harsh to expect them to  go
             to  Zimbabwe  or  to  remain  in  this  country  without   the
             appellant. I also  take  into  consideration  the  effect  the
             appellant's  removal  would  have  on  the  partner  and   the
             consequential impact  on  the  life  of  the  family  in  this
             country.


             74.  As the court said in Beoku-Betts (at [4]) the totality of
             family life is greater than the sum of its individual parts. I
             find that modern means  of  communication  are  an  inadequate
             substitute for the real bonds that unite family members.


             75.  I accept that that (sic) the very strong interests of the
             children in having a reliable and  stable  parent  present  in
             their lives outweigh the  public  interest  in  deporting  the
             appellant."


    The appeal before me


     14. The respondent claims that the Judge erred, at [64], in determining
         the appeal applying the approach set out  in  MM  (Uganda)  and  KO
         (Nigeria).  They are competing decisions and following the decision
         of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), the  judge  should  not  have
         applied the approach set out in MM (Uganda).  The  judge  correctly
         identifies that the Supreme Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  approved  the
         approach in MK (Sierra Leone) and  MAB  (USA)  as  to  the  "unduly
         harsh" threshold,  but  the  judge  gives  inadequate  reasons  for
         finding that the threshold is met.  The  judge  fails  to  identify
         adequate reasons for the conclusion that it would be  unduly  harsh
         for the children to remain in the UK  without  the  appellant.  The
         respondent submits that although it may be in the  children's  best
         interests to be raised by both parents,  that  is  insufficient  to
         establish that it would be unduly harsh for the children to  remain
         in the UK without the appellant. Although the  deportation  of  the
         appellant would impact upon the ability of the appellant's wife  to
         look after the children,  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  fall
         significantly short of establishing undue hardship.


     15. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         McClure on 11th March 2019.  The matter comes before me to consider
         whether the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung  Thapa  is
         tainted by a material error of  law,  and  if  so,  to  remake  the
         decision.


     16. Mr Mills submits that it is now clear  from  the  authorities  that
         there is a high threshold to be met by a foreign national  criminal
         who contends that it would be unduly harsh for a child to  live  in
         the country to which the person is to be deported, or to remain  in
         the UK without the person who is to be deported. Mr  Mills  submits
         that the only reasons identified by the judge for  concluding  that
         the relevant threshold is met, are those set out at paragraphs [61]
         and [62] of the decision. The fact that it is the best interests of
         the children to be cared for, and to be raised by both parents,  or
         that the appellant's partner would have significant difficulties in
         managing and looking  after  the  children  without  the  help  she
         receives  from  the  appellant,  are   matters   that   amount   to
         inconvenience or mere difficulty and are  the  sort  of  difficulty
         faced by any parent when the  other  parent  is  removed,  but  are
         insufficient to satisfy the elevated test of undue hardship.


     17. In reply, Mr Rashid submits there is no material error  of  law  in
         the decision of the judge. He submits the judge refers at paragraph
         [48] to the elevated threshold and in reaching  her  decision,  the
         judge had regard to a number of factors.  At  paragraph  [53],  the
         judge noted that DL has a diagnosis of  ASD  and  referred  to  the
         evidence of DL needing a greater than identified level  of  support
         at school. At paragraph [54], the judge considered the part  played
         by the appellant in dropping the  children  off,  and  picking  the
         children  up,  from  school.  The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
         appellant plays an active role in the children's  upbringing.   The
         judge noted that DN is now at a critical juncture of his life,  and
         it would be difficult for the appellant's partner  to  support  the
         children on her own. She had struggled when the  appellant  was  in
         prison even with the support of her friends. The judge accepted the
         evidence of the appellant's partner that she will not  be  able  to
         manage to look after the two children and pursue  her  career,  and
         she has no one else to turn to, who could provide the support  that
         the appellant provides. Mr Rashid submits that when the decision is
         read as a whole, the judge identifies a  number  of  reasons  which
         taken together, were sufficient to enable  the  Judge  to  conclude
         that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the  UK
         without the appellant.


     18. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the  parties
         that in my judgement, the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Gurung-Thapa is infected by  a  material  error  of  law,  and  the
         decision is set aside. I informed the parties that in my  judgement
         the judge failed to adequately consider and set out her reasons for
         reaching the conclusion that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
         children to live in the UK without the appellant. Furthermore,  the
         judge failed to adequately consider and set  out  her  reasons  for
         reaching the conclusion that the requirements of  paragraph  399(b)
         are met. I said that I would provide full written  reasons  for  my
         decision in due course. That I now do.


    Discussion


     19. I accept, as Mr Rashid submits, that the judge correctly refers  at
         paragraphs [47] and [48] of the decision, to the  decision  of  the
         Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and  the  test  to  be  applied  when
         considering whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
         live in Zimbabwe, or to remain in the UK without their father.  The
         issue for me is whether the judge has properly applied that test in
         reaching her decision, and whether the  judge  has  given  adequate
         reasons for the conclusions that she reached.


     20. At paragraph [64] of the decision, the judge states  that  applying
         the approach set out in MM (Uganda) and  KO  (Nigeria),  she  finds
         that in the circumstances of the  appellant  and  his  family,  the
         appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh for the children  and
         his partner and that the requirements of paragraph 399(a)  and  (b)
         are met.  It is not clear what approach the judge adopted.  If  the
         "unduly harsh" test applied by the judge was that set  out  by  the
         Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda), with  reference  not  only  to  the
         children's best interests but also to  the  overall  circumstances,
         including  the  wider  public  interest  considerations   for   the
         deportation of foreign national offenders, the judge erred  in  law
         in applying the wrong test, the test set out in MM (Uganda)  having
         been expressly overturned by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).  At
         paragraph [63], the judge accepted that the appellant is  genuinely
         remorseful for his past actions and that he is trying to  turn  his
         life around. She accepted that he  is  financially  supporting  the
         family through his self-employed work. The  judge  plainly  had  in
         mind, the appellant's offending, although she did not go so far  as
         to refer to the nature or seriousness of the  offences.   She  then
         reached her conclusion, at [64], that "in the circumstances of  the
         appellant  and  his  family"  the  effect  of  deportation  on  the
         appellant's partner and children would be unduly harsh.  It is  not
         in dispute that in the light of the Supreme Court  decision  in  KO
         (Nigeria) at  paragraph  [22],  the  seriousness  of  the  offences
         committed are not a relevant factor in the inquiry under  Exception
         2 and paragraph 399(a).


     21. In my judgement, at paragraphs [52] to [64] of  the  decision,  the
         judge conflates a number of issues and adopts a  somewhat  confused
         structure. In  considering  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  immigration
         rules, the judge was required  to  consider  whether  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the children to live in Zimbabwe; and, whether  it
         would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK  without
         the appellant.  In considering paragraph 399(b) of the  immigration
         rules,  the  judge  was  required  to  consider  (i)  whether   the
         relationship between the appellant and his wife  was  formed  at  a
         time  when  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and   his
         immigration status was not precarious; and (ii) whether it would be
         unduly harsh for  the  appellant's  partner  to  live  in  Zimbabwe
         because of compelling circumstances over and above those  described
         in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and (iii)  whether  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the  appellant's  partner  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the appellant.


     22. At paragraphs [52] to [53] of the decision, the judge refers to the
         evidence of the appellant and his wife that they have  returned  to
         Zimbabwe on at least three occasions and the children have  visited
         Zimbabwe on two occasions. The judge refers to the evidence that DL
         is autistic and receives support in  school,  and  that  "sometimes
         support is different in Zimbabwe because of  lack  of  resources.".
         The judge found that the appellant plays  an  active  role  in  his
         children's upbringing.  The evidence of the  appellant's  wife,  as
         set out at [58], was that "it would be difficult for her to support
         her children on her own and when the appellant was  in  prison  she
         struggled even with  the  support  of  her  friends.  It  would  be
         difficult to carry on with her job because it requires her to  move
         from one town to another. She stated it  would  be  impossible  for
         their relationship to continue with the appellant  is  deported  to
         Zimbabwe. She has spoken to her older son and this worries a lot.".
          At paragraph [59], the judge states that she accepts the appellant
         and his wife enjoy a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   She
         accepted the evidence of the appellant's partner that she will  not
         be able to manage to look after the two  children  and  pursue  her
         career. The judge also accepted that she has no-one  else  to  turn
         to, who could provide the support that the appellant provides.


     23. At paragraph [60], the judge found that living  in  Zimbabwe  would
         have a serious impact  on  the  children.  I  accept,  for  present
         purposes, that that is a finding that it would be unduly harsh  for
         the children to live in Zimbabwe.  At  paragraph  [61],  the  judge
         states that she also accepts that it would be unduly harsh for  the
         children to remain in the UK without the appellant. The only reason
         given in that paragraph is that it would be in the  best  interests
         of the children to be cared for, and to be raised by both  parents.
         At paragraph [62], the judge states  that  she  is  satisfied  that
         their mother would have significant difficulties  in  managing  and
         looking after the children and holding the family together  without
         the help she receives from the appellant.


     24. In KO (Nigeria), Lord Carnwarth stated, at [23]:


             "23. On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
             clearly intended to introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6) , taking account of the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1) , that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal  in
             IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be
             equated with a requirement to show "very compelling  reasons".
             That would be in  effect  to  replicate  the  additional  test
             applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences  of  four
             years or more."


     25. On their own, the reasons given by the judge at paragraphs [61] and
         [62] of the decision are  an  entirely  irrational  and  inadequate
         basis for finding that it would be unduly harsh for the children to
         remain in the UK  without  the  appellant.   It  is  in  the  bests
         interests of most children to be cared for, and  to  be  raised  by
         both  parents.  Furthermore,  the  judge  fails  to  identify   the
         significant  difficulties  that  would  be   encountered   by   the
         appellant's partner in managing  and  looking  after  the  children
         without the help that she receives from the appellant.  There  will
         undoubtably be a degree  of  hardship  and  inconvenience  for  the
         children and the appellant's partner, but that is not sufficient to
         establish that it would be "unduly harsh" for the children  or  the
         appellant's partner to remain in the UK without the appellant.


     26. Even reading the decision as a whole, as I  am  invited  to  by  Mr
         Rashid, the judge simply fails to identify anything that begins  to
         meet the relevant threshold.  Reading the decision as a whole,  one
         is looking for a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a  parent  or  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
         necessarily be involved for any partner faced with the  deportation
         of their partner


     27.  Furthermore,  although  the  judge  states  at   [64]   that   the
         requirements of paragraph 399(b) are met, beyond  the  finding,  at
         [59], that the appellant  and  his  partner  enjoy  a  genuine  and
         subsisting  relationship,  the  judge  does  not  engage  with  the
         requirements set out at paragraph 399(b)(i),(ii) and (iii).


     28. In a human rights  appeal,  the  question  of  whether  or  not  an
         appellant meets the requirements of  particular  immigration  rules
         may go to the question of proportionality. Here,  the  decision  to
         allow the appeal on human rights grounds for the reasons set out at
         paragraphs [72] to [75] of the decision is inextricably  linked  to
         the judge's erroneous findings that the requirements  of  paragraph
         399(a) and (b) are met by  the  appellant.   In  my  judgement  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa is infected by a
         material error of law and cannot stand. I set the decision aside.


    Re-making the decision


     29. Part 13 of the Immigration Rules relating to deportation provide as
         follows;


             '398.    Where a person claims that their deportation would be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and


                  ...


                  (c)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                  conducive to the public good and in  the  public  interest
                  because, in the view of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
                  offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
                  offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,


                  the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                  consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it
                  does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
                  outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraphs 399 and 399A.


             399. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -


                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and


                      (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                      at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date
                      of the immigration decision; and in either case


                           (a)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                           live in the country to which the person is to  be
                           deported; and


                           (b)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported; or


                  (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                  with a partner who is in the UK and is a  British  Citizen
                  or settled in the UK, and


                      (i)  the relationship was formed at a time  when  the
                      person (deportee) was in the UK  lawfully  and  their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and


                      (ii) it would be unduly harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      live in the country to which  the  person  is  to  be
                      deported, because of  compelling  circumstances  over
                      and above  those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                      Appendix FM; and


                      (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported.


             399A.    This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)
             applies if -


                  (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                  most of his life; and


                  (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                  and


                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.'


     30. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa found that the appellant  is
         a persistent offender and the appellant  does  not  challenge  that
         finding.  The judge also found that the appellant cannot  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 399A of the  immigration  rules.   Again,
         the appellant does not challenge that  finding.   The  judge  found
         that  the  appellant  plays  an  active  role  in  his   children's
         upbringing.  Mr Mills does not challenge that finding.


     31. The burden of proof is on the appellant to establish his case on  a
         balance of probabilities.


    The evidence


     32. The appellant relied upon the evidence set out in a bundle that had
         been filed by Tann Law Solicitors under cover of a letter dated  22
         December 2018.  Signed copies of the  relevant  witness  statements
         were filed with the Tribunal  under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  2
         January 2019.  I have read the signed witness statements,  and  the
         material contained in the appellant's bundle.  I have had regard to
         the documents relied upon by the appellant, in reaching my decision
         whether or not I expressly refer to them.  I have also  had  regard
         to the evidence given by the appellant and his wife at the  hearing
         before the FtT, as set out in the decision  of  FtT  Judge  Gurung-
         Thapa.


     33. The appellant has made a witness statement dated 30 December  2018.
         The  appellant  refers  to  his   immigration   history   and   his
         convictions. He states that he has a very close  relationship  with
         his children and his partner. He claims  that  if  he  were  to  be
         deported, his children would not have  anyone  to  guide  them.  He
         wishes to reside in the UK with them so that he  can  provide  them
         with the best upbringing. He claims that the decision to deport him
         would severely impact his children  and  in  particular,  it  would
         affect DL, his performance at school and his behaviour at home. The
         appellant confirms that DL is autistic. He has disordered language,
         difficulties relating to play and social interaction,  and  sensory
         sensitivities. The appellant claims that whilst he was  in  prison,
         DL's health deteriorated.  The  appellant  states  that  DN  is  in
         secondary school and he  struggled  whilst  the  appellant  was  in
         prison as he was lacking the father figure that he needed in  life,
         to assist him with the challenges  he  faced.  He  states  that  he
         cannot expect his children to leave the UK with him,  as  they  are
         settled here and are progressing well. The appellant states that he
         is exercising his full parental responsibilities, and the  children
         require his support. He claims it would be in the best interests of
         the children for him to continue residing with them in  the  UK  so
         that he can provide them with the love, care and support that  they
         need.  The appellant claims that his parents are deceased,  and  he
         has no family in Zimbabwe.


     34. The appellant's wife has also signed a witness statement  dated  30
         December 2018. She confirms that the appellant is her partner, they
         have two children together, and they reside together as one  family
         unit. She confirms that the appellant has a very  close  bond  with
         both children. They wish to  provide  the  best  future  for  their
         children by continuing to reside as one family. She states that she
         cannot expect their children to leave the UK as  they  are  settled
         here and are progressing well at school. She cannot leave the UK as
         she has commitments here. She also states that DL is very close  to
         the appellant and when the appellant was in prison,  that  severely
         impacted upon the mental and emotional well-being of DL. She claims
         it started to affect his performance in school and his behaviour at
         home. She claims that DN also struggled whilst the appellant was in
         prison, as he was lacking the father figure that he needed in  life
         to assist him with the challenges he faced.


     35. In reaching my decision I have also had particular  regard  to  the
         letter from DN that is at D1-D2 and the other documents within that
         section relating to the education of the children,  and  health  of
         DL.


     36. It is entirely understandable that DN would, as he  states  in  his
         letter, love and want his dad to remain in the UK. Having read  the
         letter written by DN, DN candidly states that if  his  father  went
         away, there would be no-one to take him to football or pick him and
         his brother up from school, and that would  cause  huge  difficulty
         for their mum.


     37. The letter from  St  Albans  Catholic  Primary  School  dated  20th
         November 2017 confirms that the appellant takes DL  to  school  and
         collect him most days. The letter also confirms that the  appellant
         attends parents' evenings and any other  meetings  associated  with
         DL's schooling. Similarly, the letter from 'First Friends'  Nursery
         dated 15th November 2017 confirms that the appellant has taken part
         in dropping and picking up his children from the out-of-school club
         since September 2014.  The remaining evidence in section D  of  the
         appellant's bundle is accurately summarised at paragraphs [53]  and
         [54] of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa.


    Findings and conclusions


     38. Like First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa, I am left in no  doubt
         that the appellant enjoys a close and loving relationship with  his
         children, and that the  appellant  plays  an  active  role  in  his
         children's upbringing.  I  have  no  doubt  about  the  appellant's
         devotion to his children and their well-being.


     39. The children were cared for by Ms [N] when  the  appellant  was  in
         prison. There is no evidence to indicate  that  the  children  were
         neglected to the extent that any outside intervention was required.




     40.  I  start  by  assessing  the  children's  best  interests  and  my
         obligation under section 55 of the 2009 Act.  In so doing  I  leave
         out of account any adverse  matters  relating  to  the  appellant's
         conduct. It is very clear that the children's best interests lie in
         having the appellant as part of their lives in United Kingdom. They
         have a strong bond with their father, and as I have found, he plays
         as an active role in their lives. Having considered the letter from
         DN in particular, I fully accept that the children would  be  very,
         very upset by the departure of their father.   It  is  likely  that
         this would have an adverse emotional impact on their lives. I  take
         into account that DN attends secondary school and is at a  critical
         juncture of his life.  The school reports demonstrate  that  he  is
         doing well at school.


     41. The appellant's practical involvement in the lives of his  children
         is also important, and a facet of the best  interests'  assessment.
         The appellant undoubtably supports his partner in the  day  to  day
         care of the children, and in particular, with the arrangements  for
         dropping the children off  to  school  and  picking  them  up  from
         school.  He is also involved in ensuring they  can  attend  leisure
         activities such as playing football and play in the park.  However,
         there is no evidence before me to suggest that  the  children  will
         not be adequately cared for by their mother  if  the  appellant  is
         deported.  She is plainly an able parent, who  has  properly  taken
         care of the children whilst the appellant has been in prison.   She
         does not  suffer  from  ill  health  so  as  to  prevent  her  from
         adequately caring for the children in the absence of the appellant.
         The children were able  to  attend  school  and  no  doubt  enjoyed
         leisure activities when the appellant was in prison, albeit perhaps
         to a lesser extent.


     42. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gurung-Thapa  found  that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the children to live in Zimbabwe  and  it  is  not
         suggested by Mr Mills that I should depart from that  finding.  The
         issue in this appeal is whether in the circumstances set out above,
         the appellant's deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  his  two
         children, remaining in the United Kingdom without  him.   Thus,  if
         the appellant is able to establish that it would  be  unduly  harsh
         for the children to remain in the UK without  the  appellant,  they
         would  meet the exception  to  deportation  set  out  in  paragraph
         399(a) of the Immigration Rules, as replicated in  section  117C(5)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


     43. As I have set out in my error  of  law  decision,  the  meaning  of
         unduly harsh is now set out in the Supreme Court's decision  in  KO
         Nigeria, at paragraph [23]  of  the  judgment  of  Lord  Carnworth.
         Within the Supreme Court's consideration of the specific appeal  in
         KO, reference was made to the authoritative guidance on the meaning
         of unduly harsh given in MK (Sierra Leone).


     44. Here, aside from the strength of the parental relationship  between
         the appellant and his children and his general role in the  day  to
         day care of the children, the main factor relied upon to  take  the
         circumstances over the threshold of unduly harsh, to go beyond  the
         likely consequences on any child faced with the  deportation  of  a
         parent, is primarily the health of DL.  Even focusing solely on the
         situation of the children, there is nothing in the evidence  before
         me, except the vague claim  by  the  Ms  [N]  that  the  appellants
         absence whilst he was in prison had severely impacted  DL's  mental
         and emotional wellbeing, to suggest  that  the  children  were  not
         adequately cared for by  Ms  [N].   I  find  that  the  appellant's
         partner is able to adequately care for the children in the  absence
         of the appellant.  She would obviously encounter some  difficulties
         and  would  understandably,  wish  to  have  the  support  of   the
         appellant, but that is not to say it would be unduly harsh for  the
         children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  the  appellant.
         There is nothing in the evidence before me to  establish  that  any
         adverse consequences for the children go beyond being merely  harsh
         or part  of  the  usual  consequences  of  deportation,  but  taken
         together with all of the other  factors,  make  deportation  unduly
         harsh on the children on the facts of this particular case.


     45. I therefore  find,  on  the  evidence  before  me,  that  that  the
         appellant is unable to meet the exception to deportation set out in
         paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules.  I equally find, on  the
         evidence that the appellant is unable  to  meet  the  exception  to
         deportation set out in paragraph 399(b).   I  cannot  find  on  the
         evidence that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's  partner
         to remain in the UK without the appellant.


     46. In a human rights appeal, the ability to  satisfy  the  immigration
         rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal, but  is
         capable of being a weighty, though not determinative  factor,  when
         deciding whether such refusal is proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         aim.


     47. I find that the appellant enjoys family  life  with  his  wife  and
         children. I also find that the decision to  deport  the  appellant,
         will have consequences of such gravity as to engage  the  operation
         of Article 8.  I accept that the interference is in accordance with
         the law, and that the interference is necessary for the  prevention
         of disorder or crime, the protection of health or morals,  and  for
         the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.


     48. The issue in this appeal, as is often  the  case,  is  whether  the
         interference is proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought
         to  be  achieved.   I  have  had  regard  to  the  public  interest
         considerations set out in s117C of the 2002 Act.   The  deportation
         of foreign criminals is  in  the  public  interest.  For  the  same
         reasons that the appellant cannot benefit  from  paragraphs  399(a)
         and (b) of the immigration rules, the appellant could  not  benefit
         from Exception 2 set out in s117C(5) of the 2002 Act.


     49. Having carefully considered the evidence, whilst I accept that  the
         appellant, his wife and their children  might  prefer  to  continue
         their relationship together in the UK, that does not  equate  to  a
         right to do so in law.


     50. On the evidence before me, there are no  exceptional  circumstances
         capable of establishing that the public interest in the deportation
         of the appellant is outweighed  by  other  factors,  such  that  it
         amounts to a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellants
         right to enjoyment of family life.  Having carefully considered the
         evidence before me,  and  taking  all  the  relevant  factors  into
         account including the best interests of the appellant's children as
         a primary consideration, I find that the  decision  to  deport  the
         appellant  is  not  disproportionate   to   the   legitimate   aim.
         Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


     51. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I  remake
         the decision,  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8
         grounds.


    Notice of Decision


     52. I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa.


     53. I remake the decision.  The  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  is
         dismissed.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


     54. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction.   No
         application for an anonymity direction was made before me,  and  no
         such direction is made.  I have however in this  decision  referred
         to the appellant's children by their initials rather  than  setting
         out their names.



    Signed                                  Date     24th September 2019


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD


    I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.



    Signed                                  Date     24th September 2019


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


