
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15589/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018 and 25 January 2019       |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              Mr vamshi adiyala
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman (07.12.18) and Mr S. Muquit (25.01.19),
                    Counsel instructed by Connaughts Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (07.12.18) and Ms A. Everett
                    (25.01.19), Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Hussain sitting at Hatton Cross on 1 August 2018) dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the  respondent  ("the  Department")  to
    refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain  as  a  person  who  had
    accrued at least 10 years' continuous lawful residence under the Rules.
     The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do
    not  consider  that  the  appellant  requires   anonymity   for   these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of India, whose date of birth  is  12  June
    1986.  He entered the country  on  6  October  2007  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a student, and has remained here ever since.  On  7  April
    2017, he made an application for leave to remain on the grounds of long
    residence.  He varied this application to an application for ILR on the
    grounds of 10 years' long residence on 26 June 2017 (albeit that he had
    not at this stage accrued 10 years' residence in the UK).

 3. On 16 November 2017 the Department gave their reasons for refusing  the
    appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis  of  long  residence,  and/or  on  the  basis  of  private   life
    established in the UK.

 4. The Department accepted that, following his arrival  in  the  UK  on  6
    October 2007, the appellant had had valid leave until 3 April 2017 when
    his appeal rights were exhausted.  From that point  on,  the  appellant
    had not had lawful leave.  The Department's reasoning  was  that  on  7
    April 2017 he had applied "out of time" for leave to  remain  based  on
    long residence.  Since the application was  out  of  time,  his  lawful
    residence was broken "at this point".  He had become an overstayer on 4
    April 2017, and at that point he had only resided in the UK for 9 years
    and  6  months.   Accordingly,  he  could  not  demonstrate  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the UK in accordance with the Rules.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Both parties were legally represented  before  Judge  Hussain.  In  his
    subsequent decision promulgated on 26  September  2018,  Judge  Hussain
    made a  finding  of  fact  which  was  at  variance  with  the  factual
    concession made by the Department in the refusal.

 6. At paragraph [13]  he  said  that  he  was  somewhat  confused  by  the
    Secretary of State's narrative,  because  having  reflected  after  the
    hearing on the narrative of the appellant's  immigration  history,  "it
    seems that the appellant has been without leave from 30 November 2012".



 7. The Judge went on to give detailed reasons in paragraphs  [14]-[18]  as
    to why he was of the view that the appellant  had  been  without  leave
    from 30 November 2012.  His reasoning included the fact  that,  despite
    an exhaustive search of  the  appellant's  bundle,  he  could  find  no
    documentary evidence to "support the appellant's claim"  that  until  3
    April 2017 he  had  enjoyed  deemed  leave  under  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 8. At paragraphs [19]-[20], he addressed  what  he  characterised  as  the
    substance of the appellant's submission, which was that since there was
    only a gap of three days between 3 April  2017  and  7  April  2017  he
    should find that, as a matter of substance, that the appellant  had  in
    fact accumulated ten years' residence in this country.  The Judge  said
    that there were two problems with that submission: the first  of  which
    was that, "if the Secretary of State's  narrative  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history is accepted, the appellant  has  been  without  any
    leave since 30 November 2012."

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9. On 19 October 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the Judge became confused on an issue that was
         not contentious between the parties, has not put it to the  parties
         seeking  clarification,  and  that  in  then  finding  against  the
         Appellant  (despite  saying  he  was  'inclined   to   accept   the
         Appellant's narrative') he has materially erred."

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Bramble conceded that the Judge had  been  factually  wrong  to
    find that the appellant had been without leave since 30 November  2012.
    In consultation with Mr Bramble, Ms Gherman (who did not appear  below)
    had prepared  a  manuscript  summary  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history, which Mr Bramble confirmed that he accepted.

11. After further discussion with the  representatives,  I  agreed  to  set
    aside the decision of Judge Hussain as being erroneous in  law,  and  I
    directed that there should be a resumed hearing before me to remake the
    decision on the agreed basis that the starting point for  remaking  was
    that the appellant had been  continuously  lawfully  resident  until  3
    August 2017.

12. For reasons which will become apparent, I declined Ms Gherman's initial
    invitation to  immediately  proceed  to  remake  the  decision  in  the
    appellant's favour.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law on Ground 1, but not on Ground 2

13. There are two grounds of appeal.  Ground  1  is  that  there  has  been
    procedural unfairness on the part of the Judge in him making a  finding
    of fact  adverse  to  the  appellant  that  is  in  conflict  with  the
    concession made in the decision letter, and also in conflict  with  the
    common understanding of the legal representatives at the hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal. Ground 2 is that Judge Hussain failed to have  any
    regard to the exception for overstayers outlined in paragraph  39E  and
    paragraph 276B(v) of the Rules.

Ground 2

14. Lawful residence in the UK is defined in Rule 276A(b).  It is residence
    which is continuous residence pursuant to (i) existing leave  to  enter
    or remain; or (ii) temporary admission within section 11  of  the  1971
    Act (as previously in force) or immigration bail within section  11  of
    the 1971 Act, where leave to enter or remain is  subsequently  granted;
    or (iii) an  exemption  of  immigration  control,  including  where  an
    exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a  grant  of
    leave to enter or remain.

15. The definition of lawful residence does not include  an  exception  for
    short periods of  overstaying.   This  is  a  separate  matter,  as  is
    apparent from  the  wording  of  paragraph  276B  which  sets  out  the
    requirements for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
    residence in the UK.  The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence  in  the  UK
    are that:

         '(i) (a) he has had at least 10  years'  lawful  residence  in  the
             United Kingdom

         ...

         (v)  the applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
         laws, except that, where paragraphs 39E of these Rules applies, any
         current period of overstaying will be  disregarded.   Any  previous
         period of  overstaying  between  periods  of  leave  will  also  be
         disregarded where -

             (a)  the further application was made before 24 November  2016
             and within 28 days of expiry of leave; or

             (b)  the further application was made on or after 24  November
             2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied.'

16. In short, an applicant for indefinite leave to remain on the ground  of
    long residence has to meet all five of the requirements set out in Rule
    276B(i)-(v), and the fact that the applicant satisfies the requirements
    of (v) does not mean that he satisfies the requirements of  (i).   They
    are separate requirements. So the Judge did  not  err  in  law  in  his
    alternative finding at [20] that, if it was the case that the appellant
    had continuous lawful leave until 3 April 2017, he had not "as a matter
    of fact" - i.e.  under  the  Rules  -  accumulated  ten  years'  lawful
    residence.

Ground 1

17. However, Ground 1 is clearly made out.  As the Department had  accepted
    in the decision letter that the  appellant  was  continuously  lawfully
    resident until 3 April 2017, it  was  reasonable  for  the  appellant's
    legal representatives not to  include  in  the  bundle  filed  for  the
    hearing documentary  evidence  to  allay  the  Judge's  concerns  about
    whether the position taken by the Department was legally  or  factually
    correct.  As  there  was  no  issue  between  the  parties  as  to  the
    appellant's status prior to 3 April 2014, the burden of proof  did  not
    rest with the appellant to prove continuous lawful  residence  until  3
    April 2017.

18. In addition, the Judge got into a muddle about who was  contending  for
    what.  Initially he correctly characterised the Secretary of  State  as
    advancing the case that the appellant had  been  continuously  lawfully
    resident until 3 April 2017.  But later on in his reasoning process  he
    wrongly characterised the Secretary of  State  as  contending  for  the
    opposite of what had been set out in the decision letter.

19. Accordingly, while the Judge raised  a  legitimate  concern  about  the
    appellant's true immigration history based on an alternative  narrative
    given by the appellant's previous solicitors, he did not give  adequate
    reasons for reaching an adverse conclusion on the  issue,  rather  than
    giving the appellant the benefit of the doubt; and, in  any  event,  he
    was factually wrong in his conclusion, and he thus made  a  mistake  of
    fact for which  neither  the  appellant  nor  his  legal  advisers  are
    responsible.  The mistake of fact was  capable  of  making  a  material
    difference to the ultimate outcome of this appeal,  and  so  procedural
    fairness requires that the decision should be set aside and remade.

The Resumed Hearing in the Upper Tribunal for Remaking

20. The appellant did not file any  additional  evidence  for  the  resumed
    hearing. Mr Muquit called the appellant as a witness, and he adopted as
    his evidence in chief the same  witness  statement  he  had  previously
    adopted in the First-tier Tribunal. On the topic of  the  private  life
    which he had established in the UK, he said: "I have invested a lot  of
    time, money and effort in making  a  life  for  myself  in  the  UK.  I
    therefore would lose all that that I have made for myself in the UK  if
    I am forced to be removed from the UK."

21. Mr Muquit did not  ask  any  supplementary  questions  and  Ms  Everett
    declined to ask the Appellant any questions  in  cross-examination.  In
    the course of submissions, I asked the appellant to clarify how he  was
    financially independent. He said that he got funding from  his  parents
    in India. He added that  he  had  a  cousin  here  who  was  a  British
    national, and that his cousin also helped him financially.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

22. The appellant does not have a viable  private  life  claim  under  Rule
    276ADE(1)(vi)  as  he  does  not  contend  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration into  life  and  society  in
    India, and in any event there is no reason to suppose  that  he  cannot
    lead an adequate private life on return  to  India,  drawing  upon,  if
    necessary, his parents' financial support.

23. Turning to an  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  I  accept  that
    questions 1 and 2  of  the  Razgar  test  should  be  answered  in  the
    appellant's favour, with regard to the establishment of private life in
    the UK.  Questions 3 and 4 of the  Razgar  test  must  be  answered  in
    favour of the respondent.

24. On the issue of proportionality, I must take into account the  relevant
    public interest considerations arising under section 117B of  the  2002
    Act.  It is in the appellant's favour that he speaks good  English,  as
    this means that he is better able to integrate into UK society.  It  is
    also in the appellant's favour that he is financially  independent,  in
    that he maintains and accommodates himself without recourse  to  public
    funds as a result  of  being  entirely  financially  supported  by  his
    family.

25. Nonetheless these considerations are not in  themselves  sufficient  to
    tip the balance  in  the  appellant's  favour  in  the  proportionality
    assessment.  As submitted by Ms Everett, the  statute  stipulates  that
    little weight should be given to private life which is built up in  the
    UK while a person's status here is precarious.

26. However, the considerations set out in section 117B are not exhaustive,
    and a rounded proportionality assessment requires the Tribunal to  take
    all relevant factors into account.  I acknowledge  that  the  appellant
    can be characterised as a "near miss" under Rule 276B, since  in  April
    2017 (when his lawful residence ceased) he was only six months short of
    qualifying for ILR on the  grounds  of  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence. I am also mindful of the question posed in Rhuppiah -v- SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803 which is whether the applicant has  established  in
    the UK a private life of a special and compelling character, such as to
    override the generalised normative guidance that little  weight  should
    be given to private life established by a person at a  time  when  that
    person's immigration status is precarious.

27. However, I am unable to give an affirmative answer to this question  in
    the case of the appellant. He has not shown that he has  established  a
    private life of a special and compelling character.  He  has  also  not
    shown that his - or more probably his parents' -  financial  investment
    in him has somehow been wasted. He entered the UK  as  a  student,  and
    hence on the express or implied undertaking that  he  would  return  to
    India once his studies in the UK were completed. Alternatively, he  had
    no legitimate expectation of being able to prolong his stay in  the  UK
    unless he could bring himself within another category so as to  qualify
    for further leave to remain. There is no evidence  that  the  appellant
    failed to complete his  course  of  studies,  and  hence  there  is  no
    evidence that his time spent in the UK as a student has been wasted.

28. If the appellant were to be returning to India without having  enhanced
    his employability and life prospects generally through gaining  one  or
    more academic qualifications here, he  has  not  shown  that  there  is
    anyone or anything to blame  for  this  state  of  affairs  apart  from
    himself. However, for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  I  deduce  from  the
    appellant's immigration history that he made progress in his studies in
    the period 2007 to 2012, and that he is likely to  have  obtained  some
    academic qualifications in this five year period which will  serve  him
    in good stead in India. For if that were not the case, it  is  unlikely
    that he would have been granted leave to remain  as  student  on  three
    successive occasions in 2009, 2010 and 2011 respectively,  or  that  he
    would have had occasion to apply in 2012 for leave to remain as a post-
    study work migrant.

29. Accordingly, having weighed all  the  relevant  considerations  in  the
    balance, I do not consider that the interference consequential upon the
    refusal decision will be disproportionate to the legitimate public  aim
    sought to be achieved, which is the maintenance of firm  and  effective
    immigration controls, and thus the appellant has not made  out  a  case
    that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.


Notice of Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: this appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 28 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

