
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/15116/2016
                                                               hu/15117/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th March 2018                            |On 27th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                      Palwinder singh (first Appellant)
                       Mandeep kaur (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Raza of Counsel instructed by Harbans Singh,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appealed against a decision of Judge Widdup (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated  on  27th  July  2017.
    The Appellants are Indian citizens.  The first Appellant is the brother
    of the second Appellant.  They were born on 27 August 1999 and  1  July
    1998 respectively.

 2. Both Appellants were minors  when  they  applied  for  entry  clearance
    seeking leave to enter and settle in the UK  with  their  father  Sital
    Singh, and stepmother Kiranjeet Kaur.  The Appellants resided in  India
    with relatives.  Their father had resided in the UK since January 2001.
     Their mother died in India in January 2007.   Their  father  remarried
    Kiranjeet Kaur in September 2010.

 3. The applications were refused on 25th May 2016.  The Respondent in  the
    refusal decisions made reference to paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and section EC-C of Appendix FM which sets out the  requirements
    for entry clearance as a child.

 4. The Respondent did not dispute that Kiranjeet Kaur had  settled  status
    in the UK, and the Appellants' mother  died  in  India  in  2007.   The
    Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  Appellants'  father  had  been
    issued with leave to enter or remain under Appendix  FM.   It  was  not
    accepted  that  the  father  had  taken  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellants' care or made any regular contact with them until  recently.
    The Respondent was not  satisfied  that  there  were  any  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which made exclusion  of  the
    Appellants undesirable.  The applications were therefore  refused  with
    reference to section EC-C, in particular it was not accepted  that  the
    Appellants satisfied E-ECC.1.6.

 5. The Respondent also considered paragraph 297(i)(f) of  the  Immigration
    Rules and refused the application as it was  not  accepted  that  there
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made
    exclusion of the Appellants undesirable.

 6. The refusal decision was  upheld  on  review  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager.

 7. The appeals were heard by the FTT on 20th July  2017,  the  Appellants'
    father and  stepmother  gave  evidence.   The  FTT  did  not  find  the
    Appellants' father to be  a  credible  witness,  finding  that  he  had
    deliberately omitted to disclose  that  the  Appellants  had  an  older
    sister who lived with them and other family members in India.  The  FTT
    found that the father had not exercised sole responsibility  for  their
    upbringing, and there were no serious  and  compelling  factors  making
    their exclusion from the UK undesirable.  The FTT found as a fact  that
    responsibility for the Appellants had been shared by the family members
    in India.  The appeals were therefore dismissed.

 8. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds which were prepared by their solicitors  contend  that  the
    FTT erred in law by  failing  to  consider  paragraph  297(i)(d)  which
    requires that one parent is present and settled  in  the  UK  or  being
    admitted on the same occasion for settlement, and the other  parent  is
    dead.  It was contended that the FTT had erred by not  considering  the
    relevant test, and had wrongly considered  sole  responsibility  rather
    than paragraph 297(i)(d).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth on 27th  October
    2017.

Error of Law

10. On 9th January 2018 I heard submissions from both parties  in  relation
    to error of law.  The Respondent contended there was no material error.
     I found that there was a material error  of  law  and  set  aside  the
    decision of the FTT.  Full details of the application  for  permission,
    the grant of permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my
    conclusions are contained in  my  error  of  law  decision  dated  11th
    January 2018.  I set out below paragraphs 17  -  26  which  contain  my
    conclusions and reasons for setting aside the FTT decision;

         "17. I am persuaded that the FTT erred in  law  for  the  following
             reasons.

         18.  Although these appeals were brought on human  rights  grounds,
             it is necessary to consider whether the  relevant  Immigration
             Rules were met, as this is relevant to  the  public  interest,
             and proportionality, when carrying out the necessary balancing
             exercise.

         19.  It must be decided which Immigration Rules are relevant.   The
             Respondent referred both to paragraph 297 which sets  out  the
             requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
             enter the UK as the child of  a  parent  or  relative  who  is
             present  and  settled  in  the  UK  or  being   admitted   for
             settlement, and section EC-C of Appendix FM which sets out the
             requirements to be met for entry clearance as  a  child,  when
             one of the parents is in the UK with limited leave to enter or
             remain.

         20.  In this case, the Appellants'  father  had  limited  leave  to
             remain, that being 30 months' leave  granted  on  1st  October
             2015.  It was however accepted that the father  had  remarried
             and his wife, who is the  stepmother  of  the  Appellants  had
             indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

         21.  There  is  no  specific  reference  in  the  FTT  decision  to
             paragraph 297.  The FTT did consider the issues of whether the
             father had sole responsibility, and  whether  there  were  any
             serious  and  compelling  considerations  which   would   make
             exclusion of the Appellants  undesirable.   These  issues  are
             contained within paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) and section EC-C.
              The FTT found against the Appellants  on  those  issues,  and
             there has been no challenge to those findings.

         22.  The FTT did not consider paragraph 297(i)(d).  At the  hearing
             I made the point to Ms Fletcher that in order to succeed under
             paragraph 297(i)(d) one parent must be settled in the UK,  and
             in this case the father of the  Appellants  was  not  settled.
             However, on reflection, it is relevant to consider paragraph 6
             of the Immigration Rules which  provides  interpretations  and
             definitions.  A parent includes  the  stepmother  of  a  child
             whose mother is dead.  Therefore the father's  wife  Kiranjeet
             Kaur is a parent to the Appellants, and she has settled status
             in the UK.  The relevance of this is that it is not  the  case
             that  the  Appellants  could  not  succeed   under   paragraph
             297(i)(d), as they do in fact have a parent who is present and
             settled in the UK, that being their stepmother.

         23.  I accept that there is  no  specific  reference  to  paragraph
             297(i)(d) in the Grounds of Appeal which were settled  by  the
             Appellants' solicitors.   There  is  however  a  reference  in
             paragraph 8 of the grounds to the father having  remarried  in
             the UK and the Appellants treating their stepmother  as  their
             mother.   The  Appellants  were  legally  represented  at  the
             hearing before the FTT, and it is not clear if there  was  any
             reference by their representative to paragraph 297(i)(d),  but
             in view of the fact that it was accepted by all  parties  that
             the Appellants' mother had died in India, and their father had
             remarried an individual with settled status in the UK, I  find
             that the FTT erred in law by not giving any  consideration  to
             paragraph 297(i)(d).

         24.  I find the error to be material, as if paragraph 297(i)(d) was
             satisfied,  then  this  would  be  relevant   in   considering
             proportionality  and  the  public  interest.   Therefore   the
             decision of the FTT is set aside.

         25.  The decision must be re-made.  I do not find  it  appropriate,
             having considered the Senior President's Practice  Statements,
             at paragraph 7, to remit these appeals to the FTT.

         26.  There will be a further hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
             There has been no challenge to the findings made  by  the  FTT
             that  the   Appellants'   father   did   not   exercise   sole
             responsibility for their upbringing  and  that  responsibility
             for the Appellants has been shared by the  family  members  in
             India.  Those findings are therefore preserved."

Re-Making the Decision

11. At the commencement of the hearing I ascertained that the Tribunal  had
    received all documentation to be relied upon, and each party had served
    the other with any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

12. The Tribunal had the Appellants' bundle comprising 424 pages which  had
    been before the FTT, together  with  witness  statements  made  by  the
    Appellants' father and stepmother dated 14th July 2017.  In addition  a
    supplementary bundle comprising ten pages  had  been  lodged  with  the
    Tribunal on behalf of  the  Appellants.   Mr  Raza  indicated  that  no
    skeleton argument had been  prepared.   The  representatives  indicated
    that they were ready to proceed and there was  no  application  for  an
    adjournment.

The Oral Submissions

13. Mr Raza placed reliance upon section EC-C rather  than  paragraph  297,
    and submitted that it was relevant, that it had been found at the error
    of  law  hearing,  that  the  Appellants'  stepmother   satisfies   the
    definition of a parent as contained in paragraph 6 of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Raza stated that the Appellants'  father  had  been  granted
    limited leave to remain under Appendix FM.  He therefore submitted that
    the relationship requirement set out at E-ECC.1.6.(a) was satisfied.

14.  Mr  Raza  submitted  that  this  was  significant   when   considering
    proportionality and the public interest.  I was asked to note that both
    parents of the Appellants are in the UK.  It is in the  best  interests
    of the Appellants to be brought up by their parents.  Therefore refusal
    of entry clearance was disproportionate and a breach of Article 8.   On
    that basis the appeals should be allowed.

15. Mr Kotas accepted that the requirements of E-ECC.1.6.  were  satisfied,
    and on  that  basis  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  refuse  entry
    clearance.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.





My Conclusions and Reasons

17. Refusal of entry clearance is treated as  refusal  of  a  human  rights
    claim and therefore the Appellants have a right of appeal  pursuant  to
    section 82(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The
    Ground of Appeal is contained in section 84(2) on the  basis  that  the
    decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

18. The Appellants rely upon Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  I find that Article 8 is engaged on  the  basis  of  the
    family life which the Appellants have with their parents.

19. In considering Article 8 I adopt the balance sheet approach recommended
    by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, and in  so
    doing have regard to the guidance as to the functions of this  Tribunal
    given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.  It  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellants' father has limited leave to remain in the UK and  this  was
    granted under Appendix FM.  I accept the evidence contained within  the
    Appellants' father's witness statement that he was granted this  status
    in 2013 on the basis of his marriage, and not October  2015  which  was
    the date referred to at the error of law hearing.

20. I set out below E-ECC.1.6;

         "One of the applicant's parents must be  in  the  UK  with  limited
         leave to enter or remain, or be being applying,  or  have  applied,
         for entry clearance, as a partner or a parent under  this  Appendix
         (referred to in this section as the 'applicant's parent'), and

         (a)  the applicant's parent's partner under Appendix FM is  also  a
             parent of the applicant;"

21. As it is accepted that the Appellants'  father  has  limited  leave  to
    remain granted  under  Appendix  FM,  and  his  wife,  the  Appellants'
    stepmother, is a parent of the Appellants, pursuant to  the  definition
    in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules, I find, as was conceded at the
    hearing, that E-ECC.1.6. is satisfied.

22. This is significant when one considers section GEN which sets  out  the
    general purpose of Appendix FM.  I set out below, in part, GEN.1.1;

         "It sets out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and,  in  considering
         applications under this route, it reflects how, under Article 8  of
         the Human Rights Convention, the balance will be struck between the
         right to respect for private and family  life  and  the  legitimate
         aims  of  protecting  national  security,  public  safety  and  the
         economic well-being of the  UK,  the  prevention  of  disorder  and
         crime, the protection of health or morals, and  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others (and in doing  so  also  reflects
         the relevant public interest considerations as set out in  Part  5A
         of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002).   It  also
         takes into account the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of
         children in the UK, in line with  the  Secretary  of  State's  duty
         under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
         2009."

23. I must consider the circumstances appertaining at the date of  hearing.
    The Appellants are now adults, and therefore it is not  appropriate  to
    consider the best interests of children.

24. I have regard to the considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002
    Act.  The maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public
    interest.  It is therefore extremely significant, that  the  Appellants
    can satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM.

25. There is a requirement that persons seeking leave to  enter  can  speak
    English as this aids integration.  However, that is not  a  requirement
    either in paragraph 297, or section EC-C.

26. There is a requirement that persons seeking leave to enter the  UK  are
    financially  independent.    The   Appellants   are   not   financially
    independent, but their  applications  were  not  refused  on  financial
    grounds, therefore it must have been accepted by  the  Respondent  that
    they could be adequately maintained and accommodated by their  parents.



27. I do not find that sub-sections (4) - (6)  of  section  117B  have  any
    application to these appeals.

28. This is not a case where it is suggested that either the Appellants  or
    their parents have a poor immigration history.  I find that significant
    weight must be attached to the fact that the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM are satisfied.  I  do  attach  weight  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control, and in view of the fact that
    the Immigration Rules are satisfied, I do not find that  there  is  any
    public interest in refusing  entry  clearance  to  the  Appellants.   I
    conclude  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  disproportionate   and
    breaches Article 8, and therefore the appeals are allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds with  reference  to  Article
8.

Anonymity

The Appellants were minors when  they  made  their  applications  for  entry
clearance but are now adults.  There has been no request for  anonymity  and
I see no need to make an anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th March 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the appeals have been allowed I have considered whether  to  make  a
fee award.  I make no fee award.  The appeals have been allowed  because  of
evidence adduced before the Tribunal, which  was  not  before  the  original
decision maker.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th March 2018
