
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15631/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December, 2017                           |On 15 January 2018            |
|corrected, signed and                         |                              |
|sent to Promulgation on                       |                              |
|13th January 2018.                            |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                JOSEPHINE [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on the appellant's behalf
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  8  October  1972.   The
    appellant applied for a visit visa to visit her sister  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 28  August  2007.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 10 September 2007 with a right of appeal.

2.   On 27 September 2007, the  appellant  made  a  further  application  to
    visit her sister and on 4 October 2007, she was  issued  with  a  visit
    visa valid until 4  April  2008.   The  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 November, 2007.   She  overstayed  when  her  visit  visa
    expired on 4 April 2008.  She did nothing about regularising  her  stay
    until on 4 April 2011, she submitted an application for  permission  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her Article 3 and  Article
    8 rights, but on 27 May 2011 that application was refused with no right
    of appeal.

3.    On  8  August  2011,  the  appellant's  representatives  asked  for  a
    reconsideration of the refusal decision and for a right of appeal.   On
    21 February 2014, the appellant was sent a current  circumstances  form
    which she duly completed and returned, and on  1  September  2015,  was
    issued with a notice of liability for removal.  She responded by letter
    of 27 November 2015.

4.   On 21 January 2016, she was sent a letter reminding her that  her  case
    remained outstanding asking for any further information in  respect  of
    her application to remain in the United Kingdom.  In February 2016,  an
    undated letter was received from her, at about the same time  a  letter
    was received from [GP] dated February 2016.  The  respondent  wrote  to
    the appellant's representatives on 29 April  2016,  advising  that  the
    appellant make an application for asylum, because she had on more  than
    one occasion claimed to have a fear of return to  Nigeria  because  she
    feared  that  her  husband  would  kill  her.   On  23  May  2016,  the
    appellant's representatives responded saying that she had begun to live
    with [GP] in November 2015.  The appellant has not made an  application
    for asylum and her representatives have confirmed  that  she  does  not
    intend to make such an application for asylum.

5.   On 1 June 2016, the respondent refused the appellant's application  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds on the basis of her  Article  3
    and 8 rights and gave directions under paragraph 10A of Schedule  2  to
    the Immigration Act 1971 for her removal from the United Kingdom.   The
    appellant appealed and her appeal was listed before First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Carlin in Birmingham on 7 August 2017.

6.   The appellant was represented before the judge who heard oral  evidence
    from both the appellant and from  her  partner,  [GP],  with  whom  she
    claimed to enjoy a family life.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant
    could not bring herself within  the  Immigration  Rules  and  therefore
    looked at the appellant's circumstances to  see  whether  it  might  be
    appropriate for him to allow the appeal on the basis that leave  should
    be granted to the appellant in recognition  of  her  Article  8  rights
    outwith the Immigration Rules.  He reminded himself of the decision  of
    the House of Lords in Razgar and in Huang and Kashmiri.   It  had  been
    argued before him that family life between the appellant and [GP] could
    not be enjoyed in Nigeria, because [GP] was not  able  to  eat  African
    food.  It was suggested that a lack of  suitable  diet  meant  that  he
    could not live in Nigeria and that he could not make the seven or eight
    hour flight to Nigeria, because he needed oxygen when making a one hour
    flight to Aberdeen.  The judge found that while it might  be  difficult
    for [GP],  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing with him should the parties so desire it.  He did not accept
    the argument that diet would be a problem, because it would be possible
    for [GP] to eat food which would not cause him problems.  There was  no
    medical evidence to the effect that he had been advised not to fly  and
    he did not  accept  the  claimed  difficulties  would  in  practice  be
    particularly serious problems.  He took into account  medical  evidence
    comprised in a letter  from  a  Dr  Hall  relating  to  [GP]'s  medical
    problems, but noted that he was not given  any  information  indicating
    that [GP] would not be able to obtain any medical treatment  he  needed
    in Nigeria.  He took account of the fact that [GP] had a  close  family
    in the United Kingdom and a close relationship with his two adult sons,
    several grandchildren and great-grandchildren.  It was not claimed that
    either of his sons were dependent on [GP] financially or otherwise, and
    it was not claimed that he was dependent on them.  In any event he took
    the view that [GP], if resident in Nigeria, would still be able to keep
    in touch with his family by visits and telephone calls.

7.   The appellant sought permission to appeal.  The  grounds  first  assert
    that the judge failed to adequately consider the seriousness of  [GP]'s
    medical problems as set out in Dr  Hall's  letter.   I  have  read  the
    letter; it is two pages and is in the following terms:

         "Re: [GP] - Date of birth [ ] 1939

              Your reference: AA/

         Thank you for your request regarding information for [GP] who is  a
         77 year old gentleman registered to this Practice.

         At present [GP] is waiting Orthopaedic opinion regarding  his  hip.
         He has had a  previous  hip  replacement  which  has  required  two
         revisions.  He is having left hip pain and has been  referred  back
         to Orthopaedics.

         [GP] has also been referred to the Memory clinic  and  is  awaiting
         assessment as he found that his memory has been poor recently.   He
         was also seen by the Fall's clinic last year because of  increasing
         falls at home.

         He has a past history of angina, low pack pain and  breathlessness.
         He also has a diagnosis of diverticulitis in 2016.

         He is on a variety of medications.  His medications are:

             Aspirin 75 mgs one taken daily

             Atorvastatin 50 mgs tablet taken once at night

             Bisoprolol 2.5 mgs taken daily

             Carmellose 0.5% eye drops - 1-2 drops 5 times daily

             Clenil Modulite 100 mcg Inhaler two doses twice daily

             Furosemide 40 mgs taken one daily

             Gaviscon Advance Oral suspension - 5-10 mls four times a day

             Omeprazole 20 mg tablet once a day

             Paracetamol 500 mg tablet taken once or twice six hourly.

         I am unable to give an  accurate  prognosis  of  [GP]'s  long  term
         health as he is awaiting Orthopaedic opinion regarding his hip pain
         and Memory clinic assessment regarding his poor memory.

         I  would  note  that  in  2016  he  was  seen  by   the   Pulmonary
         Rehabilitation clinic to try and improve his breathing function and
         he does get a degree of shortness of breath.  However, I am  unable
         to comment as to whether this would restrict his travel".

8.   So far as the first challenge is concerned, it is clear that the  judge
    did consider the letter from Dr Hall and  there  was  nothing  in  that
    letter to indicate that any medication or  treatment  that  [GP]  might
    require would not available to him in Nigeria.

9.   The second challenge was that it was part of the oral evidence of  [GP]
    that his dead wife's ashes were being kept with  his  son  and  it  was
    important for  [GP]  to  see  his  dead  wife's  ashes  regularly.   In
    addition, apparently, there were other arrangements  he  had  with  his
    children in the event of his death and the judge omitted this important
    piece of evidence as part of his proportionality exercise.   With  very
    great respect if [GP]'s dead wife's ashes  were  so  important  to  him
    there would be no reason at all why he should not take them with him to
    Nigeria.  In the event that [GP] should die in  Nigeria,  there  is  no
    reason why his body could not be flown back to the  United  Kingdom  in
    order that his children could make whatever arrangements he had  agreed
    with them for his funeral. This does not  disclose  any  error  of  law
    either.

10.  The third challenge is that at paragraph 38 of the decision  the  judge
    was wrong to conclude that the provisions set out in  Section  117B  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  were   not   of
    significance in this present case.  What the judge said at paragraph 38
    was that he would add that he was of the view that the  provisions  set
    out in Section 117B were not  significant.   The  appellant  can  speak
    English and the appellant is dependent on [GP] financially and  is  not
    likely to be a burden  on  the  taxpayer.   What  the  judge  said  was
    entirely correct and I find no error of law there either.

11.   At  the  hearing  before  me  today  neither  the  appellant  nor  her
    representative appeared.  When the matter was  called  for  hearing  at
    11.30  the  usher  attempted  to  make  contact  with  the  appellant's
    representatives using their main  telephone  line,  but  that  was  not
    answered.  She also attempted to make contact with a  mobile  line  but
    that was not answered and she left a message.  She rang another  number
    as well, but that was answered with a recorded message indicating  that
    messages could not be left.  In the circumstances, I proceeded to  hear
    the appeal in the absence of the appellant, no reason having been given
    for her absence.

12.   Mr  Melvin  indicated  that  there  was  no  error  in   the   judge's
    determination and invited me to dismiss the appeal.

13.  I have carefully read the determination and the grounds of  appeal.   I
    have concluded that there is no error in the judge's determination  and
    his  decision  shall  stand.   The  appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed.



No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

