
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15714/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th July 2019                       |On 25th July 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                MEHWISH TAHIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by TRP Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart  dismissed  the  appellant's
         appeal against the decision of the respondent  refusing  her  human
         rights claim. The decision was promulgated on  19th  February  2019
         following a hearing on 25th January 2019.

      2. The appellant had made a human rights  claim  which  had  initially
         been refused and certified under s94(1) Nationality Immigration and
         Asylum  Act   2002.   That   decision   by   the   respondent   was
         reconsidered/withdrawn  by  him  and  refused,  thus  enabling  the
         appellant to appeal.

      3. There are a number of difficulties  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision. The judge, at times,  addresses  the  certified  decision
         rather than the decision the  subject  of  appeal;  refers  to  the
         appellant's  nationality  as  Indian  whereas  she  is   Pakistani;
         although she finds the appellant's husband was badly advised and it
         is that advice which led to him not succeeding in  his  application
         for leave to remain under the  Rules,  she  finds  his  immigration
         history is not blameless.

      4. The judge's attention was particularly drawn to Mansur (Immigration
         Advisor's failings, Article 8) [2018] UKUT 274 (IAC) with  specific
         reference to the appellant's husband's  circumstances.  Submissions
         were made that given the acknowledged  failings  of  the  husband's
         immigration  advisors,  the  impact  on  the  public  interest   of
         maintaining immigration control was diminished. This, given the age
         of the eldest child, albeit under 7, and the length of residence of
         the husband and the appellant as his dependant,  should  have  been
         addressed and findings made. The reference  by  the  judge  to  the
         husband's circumstances not being an exceptional factor was, it was
         submitted in the grounds of appeal, an indication  that  the  judge
         had applied the incorrect test in searching for a unique or unusual
         feature.

      5. Mr Mills submitted that although the judge  had  at  times  in  the
         decision appeared to be addressing the wrong decision, the  overall
         conclusion was one which was inevitable and thus even if there were
         errors of law in the approach by the judge, they were not  such  as
         to result in the decision being set aside to be remade.

      6. This was a difficult case to decide given the mix-up by the  judge.
         As I emphasised to  Mr  Pipe,  and  he  acknowledged,  it  will  be
         difficult for the appellant to succeed in her appeal. Nevertheless,
         I do not take the view that the claim is unfounded  and  thus  that
         her appeal would inevitably fail. The mix up by the judge  combined
         with the failure to address Mansur in the accepted circumstances of
         the  husband  and  the   cursory   consideration   given   to   the
         circumstances  as  a  whole  render  the  decision,  in  my   view,
         untenable. The lack of care by the judge together with the  failure
         to address core submissions made, result in errors of law such that
         I set aside the decision to be remade.

      7. It cannot be said with certainty that the First-tier Tribunal judge
         addressed the evidence as a whole and reached conclusions that  can
         be retained. The hearing, or at least the decision has not  reached
         consistent  findings.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals  Court   and
         Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary  fact
         finding to the Upper Tribunal. In these circumstances I remit  this
         case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    re-heard.


     Date 20th July 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
