
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15841/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|with parties attending by Skype      |                                     |
|On 13th October 2020                 |On 22nd October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                            SALEEM JAHANGIR KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. I Khan, NK Law Solicitors, acting as agent for
                    International Immigration Advisory Services
For the Respondent:    Mrs. H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

 1. The hearing before me on 13th October 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The hearing
    was listed to commence at 10:30am but Mr Khan did not join the hearing
    until 10:50am, after enquiries had been made by the Tribunal clerk with
    International Immigration Advisory Services to establish whether the
    appellant was to be represented at the hearing.  Mr Khan claimed that
    although he was aware of the hearing listed, he had not been sent the
    link to join the hearing and had only been provided with the link,
    following the enquiries that were made by the Tribunal.  He had been
    instructed to act as an agent by International Immigration Advisory
    Services.  Although Mr Khan had joined the remote hearing by Skype and
    could be heard, neither I nor Mrs Aboni could see Mr Khan.  I suggested
    to Mr Khan that he should try and re-join the hearing so that he could
    be seen, but he claimed that the video function on the Skype software
    that he was using, was not working.  He confirmed that he was happy to
    continue with the hearing, and that he could see and hear both myself
    and Mrs Aboni.


 2. I was informed by Mr Khan that the appellant is aware of the hearing.
    Mr Khan had instructions that the appellant is happy for the hearing to
    proceed.  Had a request been made for a simultaneous BT conference call
    to be facilitated so that the appellant could hear the proceedings, I
    would have acceded to such a request.


 3. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and
    building were open to the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and
    I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I
    would have been, if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I
    was satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
    open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
    prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
    right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
    was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is
    proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
    issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


 4. The appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Raikes
    promulgated on 24th December 2019, in which she  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 9th September 2019 to  refuse  the
    appellant leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  his  family  life
    with his son, Muhammad Bilal Khan.


 5. The appellant filed an application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, claiming the decision of Judge Raikes was  vitiated  by
    material errors of law.  The grounds of appeal that appear to have been
    settled by Mr. Chaudhry of counsel, summarise the background and go  on
    to say, at paragraph [1]:


         "... From the  above,  it  is  proved  that  at  the  time  of  the
         application the appellant's son was not even  near  18,  let  alone
         twenty.  The Judge materially erred in law when instead of counting
         the age of the applicant's son on the date of  the  application  he
         considered it as it was on the date of the hearing.


         If the application is considered under the immigration  rules,  the
         relevant date is the date of the application, while under article 8
         it is the date of the hearing.  Albeit, there is case  law  on  the
         point, a recent one is referred to here  where  it  was  held  that
         validity of an application for leave to remain is to be  determined
         with reference to the law in force at the time that it is  made  or
         purportedly made [Das and Anor, And SSHD [2019] UKUT 354]


         ..."


 6. The appellant also advanced a second ground of  appeal.   That  is,  if
    judged objectively, the appellant could face very significant obstacles
    to reintegration in Pakistan, and the judge erroneously interpreted the
    words 'significant obstacles' in  a  literal  way,  rather  than  in  a
    sensible and practical sense.


 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    5th April 2020.  He stated:


         "This application pursues two grounds. The first ground is arguable
         as it discloses an arguable error of law in that the judge at  para
         28 of the decision has applied the date of hearing and not the date
         of the appellant's application when he would have  been  under  the
         age of 18. The second ground that the judge should have found  that
         there were significant obstacles to return  to  Pakistan  does  not
         appear to be arguable. I give permission on the first ground only."


 8. Having reviewed the file, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith sent  a  note  and
    directions to the parties expressing her provisional view that it would
    be appropriate to determine without a hearing,  pursuant  to  Rule  34,
    whether the making of the FtT's decision  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law, and if so, whether that decision  should  be  set  aside.
    Neither party complied with the directions given.


 9. The matter was reviewed again by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith  and  she
    issued a  further  note  and  directions  dated  31st  July  2020.   At
    paragraph [4], she referred to the appellant's grounds of  appeal,  and
    at paragraph [5], to the grant of permission to appeal.   At  paragraph
    [4], referring to the first ground of appeal, she said:


         "... I am afraid that I struggle to understand this  submission  as
         the appellant's  son  was  born  on  23  January  1999  (see  birth
         certificate at [AB/16]) and  so  would  have  been  aged  20  years
         whether that is taken at the date of application (23 March 2019) or
         date of hearing (10 December 2019)..."


10. At paragraph [7], Upper Tribunal Judge Smith said:


         "Neither party has filed submissions in this case either developing
         the grounds of appeal or as to the forum for determination  of  the
         error of law stage of the appeal.  As I have noted above, I do  not
         understand the ground on which the  appellant  has  expressly  been
         given permission. It may be that I have misunderstood the  evidence
         and I think it only fair to allow the appellant to respond to  what
         I say rather than deciding the error of law on the papers.  I  note
         that, although Judge Page clearly intended to refuse permission  on
         the remainder of the grounds, the way  in  which  his  decision  is
         written means that the appellant is  probably  able  to  argue  the
         remaining grounds but should take account of what is said by  Judge
         Page in his reasons and also what I  say,  particularly  about  the
         "Agyarko" point.  If, having considered what  is  said  above,  the
         appellant wishes to withdraw  his  appeal,  he  should  notify  the
         Tribunal as soon as possible. That is however, a matter for him."


11. Given what she had said about the possibility of  having  misunderstood
    either the evidence or the grounds pleaded, Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith
    directed that the 'error of law' should proceed  by  way  of  a  remote
    hearing,  rather  than  being  dealt  with  on  the  papers.  She  gave
    directions for the matter to be listed  for  a  remote  hearing,  using
    Skype for Business. It was against that background that the appeal  was
    listed before me on 13th October 2020.


12. I can dispose of the appeal in short form.  Mr  Khan  conceded  at  the
    outset that there is no merit whatsoever to either of  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He accepts the appellant's son was aged 20 when the  appellant
    made his application for leave to remain in the UK on 29th March  2019.
    He was unable to offer any explanation at all as to why the appellant's
    representatives  had  claimed  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that   the
    appellant's son "... was not even near eighteen, let alone twenty ...".
     He acknowledged that even if one were to read the  decision  of  Judge
    Page as being a grant of permission on all grounds, the  second  ground
    of appeal was equally without any merit.   He accepts that it was  open
    to Judge Raikes to dismiss the  appeal  for  reasons  set  out  in  her
    decision promulgated on 24th December 2019.


13. Mr Khan was unable to offer an explanation as to  why  the  appellant's
    representatives had persisted in pursuing an appeal that  was  entirely
    misconceived, and as Mr Khan acknowledged, entirely without any  merit.
    He  was  unable  to  give  any  explanation  for  the  failure  of  the
    professional representatives to take heed of the matters set out in the
    note and directions issued by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith  dated  31st
    July 2020.


14. Misleading the Tribunal in an application for permission to  appeal  in
    the way that occurred here, has a serious impact upon the ability of  a
    Judge to deal with the application fairly and properly, in the  limited
    time available. A judge considering an application  for  permission  to
    appeal  is  entitled  to  proceed  upon  the  basis  that  professional
    representatives will not mislead  the  Tribunal.  Here,  the  grant  of
    permission was secured by misleading the Tribunal as to the age of  the
    appellant's  son  as  at  the  date  of  the  appellant's  application.
    Behaviour of this kind runs contrary to the professional duties of  the
    representatives and is  entirely  contrary  to  the  duty  set  out  in
    paragraph 2(4) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
    upon parties to help the Tribunal to further the overriding  objective.
    That includes the objective to deal with cases  fairly  and  justly  in
    ways which are  proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the
    complexity of the issues, and the anticipated costs  and  resources  of
    the parties.  Pursuing what is an entirely unmeritorious appeal, as was
    immediately acknowledged at the outset of the hearing before me  by  Mr
    Khan, means that the resources of the Tribunal have been  taken  up  in
    circumstances where they could have been better directed to an arguable
    appeal.


15. I have significant concerns  about  the  conduct  of  the  professional
    representatives such that I require the  managing  partner/director  of
    International Immigration Advisory Services to  send  a  copy  of  this
    decision to counsel that settled the grounds of appeal.   The  managing
    partner/director shall also furnish me with the  following  information
    within seven days:


      a. The name and practising address of Counsel that settled the grounds
         of appeal, and confirmation that a copy of this decision  has  been
         provided to counsel.


      b. Their explanation for misleading the Tribunal  in  the  grounds  of
         appeal by claiming that the  appellant's  son  was  not  even  near
         eighteen as at the date of the application, when it must have  been
         obvious from even a cursory reading of the birth  certificate  that
         he was born on 23rd January 2019 and thus 20 years old at the  date
         of the application.


      c. Their explanation for continuing to pursue  what  was  an  entirely
         hopeless appeal from the  outset,  having  received  the  note  and
         directions issued by Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith  dated  31st  July
         2020.


      d. Any reasons they wish the Tribunal to consider before  it  makes  a
         decision as to whether the conduct of the appellant's  professional
         representatives should be reported  to  the  Solicitors  Regulation
         Authority and/or Bar Standards Board.


16. Counsel that settled the grounds of appeal shall within 14 days of this
    decision being sent to the parties, furnish me with the information set
    out at paragraph 15(b) and (d) above.


Notice of Decision


17. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raikes shall stand.


       Signed      V. Mandalia               Date     13th October 2020

       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
