
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/15855/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 4, 2019                             |On March 7, 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                CHOUDHRY [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Faryl, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a Pakistani national, claimed to have entered the United
    Kingdom on July 18, 2003 as a visitor. He  did  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom when his leave expired.

 2. The appellant made several applications to regularise  his  immigration
    status as follows:

      a) He submitted an application for indefinite leave to remain  in  the
         United Kingdom on July 22, 2009 but this was rejected on August  4,
         2009 as the appellant failed to pay the appropriate fee.

      b) On July 27,  2009  he  submitted  a  certificate  of  approval  for
         marriage which was issued on March 23, 2010.

      c) On August 7, 2009 he submitted an application for indefinite  leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom, but this was refused on  June  14,
         2010 without a right of appeal.

      d) On December 5, 2010 he submitted an application for leave to remain
         outside of the Immigration Rules, but this was refused  on  January
         9, 2011 without a  right  of  appeal.  A  reconsideration  of  this
         decision, on April 8,  2011,  upheld  the  original  decision.  The
         appellant  appealed  that  decision  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         dismissed his appeal and permission to appeal was  refused  by  the
         Upper Tribunal.

      e) On May 10, 2012 and June 21, 2012, the appellant applied to  remain
         on the grounds he was in a relationship with his partner but  these
         were rejected  and  refused  respectively  on  June  12,  2012  and
         February 15, 2013. The appellant  judicially  reviewed  the  latter
         decision, but this was refused.

      f) On January 8, 2015 the appellant invited the respondent to consider
         his situation under paragraph 353 HC 395 but this was  rejected  on
         March 18, 2016.

      g) On March 16, 2016 the appellant submitted a Family and Private life
         application which was refused and certified on December 7, 2016. On
         January 19, 2017 the appellant invited the respondent  to  consider
         his circumstances under paragraph 353 HC 395, but this was  refused
         and a subsequent judicial review application was refused  September
         28, 2017.

 3. The appellant lodged his  current  application  under  the  Immigration
    Rules on November 2, 2017 but this was refused  by  the  respondent  on
    July 12, 2018. The  appellant  appealed  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on July 26, 2018.

 4. His appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McCall  on
    November 8, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on November 28, 2018  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought on December 12, 2018  and  on  December
    20, 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson granted permission
    to appeal finding it arguable the Judge had erred in his assessment  of
    the appellant's partner's medical evidence and his conclusion that  she
    would be able to either accompany the appellant to Pakistan  or  remain
    alone in the United Kingdom.

 6. No anonymity decision is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Ms Faryl adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge had
    made an error in law by failing to take into account all of the written
    and oral evidence of the  appellant's  wife's  medical  condition  when
    deciding whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  either
    accompanying the appellant to Pakistan or to remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom without the appellant.

 8. She argued that the Judge had placed too much weight on one letter from
    a dietician which made no reference to the  appellant's  wife's  mental
    health. The appellant had stated in his oral evidence that he  did  not
    leave his wife alone and that he cooked for her,  gave  her  medication
    and took her out for a walk or to the shops. Whilst he  had  stated  in
    his oral evidence that he intended to work this was an  aspiration  for
    the future and he would only do so if there were others to provide  the
    necessary care for  his  wife.  The  fact  they  had  been  seeking  an
    assessment for fertility treatment was neither unusual  nor  unfanciful
    and should not have been used by the Judge to make an  adverse  finding
    against  the  appellant.  She  submitted  the  Judge's  assessment  was
    inadequate and there was a  material  error  when  he  found  that  her
    condition had improved.

 9. Mr McVeety noted that the Judge had accepted in  paragraph  26  of  his
    decision that the appellant's wife had  a  history  of  anxiety,  panic
    attacks and depression. It was  argued  the  appellant  should  not  be
    removed because he was providing 24/7  care  for  his  wife,  but  this
    contradicted his oral evidence that  he  wished  to  go  to  work.  The
    Judge's findings on fertility were  also  open  to  him.  In  order  to
    succeed, the appellant had to  demonstrate  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles in accordance with the dictum of R  (on  the  application  of
    Agyarko) (Appellant) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Respondent) [2017] UKSC 11.  Whilst  the  Judge  accepted  there  were
    health problems there had been no evidence adduced that  she  would  be
    unable to access treatment in Pakistan and the fact she did  not  speak
    Urdu was not an insurmountable obstacle.

10. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

11. It is clear from reading the Judge's decision that account was taken of
    the appellant's wife's mental health issues because at paragraph  6  of
    the decision the Judge treated her as a vulnerable person.

12. The appellant's immigration history was correctly recorded and  it  was
    noted that having entered the United Kingdom in July 2003 as a  tourist
    he did not leave and made no application to regularise his  stay  until
    July 22, 2009 when he made  an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  That  application  along  with  six  other  applications  were
    subsequently either rejected or refused by the respondent and three  of
    those applications were  considered  by  either  the  Tribunal  or  the
    Administrative Court.

13. The current application that was considered by the Judge concerned  the
    relationship between the appellant  and  his  wife  which  appeared  to
    commence towards the end of 2010. The respondent accepted, as  did  the
    Judge, that they were in a genuine and subsisting relationship  but  in
    order to meet Section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  the
    Judge had to be satisfied there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  his
    removal. Those insurmountable obstacles were said to be the appellant's
    wife's medical condition.

14. Ms Faryl submitted that the Judge did not take  into  account  all  the
    evidence and Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hodgkinson  found  it
    arguable the Judge McCall may have fallen into error in his assessment.

15. The Judge accepted at  paragraph  22  that  the  appellant  helped  and
    supported his wife from the moment they met and saved her from  a  life
    of illegal drugtaking. Whilst it  is  submitted  the  Judge  placed  no
    weight on the medical evidence, I note that he  referred  to  documents
    that existed in both the  appellant's  and  respondent's  bundle  which
    addressed her medical condition. The  Judge  noted  that  most  of  the
    medical evidence related  to  her  Personal  Independence  Payment  and
    Employment Support Allowance claims but at paragraph 24 he noted that a
    more recent letter from Lancashire NHS Trust referred to her ability to
    take half-hour walks around the park and to taking  nutritional  advice
    in order to address weight issues. It is this finding at  paragraph  24
    that Ms Faryl submitted amounted to an error in law.

16. However, contrary to Miss Faryl's submission the Judge did  not  simply
    base his decision  on  that  letter  because  he  considered  the  oral
    evidence provided by the appellant at the hearing.

17. The Judge set out, in his decision, an exchange between  the  appellant
    and Ms Faryl in which the appellant stated that in addition to  looking
    after his wife he intended to work. The Judge found that this statement
    contradicted the earlier claim that his wife required  24-hour  support
    and care.

18. The Personal Independence Payment award from July 30, 2016,  which  was
    payable until July 3, 2020, highlighted the fact that the appellant was
    entitled to an enhanced payment for daily living and a standard payment
    for mobility although the points awarded for  "preparing  food,  eating
    and drinking, managing treatments, washing and bathing, managing toilet
    needs and dressing and undressing" were all at the bottom  end  of  the
    scale and do not support an argument that she required care 24/7.

19. The Judge considered further  medical  evidence  contained  within  the
    bundles about her mental  health  and  ultimately  concluded  that  she
    relied on prescribed medication and  voluntary  attendance  at  support
    groups and did not pose a risk of harm to herself.

20. The Judge did not have any  evidence  regarding  medical  resources  in
    Pakistan and the appellant had to show his wife would not  be  able  to
    access the appropriate medical care in Pakistan. Ms Faryl did not argue
    that such facilities or medication were unavailable.

21. The Judge noted that the appellant  had  family  in  Pakistan  and  had
    previously been in business as  a  car  dealer.  The  Judge  considered
    numerous letters provided by family  members  and  the  caseworker  and
    attached  weight  to  those  documents.  At  paragraph  32  the   Judge
    considered the issue of insurmountable obstacles and  at  paragraph  33
    concluded that on the evidence before him there were no such obstacles.

22. Ms Faryl's submission was that the Judge decided the case on  a  single
    letter but a full reading of the  Judge's  decision  demonstrated  that
    this was not the case. The Judge did not dismiss the appellant's appeal
    based on a dietician's letter but found there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles having considered family evidence, medical evidence  and  the
    oral evidence provided by the witnesses. The finding therefore made  at
    paragraph 34 of the decision was open to the Judge.

23. The grounds of appeal did not  challenge  the  assessment  carried  out
    under article 8 ECHR but for the sake of completeness I find  that  the
    Judge's findings set out in  paragraphs  35-38  of  the  decision  were
    findings open to him.

24. There is no material error in law.

Notice of Decision

There is no error in law.  I uphold the original decision

Signed                              Date     05/03/2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed                              Date     05/03/2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
