
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15563/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 April 2018                           |On 24 April 2018               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                         EDWARD OLABODE MAJEKODUNMI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafferji of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmed a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The brevity of this decision is due to the commendable focus of the
         Representatives and narrowness of the issue.





Background

      2. The Respondent refused the application for  leave  to  enter  as  a
         spouse on 25 May 2016. His appeal against  this  was  dismissed  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego ("the Judge") following a hearing
         on 3 August 2017.

The grant of permission

      3. Judge Brunnen granted permission to appeal (7 February 2018) as  it
         is arguable that the Judge materially erred in failing to  consider
         Lycamobile records, photographs, and greeting cards that  had  been
         adduced  when  considering   whether   there   was   a   subsisting
         relationship or genuine marriage, and noted that  it  was  asserted
         that other electronic communication was said to have been  produced
         but also not referred to.

Respondent's position

      4. No rule 24 notice was issued. Miss Ahmed submitted  that  regarding
         the issue of the subsistence of the relationship the Judge did  not
         have to deal with every piece of evidence submitted and that  there
         was adequate consideration of the evidence. Regarding the issue  of
         the genuineness of the marriage, not every point had to be put. The
         reasoning for both issues was brief but adequate.

Discussion

      5. The judgement is extremely long.  It  runs  to  22  pages.  However
         almost 8 pages of that is recitation and detailed extracts of  case
         law none of which is necessary to include  providing  the  relevant
         principles are applied.

      6. Consideration of the relevant issues begins  on  page  11  at  [27]
         where the Judge identifies that he/she had received a bundle of 239
         pages of evidence including

             "evidence of  various  communications  and  screenshots,  2017
             flight tickets, various birthday cards, ...and copy  telephone
             records."

      7. It is recorded at [30.7] that there is daily communication  through
         phone, video, and WhatsApp. Within the  submissions  it  was  noted
         [45] that

             "there was in the bundle a wealth of  evidence  of  continuous
             communication and affection."

      8. In relation to the validity of the marriage, the evidence turned on
         consideration of the Appellant's previous divorce certificate.  The
         Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant had divorced  his  first
         wife  [49]  given  discrepancies  within  the  documents  regarding
         references, hearing dates, evidential challenges, stamps, and  date
         recording [53], and concerns  regarding  their  receipt  [54].  The
         Judge said that the Sponsors explanation that she had  got  a  copy
         rather than a new original

             "does not convince" [55].

      9. That is not that standard of proof. It is balance of probabilities.
         The Judge materially erred in applying the wrong standard of  proof
         on that issue.

     10. In relation to the genuineness of  the  current  relationship,  the
         Judge considers this at [58-63] although [58-62] relates  to  other
         matters that are not relevant to the complaint about  the  lack  of
         consideration of the documents produced.  All  the  Judge  says  in
         relation to this issue is [63]

             "I note the documentation set out in the bundle. There appears
             to be a  paternal  connection  (though  given  the  issues  of
             credibility I make no finding of fact), but the appellant  and
             the sponsor have not met the burden of proof, on  the  balance
             of probabilities, that  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship between them, and without such a finding of  fact
             this appeal cannot succeed."

     11. I am not satisfied that this is an adequate  consideration  of  the
         documents produced as he/she does not  explain  why  the  documents
         carry no weight and which was required to be undertaken as part  of
         the holistic assessment of the evidence. This amounts to a material
         error of law on that issue.

     12. I agree with the representatives that it is  appropriate  to  remit
         the matter for a new hearing with no findings being  preserved,  as
         the errors  go  beyond  those  contained  within  the  Presidential
         Guidance for retention in the Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing,
    but not before Judge Housego.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
23 April 2018
