
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15078/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th October 2018                           |On 23rd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     E P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Billie of A Billie Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Howard
    made following a hearing at Bradford on  20th  July  2017.   The  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant was born on  8th  November  1969  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe.  He came to the UK on 7th November 2002  and  sought  asylum.
    His claim was rejected and he made further submissions in 2007 and 2010
    both of which were unsuccessful.

 3. On 31st May 2016 the appellant was  refused  leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a person present and settled in the UK.

 4. Mr Billie of A Billie Law, who was present at the  First-tier  hearing,
    informed me that he sought permission to advance asylum grounds at  the
    hearing.  The protection claim is a new  matter  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 85(6) of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  and
    accordingly express consent from the Secretary of State was  needed  in
    order to allow the Tribunal to consider the ground in  accordance  with
    Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act.  Mr Billie said that  such  consent  was
    sought from the Presenting Officer at the hearing and was granted.

 5. He challenged the judge's decision on the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    failed to assess the risk of persecution  on  arrival  in  Zimbabwe  in
    accordance with existing country guidance  authority.   The  judge  had
    accepted that the appellant had been present  at  a  number  of  events
    before the Zimbabwean Embassy in London and ought to have engaged  with
    the fact that, regardless of the level of  his  political  profile,  he
    will be stopped and subjected to a two  stage  questioning  process  at
    Harare Airport.

 6. Furthermore the judge had failed to consider  whether  the  appellant's
    removal would constitute a breach of his right to remain in the  UK  on
    private life grounds - he has been here for over fifteen  years  -  and
    had erred in failing to assess the  claim  by  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(vi).

 7. Mr Tan accepted that the judge had erred for the reasons set out in the
    grounds and the appellant's submissions.  He did not oppose a  remittal
    of this appeal to a judge other than Judge  Howard  at  a  date  to  be
    notified.

 8. The original judge erred in law in failing to apply a number of country
    guidance cases in relation to Zimbabwe including TM (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
    [2010] EWCA Civ 916, EM and Others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011]  UKUT
    98 and CM (EM country guidance  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00059.

 9. He also erred in law in failing to  consider  one  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal, namely Article 8 both  in  relation  to  the  Rules,  paragraph
    276ADE and outwith the Rules. His decision is set aside.

10. Both parties are directed to serve on each other the bundles upon which
    they  intend  to  rely  within  fourteen  days  of  receipt   of   this
    determination.  The appellant is also  directed  to  expressly  request
    consent, prior to the hearing, from the Secretary of State to argue his
    protection claim before the next First-tier Judge.

Signed[pic]                             Date 17 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

