
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15820/2018
     HU/15823/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 11 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                 mrs n i (1)
                               miss m i b (2)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Sarker, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, the first appellant being  the
    mother of the  second  appellant.   The  first  and  second  appellants
    originally entered the UK with entry clearance as the spouse and  child
    of the sponsor also a Pakistani national and the husband of  the  first
    appellant and father of the second appellant.  Further leave to  remain
    was granted on application.  However on 15 July  2018  the  appellants'
    application for indefinite leave to remain was refused.  In a  decision
    promulgated on 15 February 2019 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  E  B
    Grant dismissed the appellants' appeals on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellants appeal with permission on the grounds that:

      1) The judge erred in law in considering whether it was reasonable for
         the children to return in particular it was argued that  the  judge
         erred in his consideration of the best interests of the 4 year  old
         British child of the first appellant and the sponsor.

Error of Law

 3. At the outset of the appeal Ms Everett  quite  properly  conceded  that
    although  the  decision  and  reasons  of  Ms  Grant   were   otherwise
    scrupulous, she had failed to adequately address the issues in relation
    to the 4 year old British citizen child of the family.

 4. The judge was clearly aware that there was a British citizen  child  as
    part of the family, including as mentioned at [34] and [36]  where  the
    judge identified that that child was a qualifying  child  in  terms  of
    Section 117D.  However, whilst the judge undertook arguably a  detailed
    consideration of the best interests of the second appellant, there  was
    no adequate consideration of the best interests of the British  citizen
    child including the relevant  considerations  considered  in  case  law
    including ZH (Tanzania).  I  was  reminded  of  what  was  said  in  MA
    (Pakistan):

         "... The concept of a qualifying child also includes a child who is
         a British citizen.  That will be a very important  factor  for  the
         court to take into account when having regard to the  child's  best
         interest: see ZH per Lady Hale paras 30-31, Lord Hope para  40  and
         Lord Kerr para 47.  As Lord Kerr pointed out, it bears both upon at
         best interest analysis and quite independently of that, will have a
         bearing on where the child should live.

         ..."

 5. As it was conceded that there was an error  in  the  lack  of  adequate
    consideration of both the best interests of the British  citizen  child
    and whether it will be reasonable for that child  to  return  with  his
    mother to Pakistan, I am satisfied that there is an error of law.  Both
    parties agreed  that  no  further  oral  or  documentary  evidence  was
    required and that the  Upper  Tribunal  could  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence before it albeit that  Mr  Sarker
    reminded the court that time had passed and that  the  British  citizen
    child was now 5 years old and that whilst the judge had stated that the
    British citizen child was not at school that was incorrect as noted  in
    the letter from the school  in  the  appellant's  bundle.   Ms  Everett
    accepted that that was the case.

Remaking

 6. I have considered in remaking the decision the intrinsic importance  of
    citizenship as is clear from  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.
    British Citizen  children  who  move  from  the  UK  would  lose  their
    educational opportunities, support and protection  of  the  country  of
    their nationality, amongst other  matters.   It  is  settled  law  that
    children are not to be blamed for the position  of  their  parents  and
    that there is much more to British citizenship than the status it gives
    to the children in immigration law.   As recognised by  Lord  Hope,  it
    carries with it a host of other benefits and advantages.

 7. Whilst the fact that British citizenship does not trump everything else
    I have reminded myself what was said in ZH (Tanzania) including that it
    will hardly ever be less than a very  significant  and  weighty  factor
    against moving children who have that status to another country with  a
    parent who has no right to remain here  especially  if  the  effect  of
    doing this is  that  they  will  inevitably  lose  those  benefits  and
    advantages for the rest of their childhood.

 8. I am satisfied that is exactly the case in the  appeal  before  me  and
    that if the decision of the First-tier Tribunal were to stand I  accept
    that the children would return with their mother to Pakistan  and  that
    the British citizen child does stand to lose the benefits and practical
    advantages of British citizenship for the rest of their  childhood.   I
    am satisfied that in this case the evidence points strongly to the best
    interests of the British citizen child, who has  also  now  started  at
    school, being in remaining in the UK with her family.

 9. Section 117b(6) of the 2002 Act provides:


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.


10. In considering whether it is reasonable for this family  to  return  to
    Pakistan I take into consideration all the factors and the  submissions
    of Ms Everett.  Whilst she did not specifically concede the appeal, she
    made no substantive submissions, other than indicating  that  the  Home
    Office policy position whilst currently under review remained,  largely
    speaking, that it was difficult to argue that a British  citizen  child
    should be expected to leave the UK, especially as the  actions  of  the
    parents could not be taken into consideration (KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC
    53).  KO found that it was inevitably relevant to  consider  where  the
    parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to  be,  since
    it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.  In  this
    case the appellants' sponsor has indefinite leave to remain whereas the
    first appellant does not have a right to remain in the UK.   KO  cited,
    with approval, Lewison LJ in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  874  including,  at  paragraph  58
    that:

         "... If one parent has no right to remain,  but  the  other  parent
         does, that is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. ... Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin."

11. I take it into account that it was not  Ms  Everett's  submission  that
    this was a family where it would be reasonable to expect the  children,
    including the British child and three further  children  who  have  now
    lived in the UK for over six years,  to  follow  their  mother  to  the
    country of origin.

12. In light of Home Office position before me and  in  light  of  all  the
    evidence considered in the round, although I accept that the family has
    ties to Pakistan and have visited there and that reasonableness must be
    considered in the real world, I am not satisfied that it is  reasonable
    to expect this British citizen child, who I accept is now 5  years  old
    is at school where I accept she speaks English and  is  developing  her
    life outside the home and who will in effect lose all of  the  benefits
    of British citizenship if her mother and sibling were to be removed, to
    leave the UK.  In reaching this finding I have also considered what was
    said in AB (Jamaica)  and  AO  (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  661  which
    reminded that the statute asks a  single  question  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable for the  child  to  leave  the  UK  (and  not  a  two  stage
    consideration of whether the child will in fact leave).

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.   I
    remake the decision allowing the appellants' appeals.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
