
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15247/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reason promulgated        |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 02 May 2019                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  BIBI [T]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, instructed by AWS Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
         Tribunal Judge Herwald ('the Judge')  promulgated  on  29  November
         2018 in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  human
         rights grounds.




Background


      2. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 17 January 1982.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Warr,  a  judge  of  the
         Upper Tribunal, on 6 February 2019 in the following terms:

             "It is said the First-tier Judge gave  an  indication  at  the
             hearing  about  allowing  the   appeal   but   no   procedural
             irregularity is  contended  for  and  it  is  not  argued  the
             decision was made orally at the hearing - see PAA  (FtT:  Oral
             decision- written reasons) Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  00013(IAC)  and
             Patel v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1175.


             However it is also argued that the  judge's  consideration  of
             the case law is  not  based  on  the  up-to-date  position  in
             grounds 8 to 11. It is correct that KO (Nigeria) and others  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53  had
             been handed down on 24 October, not long before  the  hearing.
             The Judge refers to MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  in
             paragraph 25 of the decision and it is perhaps  arguable  that
             his attention had not been drawn to what was  said  in  KO  at
             paragraph 19.


             I say no more than that the point is arguable. All the grounds
             may be argued  although  I  do  not  see  much  merit  in  the
             contention that the Judge might  not  have  recalled  all  the
             evidence given the  20  days  that  had  elapsed  between  the
             hearing and the decision being prepared."


Error of law


      4. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [19] of the decision under
         challenge in which the Judge notes that the sponsor  is  a  British
         citizen and that the respondent conceded that there  is  a  genuine
         and subsisting  relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  appellant
         [20(a)]. The Judge considers the issue of insurmountable  obstacles
         to integration into Mauritius concluding at [20(n)] that it was not
         made out that insurmountable obstacles existed in  accordance  with
         paragraph EX2 to the appellant and  her  sponsor  continuing  their
         family  life  in  Mauritius  or  elsewhere.  The  Judge   therefore
         dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules before  proceeding
         to consider article 8 outside the Rules.

      5. A determination speaks from the date of promulgation or the handing
         down of a judgement and there is arguable merit in the  appellant's
         contention that the case law relied upon by the Judge in  assessing
         the best interests of the child and whether it  was  reasonable  to
         remove a qualifying child,  pursuant  to  section  117B(6)  of  the
         Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  is   based   on
         consideration of the earlier case law  with  no  reference  to  the
         findings of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).

      6. It was properly conceded by Mr McVeety that the Judge's  assessment
         of the best interests of the child and the reasonableness issue  is
         infected by arguable legal error for the reason  submitted  in  the
         grounds of appeal and skeleton argument provided. The  decision  is
         set aside on this basis.

      7. The Upper Tribunal was, with the assistance of  the  advocates  and
         the appellant, able to proceed to remake the decision on  the  day.
         Oral evidence was given by both the appellant and her partner  (the
         sponsor).

      8.  There  are  two  relevant  children  for  the  purposes  of  these
         proceedings. The appellant's partner has 5 children from a previous
         marriage and is in contact with all his children and that 2 of  the
         children were living with the appellant and their father  when  she
         first moved  in  with  him.  The  current  situation  is  that  the
         appellant and her partner care for his granddaughter from Sunday to
         Thursday whilst the child's mother is at work and that the youngest
         child of the appellant's partner, who is approximately 15 years  of
         age, visits regularly.

      9. There is ongoing contact maintained between the appellant  and  her
         partner's child when she visits. It was not disputed  the  relevant
         children are British nationals and/or  that  the  appellant  has  a
         genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  her  British  national
         partner and a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  British
         child resident in the UK.

     10. The  question  in  this  appeal,  as  properly  identified  by  the
         advocates, is whether it be reasonable in all the circumstances  to
         expect the qualifying child to leave the UK. The Supreme  Court  in
         KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 has disapproved  the  reasoning  in  MA
         (Pakistan) &  Others  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  in  so  far  as  the
         immigration history of the parent is  relevant.   The  question  of
         whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK is to be
         decided without considering the immigration history of the parents.
          The immigration history is relevant however to whether the parents
         will be leaving the  UK.   To  that  extent  their  record  becomes
         indirectly material because it may lead to them having to leave the
         UK.  It is only if, even  on  that  hypothesis,  it  would  not  be
         reasonable for the child to leave that the provision may  give  the
         parents a right to remain.  The reasonableness of the child leaving
         the UK is to be considered on the basis that the facts are as  they
         are in the real world, so that  if  one  parent  has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other does, or if both parents  have  no  right  to
         remain that is the background  against  which  the  best  interests
         assessment is conducted. The ultimate question  is  whether  it  is
         reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right
         to remain to their country of origin.

     11. The appellant has existing family life  with  her  partner  in  the
         United Kingdom and if  the  appellant  has  to  leave  the  UK  the
         relationship cannot continue. If the  appellant's  partner  follows
         the appellant to Mauritius the appellant's partner's child will  be
         denied the  opportunity  to  continue  with  the  contact  that  is
         currently enjoyed with her father. It was not made out in  all  the
         circumstances that is reasonable to expect the qualifying child  to
         leave the United Kingdom to settle in Mauritius.

     12. The existence of the relationship with the qualifying child and the
         fact it is accepted it is not reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
         leave the United Kingdom establishes an insurmountable obstacle  to
         family life between the appellant and her partner continue  outside
         the United Kingdom. The  appellant  arguably  makes  out  her  case
         pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

     13. Mr Mahmood also referred to the fact  the  appellant  had  left  an
         abusive husband in Mauritius. This element was  considered  by  the
         Judge who at [15 (d)] finds:

             "She was physically abused by her husband, eventually  leading
             to the Protection Order in 2012. Once the Protection order was
             issued, she had to leave the home of her parents-in-law and:-


                  "Having left with no option rented a house at my cost  but
                  my ex-spouse broke the padlock at entry door  and  entered
                  the house to steal my money. On a second occasion he broke
                  the window and opened the door to come inside."


             So, although she appears not to have been  further  physically
             abused, she "left the country to escape domestic violence  and
             abuse"."


     14. There are within the bundle almost 50 reports to the authorities by
         the appellant of domestic  abuse  suffered  at  the  hands  of  her
         husband and evidence of the Protection order.

     15. It is also part of the factual  matrix  of  this  appeal  that  the
         appellant's partner has serious mental health issues.  He  receives
         PIP payments and has suicidal ideation and there was clear evidence
         before the  First-Tier  Tribunal  from  the  appellant's  partner's
         daughter that her father was in no fit state to live anywhere  else
         and that he was suicidal when her  mother  left  him.  It  is  this
         daughter whose child the appellant and her partner  care  for  from
         Sunday to Thursday as she works in Manchester.

     16. In his submissions made  at  the  conclusion  of  the  evidence  Mr
         McVeety properly recognised that he was in difficulty arguing  that
         it was reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom
         or that it was reasonable in all the  circumstances  to  sever  the
         bond between the appellant's partner and his child in the UK.  This
         is  not  a  deportation  appeal   with   no   substantial   adverse
         countervailing circumstances having been made out.

     17. This is one of those cases in  which  the  factual  matrix  clearly
         establishes that any interference with the appellant's family  life
         in the United Kingdom will  not  be  proportionate  to  the  public
         interest relied upon by the Secretary of State.

     18. Accordingly I substitute a decision to allow the appeal pursuant to
         article 8 ECHR.





Decision

     19. The Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the decision of  the
         original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal  is
         allowed.




   Anonymity.

     20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.

I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30 April 2019.


