

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15862/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2019                    |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                         mr mohammad rashidul hoque
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MR A. HAQUE (Legal representative)
For the Respondent:    MR L. TARLOW (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-  tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Goodrich)   ("FtT")
    promulgated on 11.4.2019 in which the appellant's human  rights  claims
    was dismissed.



Background

2.     The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh. He  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student with leave until 19.6.2015. His  wife  was  granted  ILR  in  a
    letter dated 21.6.2018 and the respondent  decided  to  reconsider  the
    appeal under EX 1.

3.      The  refusal  letter  stated  that  the  appellant   had   met   the
    requirements under Suitability and Eligibility.  It was  accepted  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting.  The  reason  for  refusal
    was that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  outside
    of  the  UK  and  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the  private   life
    requirements under paragraph 276ADE.

4.     Further grounds (SAG) were submitted with evidence to show  that  the
    appellant met the financial requirements.  At the  hearing  before  the
    FtT the HOPO consented to the SAG being raised as new matters. The  FtT
    acknowledged that the financial requirements were met at  the  time  of
    the hearing [10].

5.    In determining the issue of family life the FtT took  issue  with  the
    reasons for refusal letter which stated in terms that  the  suitability
    and eligibility requirements were met. The FtT found  that  the  letter
    had in all likelihood omitted the word "do not"  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements [40].  The FtT proceeded on that basis and concluded  that
    although the appellant had otherwise met the Immigration Rules [44], he
    was an over stayer and the Rules were not met. In considering Article 8
    the  FtT  concluded  that  it  was  proportionate  that  he  return  to
    Bangladesh to make an out of country  application.   There  was  public
    interest in the maintenance of a fair immigration control [71].


Grounds of appeal

6.    In grounds of appeal the  appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    misconceiving  the  facts  and  law  which  lead  to  the   making   of
    inappropriate findings that the appellant was an over stayer.  The  FtT
    failed to apply the  correct  provisions  which  would  mean  that  the
    appellant was not in fact an over stayer as his  application  was  made
    before 28.11.2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave.

7.    The FtT erred by failing to  properly  consider  the  SAG  raised  and
    consent was given by the respondent's  representative for those matters
    to be considered.

8.   The FtT was wrong to question the content of the  refusal  letter  with
    regard  to  suitability  and  eligibility   requirements,   which   the
    respondent had accepted were met [40]  and  to  substitute  alternative
    wording.  Indeed the respondent's representative had also confirmed  to
    the FtT that it was the respondent's case that these requirements  were
    met.

9.    The FTT failed to properly carry out  a  balanced  assessment  of  all
    relevant factors and the consequences of the appellant having to return
    to Bangladesh.

Permission to appeal

10.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    Davidge who considered that the FtT was arguably wrong  to  presume  at
    [40] that the decision  maker  who  had  stated  that  the  eligibility
    requirements were met in fact intended to write  "were  not  met".  The
    decision under Article 8 was thus arguably infected by the error.

Rule 24 notice

11. There was no rule 24 response.

Submissions

12.  At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Haque,  representing  the  appellant,
    expanded on the grounds of appeal.  He argued that the FtT had confused
    the provisions in force at the material time  and  was  wrong  to  have
    doubted the decision made by the respondent who  had  not  taken  issue
    with the eligibility requirements.  Mr Haque submitted  that  the  HOPO
    had not raised any issue that the appellant was an over stayer. The FtT
    ought to have considered if the appellant  met  the  Immigration  Rules
    having regard to the SAG in which there was  evidence  that  the  rules
    were met.

13.   In response Mr Tarlow acknowledged that in light of  the  grounds  and
    submissions there was an error of law in the decision and reasons.  The
    FtT ought not to have inferred words in the  refusal  letter.   It  was
    accepted that the FtT had no basis in law  for  the  finding  that  the
    appellant was an over stayer.  Mr Tarlow indicated that the UT was in a
    position to simply remake the decision.

Discussion and conclusion
14.    I find that there were material errors in law  in  the  decision  and
    reasons of the FtT.  The grounds  are  made  out.   The  FtT  erred  by
    presuming that the respondent had made an error in the  refusal  letter
    when it was clear that the position of  the  respondent  was  that  the
    eligibility and suitability requirements were met. It was  premised  on
    the law applicable such that the appellant  was  not  an  over  stayer.
    This position was also confirmed by the Presenting officer who attended
    the hearing, although there is some contraindication  in  the  decision
    and reasons. The FtT nevertheless took the view that the refusal letter
    was wrong and decided to substitute its  own  wording  in  the  refusal
    letter such that it altered the respondent's decision and reasons. I am
    satisfied that in proceeding on that false basis the FtT's approach  in
    effect  infected  the  ultimate  consideration  under  Article  8.   In
    addition  the   circumstances   were   such   that   the   respondent's
    representative had given consent to a new matter being raised in SAG in
    which it was  evidenced  that  the  appellant  had  met  the  financial
    requirements  of  the  Rules  at  the  time  of  the  hearing.  It  was
    specifically submitted by the respondent's  representative  that  there
    were no public interest factors having regard  to  immigration  control
    [22]. Accordingly I am satisfied that the FtT erred in  the  assessment
    of Article 8 and proportionality having pursued an  erroneous  approach
    to the Immigration Rules.

15.    Taking in to account the concession made  by  Mr  Tarlow  as  to  the
    error of law and his submission for the decision to be  remade  in  the
    UT, it was not necessary for me to hear further submissions.

16.  There is a material error of law disclosed in the decision which  shall
    be set aside.

17.  I find that the appellant has met the requirements of  the  immigration
    Rules under Appendix FM. Article 8 is engaged and the stages in  Razgar
    are met. There is no public interest in the removal  of  the  appellant
    and or requiring him to make an out of country application.

Decision

18. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.




                               Signed                     Date 17.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 17.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






