

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
HU/15808/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |    Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|Centre                                |                                       |
|On 14 September 2018                  |    On 01 October 2018                 |
|                                      |                                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                           GODWIN CHIEMEZIE CHIEGE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson, instructed by Knightbridge Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. Mr Chiege was convicted of  13  counts  of  dishonestly  making
            false statements/representations to make gain or cause loss and
            he was sentenced to 2 years and 6 months imprisonment. Pursuant
            to s32(5) UK Borders Act 2007 a deportation  order  was  signed
            against him.  The  respondent  also  took  the  view  that  his
            deportation was conducive to the public good because he  had  a
            previous conviction for battery in January 2012  for  which  he
            received a community order.


         2. His human rights claim was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a
            decision dated 27th October 2016 and his  appeal  against  that
            decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy,  for
            reasons set out in her decision promulgated on 15th May 2018.


         3. Permission to appeal that decision was sought  and  granted  on
            the grounds that it was arguable that the judge had  failed  to
            consider whether the effect of Mr Chiege's deportation would be
            unduly harsh on his wife and children, failed to  make  express
            reference to s117C Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
            failed to consider the children's best interests as  a  primary
            consideration and failed to make reference to the expert report
            from the social worker.

         4. Although the respondent's  Rule  24  response  stated  that  he
            considered the decision did not show a material error  of  law,
            Mr McVeety acknowledged that there had been no reference to the
            social workers report and this was a matter  that  should  have
            been considered by the judge.

         5. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge erred  in  law  in
            failing to have adequate or any regard to the  social  worker's
            report. I set aside the decision to be remade.

            Remaking the decision.

         6. Mr Timson submitted that the factual findings of the First-tier
            Tribunal judge were infected by Mr Chiege's criminality.  There
            had been no challenge raised in the grounds of  appeal  to  the
            findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge, the challenge was to
            the conclusions drawn from those findings in the context of the
            lack of consideration of the social work report.  The  findings
            as made by the First-tier Tribunal judge stand.  I  refused  to
            remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing  de-
            novo. There was no need for further oral evidence, there  being
            no challenge to the evidence  as  recorded  in  the  First-tier
            Tribunal decision and no indication that further oral  evidence
            was necessary.


         7. I heard submissions from both parties.

         8. The appellant arrived in the UK on 2nd February and was granted
            leave to enter as a student, visa valid until 31 October  2009.
            On 20 December 2008 he married Ms B and his leave to remain was
            varied such that he was granted leave to  remain  as  a  spouse
            until 30 March 2011. He was granted indefinite leave to  remain
            on 5 September 2011. The  couple  have  two  children  born  21
            January 2009 and 29 December 2012; his wife has an older  child
            born February 2003 from an earlier relationship who is part  of
            the family unit. She has no contact with her birth father.

         9. On 17 July 2015 Mr Chiege was convicted, following  a  plea  of
            guilty,   to   13   counts   of   dishonestly   making    false
            representations to make gain for self/another or cause loss  to
            other/expose other to  risk  and,  on  23  September  2015  was
            sentenced to a total of 2 years and 6 months  imprisonment.   A
            deportation order was signed on 27 October 2016.

        10. The retained findings are as follows:

             . The appellant's wife was convicted of handling  stolen  goods
               as her part in the criminal activity.
             . Mr Chiege lied when he told  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
               that he was not in contact  with  his  mother,  brothers  and
               sisters in Nigeria; he is in almost daily  contact  with  his
               family there.
             . That his wife "probably" was  forced  to  participate  in  Mr
               Chiege's fraudulent business.
             . His wife  is  a  registered  carer  for  her  mother  who  is
               suffering  from  breast  cancer;  her  sister  suffers   from
               cerebral palsy and is unable to assist with their mother.
             . Mr Chiege has lived with the older child since she was  small
               and with his birth children since they were born,  save  when
               he was in prison.
             . The children visited him  in  prison  and  do  not  want  him
               deported.
             . The children are old enough to participate in  telephone  and
               internet contact.
             . The children are all British Citizens, as is his wife.
             . The best interest of the children lie with  the  family  unit
               remaining together.
             . The family are a close family.
             . It would be unduly harsh for the children and Mrs  Chiege  to
               relocate to Nigeria.

        11. In the course of his sentencing remarks, the judge said


                  "....[the fraud] in actual fact is and it was vast.
                  ...
                  I agree Mr Chiege that you are of 'high culpability; you
                  are a leading role; you involved others; it was
                  sophisticated and there were large numbers of victims. I'm
                  not sure you coerced your wife into it; there are
                  certainly antecedents that suggest that part of your
                  history is one of domestic violence, but I have a head on
                  factual clash between two defendants as to whether or not
                  there was coercion and I'm not prepared to make a finding"



        12. The sentence passed upon Mr  Chiege  brings  him  within  s117C
            Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  when  considering
            his human  rights  claim.  The  public  interest  requires  his
            deportation  unless  Exception  1  or  Exception   2   applies.
            Exception 1 does not apply - he has not been lawfully  resident
            in the UK for most of his life and  there  are  no  significant
            obstacles to his reintegration to Nigeria.


        13. It is plain that he has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
            with his wife and the three children. Letters from the children
            in the bundle describe the emotional upset they faced whilst he
            was in prison. The older  child  shows  insight  into  how  his
            absence affected her and makes the point that he  is  the  only
            father she has ever know. The letter from  his  mother  in  law
            present Mr Chiege as remorseful and full of regret  -  this  is
            not borne out by the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  judge
            who found him to be a liar and  prepared  to  say  anything  to
            enable him to get what he wants.

        14. A letter from a school friend of Mr Chiege's wife describes him
            as a loving husband and father. This is not the finding of  the
            First-tier Tribunal judge who found that he  coerced  his  wife
            into committing crime and that there had been  an  incident  of
            domestic violence in the past.

        15. The letters from the nursery and the school do not  assist  the
            appellant. They do no more than indicate an involvement in  the
            children's lives  and  make  non-specific  comments  about  the
            emotional impact of separation whilst he was in prison.  It  is
            inevitable that when a father/husband is sent  to  prison  that
            will have an emotional impact on the family. An undated  letter
            from the primary school head teacher refers  to  her  judgement
            that should Mr Chiege not be allowed to remain in the  UK  "the
            effect on their emotional well-being and their  learning  would
            be significant". The head teacher  does  not  explain  on  what
            basis she draws that conclusion, how much contact she  has  had
            with the children and she  does  not  say  what  she  means  by
            significant. There is nothing in those letters that  begins  to
            suggest that the separation of Mr Chiege from  his  family  has
            had unduly harsh consequences for the children or his wife. The
            headteacher refers  to  the  middle  child  'coping'  with  her
            father's imprisonment. There is nothing  in  these  letters  to
            indicate that with the support of  their  mother  the  children
            would not cope. They may be, understandably, upset, but that is
            a long way from a conclusion  that  the  effect  of  separation
            would be unduly harsh on them.

        16. The report from the Probation  Service  dated  7th  March  2018
            states that there is no indication that Mr Chiege has continued
            to offend and  that  probation  records  indicate  that  he  is
            "trying to  make  pro-social  decisions  for  himself  and  his
            family."

        17.    The    social    worker    who    prepared    the    'Family
            Circumstances/Article 8 report' is an experienced professional.
            She interviewed Mr Chiege, his wife and their children  on  one
            occasion for about 2 hours. The report says that she  also  had
            information provided to her by Mr Chiege's solicitors, but  the
            report does not say what that information was. She records  Mrs
            Chiege's view that if Mr Chiege were deported she would have to
            give up work and claim benefits, her depression  and  low  mood
            and the difficulties  that  Mrs  Chiege  says  she  would  have
            without her husband present. The report makes no mention at all
            of how Mrs Chiege coped whilst Mr Chiege was in prison; whether
            she gave up work or what she did with her young  children.  The
            report states that removal of Mr  Chiege  will  take  away  the
            financial and emotional stability the family enjoys  but  makes
            no mention of the effect on the children of their father  being
            in  prison  and  what  effect  that  had  on  their   emotional
            stability. Although she concludes that the children are  likely
            to experience emotional trauma and stress she does not  provide
            any indication of what that might be. This is surprising  given
            that the children have already been separated from their father
            whilst he was in prison. The reference by one of  the  teachers
            that  the  middle  child  coped,  with  her  mother's  support,
            provides greater insight  than  the  social  worker,  with  its
            reference to the separation that occurred when Mr Chiege was in
            prison.


        18. None of the letters or reports relied upon provide analysis  of
            whether and  how  the  children's  behaviour  or  learning  was
            significantly undermined by Mr Chiege's imprisonment, save  for
            the  oldest  child.  Although,  as  submitted  by  Mr   Timson,
            deportation is very different from a lengthy period in  prison,
            the evidence relied upon does not support  a  finding  that  it
            would be unduly harsh for  them  to  be  separated  from  their
            father. He is their carer, but they are cared for by both their
            parents; whilst he was in prison Mrs  Chiege  was  truly  their
            primary carer. There is simply inadequate evidence to  be  able
            to conclude that the separation of the children and Mrs  Chiege
            from the appellant would be unduly harsh. Yes, it is  in  their
            best interest to live with and grow up as part of a family unit
            with both their mother  and  father.  Yes,  it  would  be  very
            upsetting and emotionally stressful but there  is  no  evidence
            that could lead to conclusion that would bring Mr Chiege within
            Exception 2.

        19. The children are British; there was  no  suggestion  that  they
            would be able to easily  relocate  to  Nigeria,  even  if  they
            wanted to. It almost goes  without  saying,  given  their  age,
            family ties and lives here in the UK, that it would  be  unduly
            harsh for Mrs Chiege  and/or  the  children  to  relocate.  Mrs
            Chiege has caring responsibilities over and  above  those  with
            her children.

        20. Mr Chiege did not rely on any other factor to support his human
            rights claim; his claim is based upon his family relationships.
            He has been  convicted  of  a  serious  offence  for  which  he
            received a lengthy prison sentence.  It  is  a  consequence  of
            criminal activity that families are  separated.   Although  the
            best interests of the children are for him to remain in the UK,
            the evidence before me does not support the contention that  it
            would be unduly harsh for these children, or his  wife,  to  be
            separated from him on his deportation.  I  of  course  consider
            that because of deportation he would  be  unable  to  apply  to
            return to the UK for several years and that  contact  with  his
            children and wife will necessarily be restricted to  telephone,
            skype and similar and that visits may be very limited. But  the
            evidence before me does not support  a  conclusion  that  those
            circumstance would be unduly harsh.

        21. The appeal is dismissed.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it


                                    Date 27th September 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
