
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15064/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22 December 2017                   |On 30 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mrs urmila vasant kadam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner, of Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox who in a determination promulgated
    on 17 August 2017 allowed the appellant's appeal against a decision  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer, made on 24 May 2016, to refuse her a  visa
    to enable her to enter Britain as the dependent relative of her son.

2.   Although the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant before me I  will
    for ease of reference refer to him as the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly, I will refer  to  Mrs  Urmila
    Vassant Kadam as the appellant as she  was  the  appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  23  July  1942.   In  the
    refusal the Entry Clearance Officer wrote that it was not accepted that
    she could not receive the required level of care in her own country nor
    was it accepted that there was no one in  India  who  could  reasonably
    provide it or that it was not affordable.  The Entry Clearance  Officer
    pointed out that the appellant had recently applied  for  a  five  year
    visit visa to see her family in the United  Kingdom  and  had  made  no
    mention of any medical conditions in that application and, in fact, had
    stated that she would not have medical treatment in Britain.   The  ECO
    said that if she now required full-time care due to medical problems it
    was unclear "how you would have spent 5 years  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without any need for treatment".  It was noted that  in  the  last  two
    years she had made numerous visits globally which  indicated  that  she
    was both in good physical condition and it was stated it  was  unlikely
    that someone in need of care and who could not complete everyday  tasks
    would be a frequent international traveller.  It was  stated  that  she
    has not indicated that she met the threshold of dependency outlined  in
    Appendix FM.  The Entry Clearance Officer went on to state:-

         "Based on the information you have provided I am not satisfied  you
         need care.  I am not satisfied that you require, due to either age,
         illness or disability, long-term personal care to perform  everyday
         tasks.  I therefore refuse your  application  under  paragraph  EC-
         DR.1.1.(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  (E-ECDR.  2.4)
         and (E-ECDR.2.5)"

    The application was also refused on human rights grounds.

4.   The grounds of appeal argued that the appellant  met  the  requirements
    of the Rules and also that the decision was not in accordance with  the
    sponsor's Article 8 rights.

5.   There was no appearance  on  behalf  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    before the First-tier Judge.  In a brief determination the judge  noted
    the respondent's decision, set out the burden and  standard  of  proof,
    listed case law,  and  noted  that  a  bundle  of  documents  had  been
    submitted.  In paragraphs 16 through 24 he set out the submissions made
    to him by Mr Turner.

6.   In less than a page he set out his findings which were:-

         "25. The appellant satisfied the burden upon her in accordance with
             the Immigration Rules.  The  available  evidence  demonstrates
             that the appellant is unable to obtain the required  level  of
             care in India as there is no person in that  country  who  can
             reasonably provide it.

          26. The distinguishing feature of the evidence is the  exceptional
             circumstances arising from  the  sponsor's  personal  history.
             When considered with the appellant's medical  evidence  it  is
             reasonable to conclude that the sponsor stands apart from  all
             other possible carers.

         27.  It is  evident  that  the  sponsor  has  overcome  significant
             personal challenges in order to pursue his life opportunities.
              It is reasonable to conclude  that  the  appellant  has  been
             fundamental in the sponsor's success.  His dependency upon her
             causes the appellant's relationship with  the  sponsor  to  go
             beyond normal emotional ties between adult family members.

         28.  The sponsor's separation from the appellant can be likened  to
             an adult child's departure  for  further  education  delivered
             outside the home region.  It is acknowledged  that  this  does
             not automatically sever family ties  and  the  same  principle
             applies to the sponsor due to his heightened  dependency  upon
             the appellant.

         29.  For these reasons I find that  the  family  life  between  the
             appellant  and  sponsor  was  never  severed.   The  sponsor's
             dependency  has  evolved  into  a  mutual  dependency  as  the
             appellant gets older.  It is reasonable  to  expect  that  the
             exceptional circumstances that caused the bond to  arise  will
             result in  the  sponsor's  acute  desire  to  demonstrate  his
             appreciation as the appellant enters a  vulnerable  period  of
             her own life.  The  detrimental  emotional  and  psychological
             impact, upon the appellant and sponsor, of an inability to  do
             so is apparent from the available evidence.

         30.  As the appeal is allowed in accordance  with  the  Immigration
             Rules it is unnecessary to consider  Article  8  ECHR  in  any
             meaningful detail.  It follows that inference with  Article  8
             ECHR  is  disproportionate  to  any  legitimate  aim  pursued.
             Exceptional circumstances exist for the same reasons as stated
             above; Nagre applied."

7.   The judge  therefore  allowed  the  appeal  apparently  on  immigration
    grounds as well as on human rights grounds.

8.   The Entry  Clearance  Officer  appealed  stating  that  the  judge  had
    firstly failed to give adequate reasons to make material findings.  The
    grounds read:-

         "Given the appeal was allowed under the rules  the  FTTJ  makes  no
         proper findings about what  the  appellant's  current  medical  and
         personal needs are and what everyday tasks she needs personal  long
         term care to perform.  Indeed the FTJ notes counsel's concession at
         [20] that the medical evidence is lacking.

         Given this was an appeal allowed under the rules the FTJ  makes  no
         proper findings about how the provisions  of  the  adult  dependent
         relative rules are satisfied.

         The actual findings of the FTJ upon the evidence appear in 5  brief
         paragraphs [25-29].  The FTJ appears to reason that  the  sponsor's
         success in life has been attributable to the appellant - [27].   It
         is respectfully submitted the  FTJ  has  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons as to  how  the  sponsor  is  therefore  dependent  on  the
         appellant for his success.  Further the FTJ's  rationale  that  the
         sponsor was like a child who has left  home  to  study  further  is
         misconceived.  The sponsor left India and the family home to pursue
         his own career abroad [22].  The present facts  in  no  way  mirror
         that of a child who has temporarily left home to study and this  is
         deemed not to have formed his own independent life.

         The FTJ's findings on the  existence  of  family  life  and  mutual
         dependency are inadequately explained or reasoned.

         Further, insofar as it could be suggested the  appeal  was  allowed
         under article 8 (which the ECO contends it  manifestly  wasn't)  no
         findings were made about any public interest features under 117B of
         the 2002 Act."

9.   At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  Ms  Everett  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal emphasising that the judge had not  given  sufficient
    or indeed any reasons for his decision.  It was noted  that  the  judge
    had relied on the sponsor's medical history but that in itself did  not
    demonstrate family life.  The only evidence was, she argued, that there
    was a letter from the appellant's physician stating that her health  is
    deteriorating because she missed  her  son.   It  was  not  clear,  she
    argued, how the appellant might met  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
    Moreover no reasons had been given as  to  why  the  application  could
    succeed under Article 8.

10.  In reply Mr Turner argued that the appellant's evidence and the  bundle
    of documents submitted clearly showed that the appellant  met  all  the
    requirements for her needs.  He referred to statements  in  the  bundle
    from the  sponsor,  the  sponsor's  wife  and  the  appellant  and  the
    assertions made that she is unable to  meet  or  obtain  the  necessary
    level of care.  He referred to the  sponsor's  own  health  issues  and
    argued that it was only the sponsor who could care for his mother.   It
    was not, he argued, an issue of money but the fact of the level of care
    which she require.  He asserted that the judge  had  made  findings  of
    fact which were fully open to him and that there was no real  challenge
    to those.  He argued that was often claimed that a judge did  not  need
    to make findings on all issues in an appeal  provided  it  was  evident
    that he had considered all aspects of the law.  He argued that that was
    what  had  happened  here.   Moreover,  he  argued  that   there   were
    exceptional circumstances in this case which, when the medical evidence
    was considered, meant  that  this  case  stood  apart  from  all  other
    possible cases or other possible carers.  He asked  me  to  accept  the
    sponsor's desire to look after his mother at a vulnerable period in her
    life and stated that the grounds were merely a  disagreement  with  the
    facts which were fully open to the judge.

Discussion.

11.  The  Immigration  Rules  set  out  the  clear  requirements  for  entry
    clearance to be issued  to  a  dependent  parent.   These  are  set  in
    Appendix FM at E-EDCR.2.1 and in particular E-ECDR.2.2.5 which states:-

         "The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partners  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner must  be
         unable even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor to
         obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they  are
         living because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  is not affordable."

12.  The further relevant issue relate to the financial  requirements  which
    include evidence that  the  applicant  can  be  adequately  maintained,
    accommodated and cared for in the United Kingdom by the sponsor without
    recourse to public funds and, if the applicant's sponsor is  a  British
    citizen or settled in the United Kingdom, the applicant must provide an
    undertaking signed by the sponsor confirming the applicant will have no
    recourse to public funds and that the sponsor will be  responsible  for
    his or her  maintenance, accommodation and care for a  period  of  five
    years from the date the applicant enters the United Kingdom if they are
    granted indefinite leave to enter.

13.  It is clear from the determination that the  judge  no  where  grapples
    with the requirements of the Rules and yet he appears to  have  allowed
    the appeal under the Rules.   The  very  least  that  could  have  been
    expected would be for the judge to set out the Rules  and  to  say  how
    each requirement of the Rules is met and his reasons for  finding  that
    that Rule is met.  There is no evidence whatsoever that the  judge  has
    carried out that exercise.  On that basis his decision  to  allow  this
    appeal is in material error of law.

14.  With regard to the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds that appears to be based on the fact that the judge  has  found
    that the requirements of the Rules for  an  adult  dependant  are  met.
    That, however, has not been shown by the judge for the reasons which  I
    have set out above.  Moreover the first step in considering an  Article
    8 application is whether or  not  there  is  family  life  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  In this case the judge appears to state the
    relationship between the appellant and the sponsor is like that between
    a parent and a child who goes to  study  for  a  period  abroad  before
    returning home.  That is simply not the case here.  The reality is that
    the sponsor, who was born in January 1968, left home in  2005  to  work
    abroad.  He entered Britain in 2006.   This  application  was  made  in
    2015.  That does not  show  that  family  was  continuing  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor - the sponsor left India at the age of 39.  I
    therefore do not see how the judge could have  considered  that  family
    life exists in any meaningful sense.

15.  I accept that the sponsor has had a  difficult  life  and  the  way  in
    which he has tackled the very serious illnesses  -  both  polio  and  a
    stroke - and  has  made  a  successful  career  is  admirable.   I  can
    understand that he is particularly attached to his mother, but I do not
    consider that those facts  alone,  while  they  introduce  very  strong
    compassionate factors in  this  case,  are  sufficient  to  lead  to  a
    decision that the appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.

16.  For the above reasons I find that there are material errors of  law  in
    the determination of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  set
    aside his decision.

17.  The decision is so lacking in reasoning for the reasons  which  I  have
    given  that I hesitate to conclude that there  was  no  evidence  which
    could have led this case to be successful - what there appears to be is
    complete lack of enquiry into the evidence and findings made.  For that
    reason I consider that it is appropriate that this appeal  be  remitted
    for a further hearing in the First-tier Tribunal where a further  judge
    can make findings on all relevant issues,  both  with  regards  to  the
    ability of the appellant to meet the requirements of the Rules and with
    regard to her rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   I  consider  it
    important that there are findings regarding each and every  element  of
    the requirements in  the  Rules,  which  Mr  Turner  has  accepted  are
    stringent, and in particular I consider that enquiry needs to  be  made
    and findings then made regarding  the  appellant's  other  children  in
    India.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  afresh  on
all issues.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 25 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy





