
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15940/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) hearing in Field   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 6th June 2019                     |On 18th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                             mr Mosaraf Hossain
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G O'Ceallaigh, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh whose appeal was dismissed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge White in a decision promulgated on 11th April
    2019.  Grounds of application were lodged.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  in  a  decision
    dated 14th May 2019.  Thus, the appeal came  before  me  on  the  above
    date.

 2. Before me Counsel relied on his grounds.  Given  the  failures  in  the
    decision particularly on the issue of credibility the  decision  should
    be set aside and the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 3. For the Home Office  Ms  Jones  relied  on  the  Rule  24  notice.   In
    particular the Appellant accepted that the voice  recording  linked  to
    him was not his voice and that  the  Home  Office  had  discharged  the
    initial burden of proof.  The oral evidence of the Appellant appears to
    have not been wholly rejected but the explanations  provided  were  not
    satisfactory.

 4. The Home Office  had  established  that  the  evidence  demonstrated  a
    statistically high level of fraud at  Colwell  College  and  where  the
    Appellant accepted the voice recording was  not  his.   The  judge  was
    entitled to  conclude  having  regard  to  all  the  evidence  and  the
    Appellant had used a proxy.

 5. At the same time Ms Jones accepted that there was no clear  credibility
    finding against the Appellant.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. The grounds of application are  extensive.   It  is  not  necessary  to
    repeat them all here but Ground 1 relates to the judge failing to reach
    a conclusion as to whether the Appellant's account was credible and  in
    treating the Respondent's evidence as  determinative  it  is  said  the
    judge erred in law.  In paragraph 7 of the grounds it is said the judge
    reached no  conclusion  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's  account  was
    plausible or whether his evidence was credible despite noting  that  it
    was "not shaken by cross-examination" and not "inherently contradictory
    or implausible".  Paragraph 8 says that the judge's failure to reach  a
    conclusion on this core issue was an error of law.

 8. Reference is made to SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence -  Burden  of  Proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) which led the Tribunal to fail to properly  weigh
    the Appellant's evidence  against  that  of  the  Respondent.   Further
    grounds which may well have merit are stated.

 9. However, it seems to me that in a case of this nature it  is  essential
    for the judge to make a clear credibility finding.  That was  not  done
    in this case.  Of course, if the Appellant was regarded as  a  credible
    witness then it  is  very  likely  that  the  appeal  would  have  been
    successful.  There are other factors which went to the  credibility  of
    the Appellant namely paragraph  20  wherein  the  judge  notes  various
    witnesses testified to their shock at the allegation  of  cheating  and
    that the Appellant would not do such a thing.  The judge says this is a
    factor to be taken into account.

10. Fairness demands that the Appellant has a clear and coherent finding on
    credibility either in his favour  or  against  him.  Without  that  the
    decision is simply not safe. Sometimes an inference can be  drawn  from
    all the findings that the judge must have concluded the  Appellant  was
    not a credible witness  but  given  that  a  significant  part  of  the
    evidence is favourable to the Appellant I do  not  think  that  can  be
    safely done in this case.

11. The decision must therefore be set aside.  Because further fact-finding
    is necessary the matter has to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to be heard by a judge other than Judge White.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed      JG  Macdonald                                Dated    14th  June
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




