
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15356/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th August 2019                            |On 11th September 2019        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                 Manjula [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert OBE, promulgated on 6th March  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hendon Magistrates' Court on 25th February 2019.  In the determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, and was born  on  25th
    February 1979.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent,
    dated 6th July 2018 refusing his application for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom on the basis of his human rights.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that, although he  entered  the
    UK as a visitor, he has subsequently  developed  private  life  rights,
    particularly following activities of providing care for a [DR], over  a
    period of ten years.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge considered the Appellant's evidence that "he has  effectively
    become full-time carer" of [DR] since September  2008  (paragraph  13).
    [DR] suffers from a number of mental health issues, including  paranoia
    and serious depression, as well as  PTSD.   The  Appellant  provided  a
    degree of care, such as help "with his daily activities,  prepares  his
    meals, cleans his  room,  and  if  he  has  any  medical  appointments,
    arranges his transport to and from hospital" (paragraph 15).   So  much
    so, that, when the Appellant had discussed the fact that he might  have
    to leave the United Kingdom "[DR] was deeply upset  and  said  that  he
    will be traumatised if he did so" (paragraph 17).

 5. [DR] is a British citizen living in the UK on a  permanent  basis.   He
    "rarely has any visitors" (paragraph 19).  The Appellant's evidence was
    that "there was a very close relationship as a carer and a  person  who
    is clearly in need of significant physical and emotional  support"  and
    that "if he did return that [DR] would effectively be lost without him"
    (paragraph 22).

 6. Against this background, the judge concluded that,  "I  find  that  the
    Appellant has established a significant family and private life both in
    his own right as well as an individual in the ten years he has been  in
    the United Kingdom but also with a person  that  he  cares  for,  [DR]"
    (paragraph 49).  The judge observed that "[DR] is very reliant upon the
    Appellant" (paragraph 50).

 7. He accepted that the person cared for  "was  registered  disabled"  and
    that "there is no official confirmation" (paragraph 51).  It  was  also
    observed by the judge that the need of [DR] fell  into  two  categories
    "the physical needs and the emotional needs of a caregiver with whom he
    has lived since 2008" (paragraph 52).  I

 8. n the end, it was the judge's view that  "this  is  a  finely  balanced
    case" but where "there are  not  very  compelling  circumstances  of  a
    compassionate nature which undermine the presumption  that  the  public
    policy immigration control must be  maintained"  (paragraph  55).   The
    appeal was dismissed.




Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law
    because  he  had  recognised  that  the  Appellant  had  established  a
    significant family and private life (paragraph 49) in his own right  as
    an individual, as well as by living with  [DR].   The  judge  had  also
    found the case to be finely balanced.  His conclusion that  there  were
    no very compelling circumstances was not well-founded.

10. On 14th May 2019 permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  of  a
    range of reasons, (but on the principle that "it is arguable  that  the
    proportionality exercise has been affected").

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 8th August 2019,  Mr  Ahmed,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant went through the  findings  of  the  judge  and
    concluded that the decision could not be  sustainable  given  that  the
    judge had accepted early on  that  the  Appellant  "has  established  a
    significant family and private  life  both  in  his  own  right  as  an
    individual ... but also with  the  person  that  he  cares  for,  [DR]"
    (paragraph 49).  The judge had then gone on to make the point that  the
    relationship between the two of  them  could  be  split  up  into  "the
    physical needs and the emotional needs of a caregiver" (paragraph  52).



12. That being so, the standard in Kugathas had been  satisfied,  of  there
    being "more than normal emotional ties" between them.  It was  on  that
    basis, that the judge had concluded that a family relationship  existed
    between the two of them.  If that was the case then it was difficult to
    see why, with the satisfaction of such a high standard of proof,  there
    would not also be reason to hold that there were  "compelling  reasons"
    to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  Second, whilst the judge had
    recognised the private life rights of the Appellant, he had  failed  to
    attach due weight, on the Boku-Betts principles, to the rights  of  the
    British citizen, [DR].  There was after all, a positive duty to  ensure
    that private life  rights  were  not  infringed  (see  EB  (Kosovo)  at
    paragraph 18).

13. For his part, Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    confused.  There was no familial relationship between the Appellant and
    [DR].  That being so, the only relationship that  could  exist  between
    the two of them would be that of "private life" rights.  It  was  wrong
    for the judge to conclude that there was a family  life  between  them.
    Even so, the judge had concluded that "this is a finely balanced  case"
    (paragraph 55).  He had  then  gone  on  to  undertake  the  "balancing
    exercise"  (paragraph  58).   Thereafter  there  followed  seven   sub-
    paragraphs to paragraph 58, at the end of which,  the  judge  concluded
    that the Appellant's decision to overstay was done at a  time  when  he
    knew that his status was precarious, and that he had to regularise  his
    stay, and any rights developed had been on that basis,  such  that  the
    public interest lay in requiring him to return to Sri Lanka.

14. In reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that the Appellant was  living  under  the
    same roof as [DR], had provided him with ten years  of  care  services,
    and had  effectively  become  part  of  his  family,  and  the  judge's
    conclusion was correct in this respect.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  My reasons are  as  follows.
    These are that the judge's determination is confused  in  a  number  of
    respects.  Although it is comprehensive and overarching and sets out to
    take every aspect of the claim into  account,  it  reaches  conflicting
    conclusions in a number of  respects.   Thus,  under  the  heading  "my
    findings of fact", the judge early states that  "the  Appellant  relies
    solely on the establishment of his private life under Article  8  based
    in part on the time he has spent in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 39).



16. The judge then analyses  the  particular  constituent  requirements  of
    establishing a private life right.  There is reference  to  SS  (Congo)
    and the need to demonstrate "compelling circumstances" (paragraph  40).
    The Section 117B consideration is properly taken into account,  and  it
    is particularly importantly  recognised  that  the  court  in  Rhuppiah
    [2018} UKSC 58, had  made  it  clear  that  "Section  117B  cannot  put
    decision makers in a  straightjacket"  (paragraph  45).   Nevertheless,
    despite starting off on the premise that the Appellant  "relies  solely
    on the establishment of his private life" (at paragraph 39), the  judge
    then proceeds to make findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant  having
    "established a significant family and private life" (paragraph 49).

17. That conclusion is not only erroneous insofar as  it  suggests  that  a
    family life could exist between the Appellant and [DR],  with  whom  he
    has no familial relationship, and with respect to  whom  there  are  no
    clear findings as to how the family unit comes into being,  but  it  is
    also inconsistent with what the judge had started off with,  which  was
    that "the Appellant relies solely on the establishment of  his  private
    life" (paragraph 39).

18. Not only  this,  the  judge's  final  conclusion  after  undertaking  a
    "balancing exercise" (at paragraph 58),  is  that  "this  is  an  adult
    relationship between a carer and a person requiring  ongoing  treatment
    and support and it is not a family relationship  or  anything  akin  to
    that" (see paragraph 58(v)).  Therefore, there is an inconsistency here
    once again between this conclusion and the conclusion at  paragraph  49
    where it was said that "the Appellant  has  established  a  significant
    family and private life".

19. Second, however, that is not to say  that  the  judge's  conclusion  in
    other respects was not one that  was  open  to  him.   When  the  judge
    observes that "[DR] is very reliant upon the Appellant" (paragraph 50);
    and observes that "he was registered disabled" (paragraph 51); and that
    there exists "the physical needs and the emotional needs of a caregiver
    with whom he has lived since 2008" (paragraph 52), these findings  were
    open to the judge to make, however, in so  doing,  the  judge  has  not
    considered the Article 8 rights, particularly in relation to the  right
    to a private life, of the British citizen, [DR].

20. This should have been done  for  at  least  two  reasons.   First,  the
    Appellant had confirmed during questioning at the hearing that, when he
    has told [DR] that he may have to leave the United Kingdom, [DR]   "was
    deeply upset and said that he  would  be  traumatised  if  he  did  so"
    (paragraph 17).  He could not  turn  to  his  daughter  who  "also  had
    serious mental health problems and had attempted to take her  own  life
    on more than one occasion" (paragraph 18).  Indeed, he "rarely has  any
    visitors" (paragraph 19) and that it is the Appellant  who  takes  [DR]
    who takes, "[DR] to events within the Sri Lankan community  on  one  or
    two occasions out of the five or six that he  organises  in  Birmingham
    for the Buddhist community" (paragraph 20).

21. Indeed, he "helps him with his daily activities,  prepares  his  meals,
    cleans his room" and so forth (paragraph 15).  Second, the  judge  does
    not reject the evidence that "there was a very close relationship as  a
    carer and a person who is clearly in need of significant  physical  and
    emotional support"; so much so that if the  Appellant  were  to  return
    back to Sri Lanka "that [DR] would effectively  be  lost  without  him"
    (paragraph 22).

22. In these circumstances, the  statement  that  ultimately,  "this  is  a
    finely balanced case", but one where "there  are  not  very  compelling
    circumstances of a compassionate nature" (paragraph 55)  could  not  be
    made out, given the errors I have identified above.  Whilst it is  true
    that the Appellant himself would have known "for a considerable  period
    of time that his immigration status has been precarious"  it  does  not
    follow that "that is also something [DR] would have been  aware  of  as
    well" (see paragraph 58(iii)).

23. In the same manner, given the vulnerability and  disability  that  [DR]
    suffers  from,  such  that  it  can  be  said  that  the   balance   of
    considerations would fall  against  the  Appellant  and  in  favour  of
    immigration control.  This is particularly  important  given  that  the
    judge at the end recognised the seriousness  of  [DR]'s  condition  and
    observing that  "nothing  in  this  decision  is  a  criticism  of  the
    Appellant nor seeks to undermine the seriousness of  [DR]'s  condition"
    (paragraph 59).

Remaking the Decision

24. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.  This is a
    case where the Appellant's Article 8 rights to a private life have been
    accepted as having been established.  That being so,  the  question  is
    whether  he  can  succeed  on  that  basis.   I  have   given   careful
    consideration to the documents  before  me  and  to  the  evidence  and
    submissions.  With regards to Article 8 ECHR, the protection  of  these
    rights is principally now contained in paragraph 276ADE of HC  395  (as
    amended).  The relevant Rules required that a claimant has spent twenty
    years  in  the  UK.   This  is  not  the  case  with  this   Appellant.
    Accordingly, the Rules are not met.

25. However, there is an alternative basis to the application of  paragraph
    276ADE which is that there  are  "very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which he would have to go".
     In this case, the  Appellant  speaks  the  relevant  language  of  his
    country of origin and has continuing ties and connections there.  There
    is nothing to suggest he has lost those  ties.   He  can  return.   The
    question that then remains is whether the Appellant can  succeed  under
    freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence.  The  question  here  is  whether
    there are "exceptional circumstances" to the Appellant's claim.  I find
    that he does.

26. This is because of  the  decision  in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  1,  which
    explains that "the European Court's views of  the  phrase  "exceptional
    circumstances" in this context was considered by the Court of Appeal in
    MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 (at paragraph 56).  The Supreme Court
    goes on to say that, "ultimately, it has to decide whether the  refusal
    is proportionate in  the  particular  case  before  it,  balancing  the
    strength of the public  interest  in  the  removal  of  the  person  in
    question against the impact on private and  family  life."   (Paragraph
    57).

27. The Supreme Court goes on to state that, "the Secretary  of  State  has
    not imposed a test of exceptionality in the sense that the case  should
    exhibit some highly unusual feature, over and above the application  of
    the tests of proportionality.  On the contrary,  she  had  defined  the
    word 'exceptional', as already explained, as meaning  circumstances  in
    which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
    individual such that the  refusal  of  the  application  would  not  be
    proportionate" (paragraph 60).

28. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the Appellant's removal would
    mean that it would be unjustifiably harsh to expect him  to  return  to
    Sri Lanka, given the close relationship  that  he  has  developed  with
    [DR], and the dependency that the latter also has on the Appellant,  to
    the extent that he would be "traumatised", if the Appellant were to  be
    removed.

29. The rights of [DR], as a British  citizen,  must  also  be  taken  into
    account and, I am satisfied that he cannot be blamed to the same extent
    as the Appellant, for availing himself of the support of the Appellant,
    during the time that the Appellant has been in the UK outside the  law.
    Section 117B does express the public interest  in  immigration  control
    but I find that there would be a disproportionality  in  requiring  the
    Appellant to leave, given what rights are at stake here, and the manner
    in which they interact between the Appellant and [DR].

30. After all, the Appellant has provided ten years of solid care for [DR],
    helping him  with  his  daily  activities,  preparing  his  meals,  and
    cleaning his room, and arranging for his medical  appointments.   There
    is no evidence here that NHS support can be a substitute,  because,  of
    the finding by Judge Herbert OBE below, that this was a case where  the
    "need falls into two categories, the physical needs and  the  emotional
    needs of a caregiver with whom he has lived  since  2008."   (Paragraph
    52).

Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed for the reasons
    I have given above.

32. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.




Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019


