
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15052/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|At a remote hearing via Skype for Business    |On 16 December 2020           |
|On 8 December 2020                            |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

      1. The appellant, a citizen of Morocco,  has  appealed  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal ('UT') against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')
         Judge Handler sent on 25 February 2020, dismissing  his  appeal  on
         human rights grounds.

      2. The FTT made an anonymity direction because the appellant has  been
         accepted to be a victim of trafficking ('VOT'), and I maintain that
         order.  The FTT also treated the  appellant  as  vulnerable  and  I
         continue to do so.

Background

      3. The appellant was born in 1995 and first entered the United Kingdom
         ('UK') on 15 July 2011, when he  was  about  16.   His  immigration
         history is lengthy but it is only necessary to summarise it for the
         purposes of this decision:

         -    although his 2011 asylum claim was refused, the appellant  was
             granted DL as an unaccompanied minor on 30 September 2011;

         -    in December 2011 the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant
             was a child VOT;

         -    the FTT allowed the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal  in  a
             decision dated 24 September 2013

         -    the appellant was granted leave on the  basis  of  his  family
             life with his partner between 2016 and 2019;

         -    when that relationship ended he made an application based upon
             his private life, which was refused in  a  decision  dated  21
             August 2019 - it is against this decision that  the  appellant
             appealed to the FTT.

      4. The FTT accepted significant aspects of the  appellant's  evidence,
         in particular: he had a difficult  childhood  in  Morocco  and  was
         involved with drug gangs there from an early age; he was trafficked
         into the UK in 2011 (when he was 16)  and  involved  in  using  and
         selling drugs for the drugs gang until around 2013/14 (when he  was
         around 18/19); he has a number of mental health conditions  as  set
         out  in the report of Professor  Katona  dated  17  February  2020,
         including inter alia complex PTSD.

      5. The FTT considered the appellant's evidence about his family to  be
         "very inconsistent" at [24]  and  concluded  that  upon  return  to
         Morocco, he would be assisted by the support of  his  family  [43].
         This together with the matters set out at [40] to [44] led the  FTT
         to conclude that the appellant  would  not  face  very  significant
         obstacles to re-integration with Morocco and his removal would  not
         breach Article 8 of the ECHR.



Appeal to the UT

      6. The appellant challenged the FTT's decision in  grounds  of  appeal
         prepared by Mr Jagadesham (who  also  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant before the FTT and before me).  The  renewal  grounds  of
         appeal to the UT are three-fold and summarised here:

                   1) In drawing adverse inferences  from  the  appellant's
                      inconsistencies regarding his family in Morocco,  the
                      FTT failed to take into account relevant evidence.



                   2) The FTT irrationally  concluded  that  the  appellant
                      would  not  face  very   significant   obstacles   to
                      reintegration with Morocco in the light of  the  risk
                      of re-trafficking there.

                   3) The FTT failed to address Professor Katona's evidence
                      as to the risk of this appellant being re-trafficked.

      7. UTJ Kamara granted permission to appeal in a decision dated 25 June
         2020.

Error of law

      8. Mr Tan submitted that the FTT's findings at [24] and [28] i.e.  the
         appellant's inconsistent evidence regarding his contact with family
         in Morocco supported the conclusion that he remained in touch  with
         them,  was  open  to  the  FTT.   Mr  Tan  reminded  me  that   the
         inconsistent   information   was   provided   to   a   variety   of
         professionals.

      9. After hearing from Mr Tan and very briefly  from  Mr  Jagadesham  I
         indicated that ground 1 was made out i.e. the  FTT's  finding  that
         the appellant had been in contact with his family  in  Morocco  and
         will be able to contact them upon return contains clear  errors  of
         law for the reasons identified in the grounds of appeal.   The  FTT
         failed to take the following relevant matters into  account  before
         concluding that inconsistencies undermined  the  appellant's  claim
         that he had no contact with his family  since  being  abandoned  by
         them at a very young age:

          i) Mr Tan was correct  to  point  out  that  the  inconsistencies
             regarding the appellant's family as identified by the  FTT  at
             [24] all relate to  what  he  is  recorded  to  have  said  to
             professionals.   However, as I pointed out during  the  course
             of Mr Tan's submissions, this reporting  relates to 2012 -  at
             this time, it was undisputed that the appellant was  a  recent
             arrival to the UK as a child VOT and continued to be under the
             control of his traffickers until 2013/2014.  I invited Mr  Tan
             to take me to any other evidence wherein  the  appellant  made
             references to contact with  family  after  2014,  but  he  was
             unable to do so.




         ii) The appellant explained in  his  witness  statement  dated  21
             January 2020 that the account he provided regarding his family
             details was a false one based upon that which he was  told  to
             say by the traffickers - a plight faced by many  VoTs  as  set
             out in the guidance referred to in the grounds of appeal.  The
             FTT  has  not  addressed  this  explanation.   The  FTT  judge
             indicated at [28] that she did not "accept he would have  made
             up the specific details".  This  failed  to  engage  with  the
             appellant's explanation at [10] and [11] of his statement that
             he did not make up the specific details but was  told  by  the
             traffickers to maintain the lies about his past.


        iii)  Professor  Katona's  report  (to  which   the  FTT   attached
             "significant weight") included a  detailed  and  comprehensive
             account of losing contact with his parents at an early age and
             his brother from  the  time  he  left  the  hostel  -  see  in
             particular section 2 and [4.32] of the report.

     10. In these circumstances, the FTT irrationally concluded  that  these
         inconsistencies could not be reasonably  explained  at  [28].   The
         linked conclusion that this appellant, who was under the control of
         traffickers  both  in  Morocco,  around  Europe  and  then  for   a
         significant period of time after arrival in the UK, would have been
         able to reasonably ignore their coercion and  control  irrationally
         failed to take into account relevant cogent evidence.

     11. Mr Tan reminded me that the FTT concluded that this appellant would
         be resilient enough to cope with challenges in  Morocco.   This  is
         based upon the reasoning to be found between [37] and [43].  Whilst
         the finding as to family contact in Morocco could in no way be said
         to have been determinative, the FTT regarded  it  as  relevant  and
         referred to it twice at this part of the decision ([37] and  [43]).
         I am satisfied that this played a  material  role  in  the  overall
         assessment. I am therefore satisfied that the error of  law  as  to
         family contact infects the  FTT's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         circumstances in Morocco and the risk of being  re-trafficked.   It
         follows that all the grounds of appeal have been made out.

Disposal

     12. Some of the key aspects of the relevant factual matrix have already
         been decided in the appellant's favour, in particular his claim  to
         be a child VOT and the diagnosis contained  in  Professor  Katona's
         report.  For this reason I preserve the positive findings at  [27].
          This limits the necessary fact-finding, but important  aspects  of
         the factual matrix still need to be re-made.

     13. Mr Jagadesham also pointed out that the appellant had submitted  an
         international protection claim based upon his  risk  of  being  re-
         trafficked.  The respondent may not agree to treat this as a  fresh
         claim but if she does it would  be  helpful  to  have  the  matters
         linked, if it possible to do so without delay.  In  this  regard  I
         bear in mind Professor Katona's report,  which  supports  an  early
         resolution of the disputed issues in this case.

     14. Having considered the terms of the relevant Practice Statement  and
         the overriding objective, I am satisfied that the matter should  be
         remitted to the FTT.  For the reasons  I  have  summarised  in  the
         previous paragraph it would  be  helpful  to  have  an  early  case
         management hearing before the FTT.



Decision

     15. The decision of the FTT contains a material error of law and is set
         aside.  It is remitted to the FTT  to  a  judge  other  than  Judge
         Handler.


Signed: UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

Dated: 8 December 2020
