
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15497/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 28 May 2021                     |On: 11 June 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            SANYA SIMONE SIMPSON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 30  January  1982.  She
      arrived in the UK on 14  December  2002  with  entry  clearance  as  a
      visitor valid until 14 June 2003. She did not leave the  UK  when  her
      visa expired, but remained as an overstayer, making no applications to
      regularise her stay until 20 June 2011, when she made  an  application
      for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.  That  application  was
      refused without a right of appeal on 11 August 2011.  Nothing  further
      happened until 7 March 2019, when she made another human rights claim,
      on the basis of her family and private life.

   2. In that application details were given of  the  appellant's  difficult
      childhood in Jamaica. It was said that her father had moved out of the
      family home when she was eight years of age and her older  sister  had
      moved to USA and ceased  communication  with  the  family.  Her  older
      brother had mental health issues and some physical  disabilities.  Her
      mother asked her to leave the family home when she was 17 as she could
      no longer support her financially and the appellant then rented a room
      and found employment. After she completed her high school studies, her
      grandmother invited her to the UK for a visit, in 2002.  She  came  to
      the UK and stayed with her grandmother but her relationship  with  her
      grandmother became strained and she moved out after a few months.  She
      hoped to pursue a career in nursing but was unable to do so because of
      her immigration status. She  therefore  worked  as  a  carer  and  was
      currently working for a Mr Peter Hale, an elderly man who was  in  the
      end stages of Parkinson's disease with whom she lived as his full-time
      carer. It was stated that the  appellant  was  now  seeking  leave  to
      remain on the basis of her private life in the  UK,  specifically  her
      length of residence here (more than 16 years)  and  lack  of  ties  to
      Jamaica. Reference was made to  the  appellant  suffering  PTSD  as  a
      result of being assaulted by the grandson  of  a  patient  in  January
      2018.

   3. In  the  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  the  respondent
      considered there to be no evidence of very  significant  obstacles  to
      integration in Jamaica and considered that the  appellant  could  not,
      therefore,  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
      immigration rules on the basis of her private life. It was  considered
      further that  there  was  no  evidence  of  exceptional  circumstances
      entitling her to leave outside the immigration rules.  The  respondent
      noted the evidence of the appellant's psychiatric treatment  for  PTSD
      but considered that she would be able to access suitable treatment  in
      Jamaica.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal  came  before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego on 5 February 2020. Mr Hale had  not
      been able to produce a witness statement as he was  in  hospital,  but
      his medical reports were available before the Tribunal and his medical
      condition was accepted by the Home Office Presenting Officer.  It  was
      also accepted that the appellant was his  carer.  The  appellant  gave
      evidence before the judge and he found her to be a  truthful  witness.
      The judge accepted from the appellant's  evidence  that  Mr  Hale  had
      become like a grandfather to her and that she had been visiting him in
      the hospital on a daily basis. The judge noted that the appellant  had
      been in the UK for half her life but accepted that that did not  bring
      her within the immigration rules. He found that she could not meet the
      requirements of the rules as there were no very significant  obstacles
      to her integration into Jamaica, although she had no  real  connection
      to the country. The judge found, however, that there were  exceptional
      circumstances outside the rules such that  the  respondent's  decision
      was disproportionate. He relied upon the case of Lama (video  recorded
      evidence -weight - Art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 16  as  comparable  to  the
      appellant's case and found  that  family  life  had  been  established
      between the appellant and Mr Hale. He found that there was no evidence
      to show that Mr Hale's care needs would be met to the same  extent  as
      they were by the appellant and that, given Mr Hale's vulnerability and
      health  condition,   taken   together   with   the   appellant's   own
      circumstances, the balance fell in the appellant's favour in assessing
      proportionality. The judge accordingly allowed  the  appeal  on  human
      rights grounds.

   5. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal against Judge  Housego's  decision.  The  matter
      came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  on  27  July  2020.  In  a
      decision promulgated on 4 September 2020 UTJ  Perkins  found  material
      errors of law in the judge's decision on the basis of all the  grounds
      and set aside the decision. He directed that the decision  be  re-made
      in the Upper Tribunal. His reasons for so doing are as follows:

         "8. Ground 1 complains  that  the  Judge  has  not  given  adequate
         reasons for the decision.

         9. In particular the  judge  is  criticised  in  the  Secretary  of
         State's grounds for relying on Lama.  This is something of a  blind
         alley.  The decision in Lama is  a  good  working  example  of  the
         flexibility that is needed to give proper effect to  Article  8  of
         the European Convention on Human Rights.  It most certainly did not
         establish that every person who works as a carer has established  a
         right to remain in the United Kingdom but it does provide some kind
         of  judicial  support  for  the  finding  in  this  case  that  the
         relationship established between the claimant and Mr H  was  to  be
         regarded as an important relationship at the "family life"  end  of
         the "private and family life" continuum.  The point is  that  human
         beings are allowed to develop relationships.  Some of them, such as
         a relationship between husband and wife or parent and  minor  child
         are easy to recognise and categorise and usually  attract  a  great
         deal of respect but other relationships can become  very  important
         and, in principle, there is no reason why a close relationship that
         has developed between a person who  would  otherwise  be  a  lonely
         vulnerable sick old man and a carer can be within the scope of  the
         protection of the Convention.

         10. However it is important to consider what has happened here. The
         rules do not provide for admission  as  a  "carer"  but  there  are
         policies that permit admission to the United Kingdom  for  a  short
         time to make arrangements for a person's care by  persons  lawfully
         in the United Kingdom, typically by the NHS or  a  private  nursing
         home. The policies are grudging and clearly intended to  deal  with
         immediate needs before long terms arrangements can be made but here
         the Tribunal has decided that the relationship between the claimant
         and someone the Judge did not here is so important that it must  be
         given weight comparable to the relationship between  life  partners
         or parents and minor children. It is,  with  respect,  an  enormous
         leap.

         11. I make it plain that there is a lot about the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal that concerns me.  Whilst there was nothing  to
         undermine the claimant's evidence about her relationship with Mr  H
         there was almost nothing outsider her testimony to substantiate it.
          The  nearest  that  comes  to  independent  evidence  is  a  short
         supporting letter from Mr H in which he introduces himself and says
         that he:

             "Can confirm that the [claimant] is my  carer  and  she  lives
             with me at the three bedroomed property I own.

             [The claimant] has been my carer since August 2018.  She works
             for me full-time.  I pay her cash in hand on a  weekly  basis.
             I do not give her payslips and we do not have  a  contract  of
             employment.  I suffer from Parkinson's disease and I am in the
             last  stage  of  this.   I  fully   support   [the   claimant]
             application for leave to remain in the UK."

         12. The Reasons for Refusal Letter criticise this  letter  pointing
         out that there was no evidence from  the  NHS  or  social  services
         dealing with the possibility of alternative care.

         13. Notwithstanding this criticism the case before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was no better. Much more could have been done here if  the
         case is at it seems.  Some regard  could  have  been  had  for  the
         carer's policy at Part  17  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Although
         concessions are made it is clear from the Rules that they  strongly
         discourage people remaining in the United Kingdom because they  are
         carers.  If they have no other right to be there, there  is  little
         chance under the Rules of them being allowed  long-term  residence.
         This could have illuminated the balancing exercise.

         14. Mr H has been described as a vulnerable man.  If he is  in  the
         last stages of Parkinson's disease as is said that is  no  surprise
         to anyone but there seems to be no-one taking care of his interests
         independently of the claimant.  There is no independent evidence to
         support the contention that the claimant's involvement in his  life
         is as benign and supportive as she says.  It may be that everything
         she said is entirely truthful but  all  that  is  known  about  the
         claimant with any confidence is that she is prepared to live in the
         United Kingdom for many years without permission and  whilst  there
         are undoubtedly worst examples of bad behaviour  there  is  nothing
         there  that  makes  her   evidence   particularly   attractive   or
         persuasive.

         15. The second ground adds nothing to the first.  It is essentially
         a reworking of the same point that the judge should not  have  made
         the findings that he did.

         16.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decisions  that  the   claimant's
         relationship with Mr H is akin to family life and that  interfering
         with the relationship is disproportionate are reasoned inadequately
         and I set is aside.

         17. It may be that I will be  criticised  for  not  substituting  a
         decision to dismiss the claimant's appeal but she did  impress  the
         judge and, for Mr H's sake  I  have  decided  to  order  a  further
         hearing in the Upper Tribunal when the appeal will be redetermined.
         If the claimant wishes to rely on further evidence she must make an
         appropriate reasoned application in accordance with the rules.

         18. Decision

         19. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its  decision
         and directed that the appeal  be  determined  again  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal."

   6. The matter then came before me for a hearing in order for the decision
      to be re-made.  The  previous  representatives,  DJ  Webb  &  Co,  had
      informed the Upper Tribunal on 23 April 2021 that they were no  longer
      representing the appellant.  The  appellant  did  not  appear  at  the
      hearing and there was no explanation for her absence.  The  Notice  of
      Hearing had been served on her and she would therefore have been fully
      aware of the  hearing  date.  Furthermore,  there  was  no  additional
      evidence since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, despite the
      direction made by UTJ Perkins.

   7. Ms Cunha made brief submissions before me, referring to  the  lack  of
      any evidence of Mr Hale's condition  and  whether  the  appellant  was
      still providing him with care. Neither was there any further  evidence
      about the appellant's own health and nothing  to  suggest  that  there
      were any issues which would meet the threshold for Article 3 or 8. The
      appellant could return to Jamaica and access any treatment she  needed
      there.

Consideration and findings

   8. There is little that needs to be said by way of  findings,  given  the
      comments of UTJ Perkins at [17] of his decision and the  lack  of  any
      further evidence from the appellant. It is now almost a year since the
      decision in the appellant's appeal was made by the First-tier Tribunal
      and there is no evidence to suggest that her circumstances remain  the
      same. It is not known if she continues to care for Mr Hale or what her
      current situation is. Even if, following the guidance in  Lama,  there
      could be said to have existed a relationship sufficient to  amount  to
      family life between the appellant and Mr Hale -  and  given  the  very
      limited evidence it is unlikely that that was established -  the  fact
      is that there is no evidence  as  to  whether  that  relationship  has
      continued. Given the seriousness of Mr Hale's  condition,  it  may  be
      that he is no longer capable of being cared for at home and  it  could
      sadly be the case that he is no longer alive. Clearly, on the  limited
      evidence before me, I  cannot  conclude  that  family  life  has  been
      established for the purpose of Article 8.

   9. Assuming that the appellant is still in the UK, I accept that she  has
      established a private life here, having resided  here  for  19  years.
      However that is not sufficient in itself to meet the  requirements  of
      the immigration rules in paragraph 276ADE(1). There is no evidence  to
      show that there would be very significant obstacles to her integration
      in Jamaica. She has lived the majority of her life in Jamaica and  has
      family members living there. There is no evidence to suggest that  her
      medical condition is such that she  could  not  access  any  treatment
      required in Jamaica. Clearly she cannot meet the requirements  of  the
      immigration rules on the basis of family or private life.

  10. On the basis that Article 8  is  engaged  at  least  on  private  life
      grounds, I turn to the question of proportionality, and whether or not
      there are any compelling circumstances that would justify a  grant  of
      leave outside the immigration rules.  There  is  no  evidence  of  the
      appellant's current circumstances in the UK. Her relationship with  Mr
      Hale, even if still subsisting, would not assist her  sufficiently  to
      make out a claim on Article  8  grounds.  Her  situation  is  entirely
      different to that in the case of Lama, as relied upon  by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, since [43] and [44] of that decision made it clear that
      the appellant's impeccable immigration history and lawful stay in  the
      UK was a weighty factor in the proportionality assessment, whereas  Ms
      Simpson's entire stay in the UK has been unlawful following the expiry
      of her visa in June 2003. Having had regard to the factors in  section
      117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  considering
      that the appellant established her  private  life  whilst  living  and
      working unlawfully in the UK and given the absence of any evidence  of
      her current  circumstances,  it  cannot  possibly  be  said  that  the
      decision to refuse her claim is a disproportionate one.  There  is  no
      breach of Article 8 and the appellant's appeal fails.







DECISION

  11. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and has been set aside. I re-make the decision
      by dismissing the appeal.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  28 May 2021




