
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15573/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2019                     |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          Mr GLENFORD LEROY WALKER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe instructed by MFI Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of  Jamaica,  appeals  with  permission
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on
    7 January 2019,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 30 November 2017 to  deport  the  appellant  on  the
    grounds that he is a foreign criminal who  had  been  convicted  of  an
    offence and sentenced to a period of at least twelve months.


 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 April  1999  and  was
    subsequently granted leave as a student  until  31  January  2001.   He
    later applied for and was granted variation of leave as a  spouse,  and
    in 2007 was granted indefinite leave to remain.


 3. The appellant  is  married  to  a  British  national.   They  have  two
    biological  children,  P  born  in  2004  and  S  born  in  2007.   The
    appellant's wife has three children from a  previous  relationship  who
    are adults.  The stepchildren, N, born in 1982, K, in 1993 and NK, born
    in 1996 are all British citizens.


 4. N suffers from schizophrenia and lives with the appellant and his wife.
     The appellant had played a supportive role and a stabilising influence
    to N who has had several episodes of being admitted to  hospital.   The
    stepdaughter, K, also  suffers  from  serious  mental  health  problems
    including  schizophrenia.   She  has  attempted  suicide   on   several
    occasions and has been sectioned under the Mental  Health  Act  in  the
    past.  The appellant and his wife care and provide support for her  and
    have care of her children, KM and KN, a situation which came into being
    when K was in hospital having been sectioned under  the  Mental  Health
    Act.


 5. The other stepdaughter, NK, has two small children.   Her  partner  was
    killed, and one of the children has severe behavioural and anger issues
    such that NK cannot care for other children.


 6. The appellant's case is  that  the  impact  on  all  of  these  people,
    including on his wife who has mental health issues of her own  and  who
    had difficulty whilst he was imprisoned, is such that even  though  the
    appellant was sentenced to a  term  of  six  years'  imprisonment,  his
    deportation would not be proportionate as it meets the very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those set out in paragraphs 399  and  399A
    of the Immigration Rules and/or Section 117C(3) of the 2002 Act and  as
    such, he meets the requirements of section 117C(6) of that Act.


 7. The respondent's case as presented to the First-tier Tribunal  is  that
    the appellant did not meet either of the  exceptions,  nor  were  there
    very compelling circumstances such that his deportation was not in  the
    public interest.


 8. Judge Devittie heard evidence from the appellant, the appellant's  wife
    and the stepdaughter, N, gave evidence.  He also took  into  account  a
    detailed bundle containing a number  of  psychiatric  and  social  work
    reports relating to the appellant, his wife, and other members  of  the
    family.  The judge directed himself in line with NA (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA  (see  paragraph  10  of  the  decision)  and  also  as  to
    Exceptions 1 and 2 within the Immigration Rules and within Section 117C
    of the 2002 Act.  The judge noted [10(9)] that although  there  was  no
    "exceptionality" requirement and that it  follows  from  the  statutory
    scheme  that  cases  in  which  the  circumstances   are   sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh the high public interest in deportation will  be
    rare.


 9. The judge also, following MF (Nigeria), noted [10(11)(b)],  noted  that
    it was sensible to consider whether the case involves circumstances  of
    the types described in Exceptions 1 and 2 first as that may  provide  a
    helpful basis on which an assessment can be made whether there are very
    compelling circumstances over and above those.


10. The  judge  concluded  [12]  that  Exception  2  did  apply  given  the
    consequences that there would be on his biological children.  The judge
    also found that there would be serious consequences for the  stepson  N
    and also for the granddaughter KM.   The  judge  noted  also  that  the
    appellant's wife is  suffering  from  depression,  would  have  extreme
    difficulty in coping if he was deported, and those consequences for her
    would in turn impact on the rest of the family.   The  judge  concluded
    [13]:-


         "It seems to me therefore that in relation to all his children  and
         grandchildren, and his spouse, the consequences  for  them  of  the
         appellant's  deportation  would  comfortably  meet  the   threshold
         expressed in Exception 2 if he was deported".

11. The judge then went on to consider whether there were  exceptional  and
    compelling circumstances over and above  those  identified  as  meeting
    Exception 2.  The judge noted that  the  minor  children  had  suffered
    immensely during the appellant's  imprisonment;  that  the  appellant's
    wife would also suffer emotional harm making it difficult  for  her  to
    cope not just with her own children but her son and granddaughter whose
    mother has been sectioned; that although  they  would  receive  support
    from Social Services, this could not fully compensate for  his  absence
    from their lives; and, that the appellant has shown genuine remorse and
    the likelihood of reoffending was very low.


12. The judge concluded [15]:-


         "Looking at all the circumstances of the case, I  have  taken  into
         account the physical and emotional needs  of  all  the  appellant's
         family and their interdependence upon him; all other members of the
         family are lawfully settled  in  the  UK  and  there  could  be  no
         question of them relocating to Jamaica; the fact that the appellant
         is not a burden on the state, but rather by his dedication to  care
         for other family members is likely to be  relieving  the  state  of
         what otherwise might be an expensive financial burden".

13. The judge then observed that the best interests of the  minor  children
    were not in themselves an exceptional situation [16] and that:-


         "The strong public interest in the  appellant's  deportation  flows
         from the gravity of the offence he committed.  It is sadly the case
         that the deportation of one who plays such a central  role  in  the
         cohesive  family  unit   will   have   devastating   and   lifelong
         consequences for the  family  member,  more  particularly  for  the
         children.  These are the sad consequences of deportation.  The harm
         that the children will suffer is of considerable concern but  I  am
         not satisfied on consideration of the  totality  of  the  evidence,
         this is a case in which it can be stated that there are exceptional
         circumstances [our emphasis added], over and above those  described
         in Exception 2, that would render the deportation of this appellant
         disproportionate".

14. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-


      i) in making a material misdirection in that  having  found  that  the
         appellant comfortably satisfies Exception 2 found that  there  were
         "no exceptional circumstances" which was the incorrect legal  test.
         Further, and in the alternative, that the assessment was irrational
         given the significant  positive  factors  which  amounted  to  very
         compelling circumstances;

     ii)  in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that   the
         circumstances he had accepted did not  amount  to  very  compelling
         circumstances;

    iii) in  misdirecting  himself  by  balancing  compelling  circumstances
         against criminality, contrary to KO (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC
         53;

     iv) in making an error of fact in that he failed to take  into  account
         that the appellant's son had threatened suicide which, contrary  to
         what he had stated, there was evidence in what the expert witnesses
         had said.

15. On 30 January 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted  permission
    to appeal.


16. We heard submissions from both representatives.


17. We are satisfied that there was an error in law on the part of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in this case.  He applied the wrong test of
    exceptional circumstances instead of the correct test of very
    compelling circumstances.  That in itself is sufficient to vitiate his
    decision but in addition, when carrying out the test, he re-imported,
    as Mr Pipe put it, the issue of public interest, which had already been
    taken into account in the statutory scheme itself.


18. Furthermore, he made an error in fact in relation to the mental health
    of the child and an additional error in fact in stating that there was
    only one grandchild when in fact there were two.  These errors of fact
    would not in themselves necessarily result in the decision being set
    aside but the failure to apply the correct statutory test and the re-
    importing of the public interest consideration amount to an error of
    law which requires the decision to be set aside.


19. We then, as it was accepted that there was no  need  for  further  oral
    evidence, agreed to the parties making written  submissions,  the  Home
    Office within three weeks with a further  week  for  the  appellant  to
    reply.


20. Subsequent to that, on 15 April 2019,  we  issued  further  directions.
    That is because the Upper Tribunal had, since the  hearing  before  us,
    handed down two relevant decisions. We considered that it would  be  in
    the interests of justice to allow the parties to  make  submissions  on
    those decisions. Our directions provided:


         In the light of the Upper Tribunal reporting MS  (s.117C(6):  "very
         compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 122  (IAC)   and
         RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT
         123 (IAC), it is my view that the Upper Tribunal would be  assisted
         by submissions on these  decisions prior to a decision being handed
         down in this case.


21. We have since received submissions from both representatives  on  these
    issues.


The Law


22. Section 117C of the 2002 Act provides


         "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."

23. The immigration rules provide:-


         "398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be
         contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported, because of
             compelling circumstances over and above those described in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported."

24. At paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court said this:-


         "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons". That would  be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

25. Also of note is what is said in MS (Philippines):-


         "(1) In determining pursuant to section 117C(6) of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whether there are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2
         in subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public interest
         in the deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or tribunal  must
         take into account, together with any other relevant public interest
         considerations, the seriousness of the particular offence of  which
         the foreign criminal was convicted; not merely whether the  foreign
         criminal was or was not sentenced to imprisonment of  more  than  4
         years. Nothing in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53 demands a contrary conclusion.

         (2)  There is nothing in Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 that requires a court or tribunal to
         eschew the principle of public deterrence, as  an  element  of  the
         public interest, in determining a deportation appeal  by  reference
         to section 117C(6)."

26. In a parallel case, RA (Iraq) the Tribunal said this:-


         "(1) In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the Supreme Court of the
         test of "unduly harsh"  in  section  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, formulated by the  Upper  Tribunal
         in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), does not mean that the test includes the way
         in which the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation to the facts of
         the case before it.

         (2)  The way in which a court or tribunal should  approach  section
         117C remains as set out  in  the  judgment  of  Jackson  LJ  in  NA
         (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

         (3)   Section  117C(6)  applies  to  both  categories  of   foreign
         criminals  described  by  Lord  Carnwath  in  paragraph  20  of  KO
         (Nigeria);  namely,  those  who  have   not   been   sentenced   to
         imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those  who  have.  Determining
         the seriousness of the  particular  offence  will  normally  be  by
         reference to the length of sentence imposed and what the sentencing
         judge had to say about seriousness and mitigation; but the ultimate
         decision is for the court  or  tribunal  deciding  the  deportation
         case.

         (4)  Rehabilitation will not ordinarily  bear  material  weight  in
         favour of a foreign criminal."

27. The starting point in remaking the decision is the findings made by the
    First-tier Tribunal which we have preserved and  which  are  summarised
    above.


28. In addition,  we  have  taken  into  account  more  recent,  additional
    material relating to the  appellant's  wife,  their  children,  and  in
    respect of the stepdaughter K.  We summarise this below.


29. It appears  from  the  evidence  that  the  position  regarding  K  has
    deteriorated.  She was detained under Section 2 of  the  Mental  Health
    Act on 7 September 2018 and released eight days later with further care
    to be provided by a health treatment team.  She  did  not  engage  with
    this and her behaviour and moods became more  erratic  and  odd.   This
    caused considerable difficulty for  the  family  and  eventually  on  2
    January 2019 she was sectioned again and  she  is  being  looked  after
    alternately by the appellant and his  wife  who  also  look  after  her
    children, trying to protect them from her mental  illness  and  erratic
    behaviour.


30. The stepson N does not engage with mental health services and is  cared
    for primarily at home by the appellant and his wife.   The  appellant's
    biological son has been referred to CAMHS owing to suicidal ideation.


31. We accept on the basis of the evidence before us that  the  appellant's
    wife would not be able to cope with looking after  her  son  N  or  her
    daughter K; or, for that matter, K's two children KM and KN who are now
    13 and 4.  In addition, there  appear  to  be  significant  behavioural
    problems  arising  with  the  appellant's  biological  children.    His
    daughter, P, has been showing signs of erratic behaviour  including  an
    accidental overdose.  His son is greatly distressed at the  thought  of
    his father being deported and as a  result  started  to  have  suicidal
    thoughts in addition to the self-harming behaviour which  has  resulted
    in him being referred to CAMHS.


32. We are  satisfied  from  the  evidence  that  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant, his wife will be unable to cope and offer the same level  of
    care to her children, both the adults N and K, and the minor children P
    and S as before.  We accept that she was on her own while the appellant
    was in prison, and that she had found it difficult to cope.  We  accept
    also that she got into debt.   We  consider  that  this"  just  coping"
    scenario would be different were the appellant removed from the  United
    Kingdom permanently.  That is because  the  wife's  mental  health  has
    deteriorated since he was in prison.  In addition,  K's  situation  has
    deteriorated since then and there are the added  complications  of  the
    suicidal ideations of the son.  We accept, as Mr Melvin submitted, that
    this is under some degree of monitoring.  The children are also  older.




33. We remind ourselves that Exception 2 which is  met  in  this  case  (an
    issue  no  longer  challenged  by  the  respondent),  relates  to   the
    qualifying children, that is the appellant's biological  children,  and
    also to his wife.   As the step-children are over 18,  they  cannot  be
    qualifying children, nor does it  appear  that  the  step-grandchildren
    fall within that category either. The effect on them of the appellant's
    deportation must be seen  as  circumstances  potentially  falling  into
    section 117C(6).


34. We are satisfied by the psychiatric and other evidence that because the
    appellant provides a stabilising influence in the  lives  of  both  two
    adult stepchildren whose mental health is fragile, and in the  case  of
    NK, subject to regular and serious changes, that his removal will cause
    them to deteriorate, resulting in them suffering. This may, in the case
    of K, result in her further detention in hospital. This has happened on
    several occasions in the past.


35. We accept also from the expert evidence  that  it  is  the  appellant's
    position in the United  Kingdom  which  has  provided  the  stabilising
    influence both for K and N, his stepson.  We are satisfied that  it  is
    more  likely  than  not  that  the  position  of  both  of  these  will
    deteriorate significantly if the appellant is deported.  This is likely
    to result in K's re-detention under the Mental Health Act  and  similar
    deterioration in respect of the stepson, N, who has already  failed  to
    engage with mental health services.


36.  Given  the  unchallenged  finding  that  Exception  2  was  met  by  a
    substantial margin, we consider that these other effects resulting from
    the appellant's deportation are over and above those.  Whilst there  is
    no formal grant of parental responsibility to the appellant's wife, she
    has in effect been regarded as being  having  joint  responsibility  by
    Social Services.  Given the extent of the involvement in their life and
    the care she shows for them including trying to protect them  from  the
    effects of their mother's behaviour, this would  appear  to  show  that
    there is a parental relationship at least between the appellant's  wife
    and her grandchildren.  Given that in the absence of the appellant  the
    wife would be left to  look  after  her  adult  son  who  suffers  from
    schizophrenia, her two children,  one  of  whom  who   has  significant
    mental health difficulties already and has shown a degree  of  suicidal
    ideation, we consider there is a realistic prospect that on  the  basis
    of the evidence of K's regular detention under the  Mental  Health  Act
    that this was a recurrent feature and on  this  occasion  the  children
    would need to be taken into care as the appellant's mother would not be
    in a position to look after them.


37. We bear in mind what was set out in NA at  [30]and  [34].  We  consider
    that on the facts as found here that the impact on the appellant's step-
    grandchildren, if not also his step daughter and stepson,  are  matters
    which go well beyond what would necessarily be seen  as  unduly  harsh.
    The prospect of continued and deterioration in  mental  health  in  the
    case of K and her prospects of being taken into care in respect of  the
    two step-grandchildren are we consider bleak.  This is a case in  which
    not only is Exception 2 met  but  there  are  equally  if  not  harsher
    effects on other members of the extended family  which  meet  the  same
    threshold, albeit that they do not necessarily fall within the criteria
    of Exception 2 as they are not qualifying children.


38. We must consider the public interest in removal.   That  is  clearly  a
    significant and major concern given the length of sentence  imposed  in
    this case, albeit that it was for a first offence.


39. The offence which the appellant has  committed  is  extremely  serious.
    There is a public interest in  the  need  to  protect  society  against
    crime, a wider impact of the offending  conduct  on  the  community  at
    large, its consequential effects and the need to  operate  a  deterrent
    policy. We acknowledge the very great weight to be  given  to  this  in
    this case as is consistent with section 117C,  clearly  expressing  the
    view of Parliament. That weight  is,  we  consider,  in  line  with  MS
    (Philippines) and RA(Iraq) capable of being increased where, as here, a
    sentence of more than 4 years imprisonment has been passed.


40. We turn therefore to the sentencing remarks set out in the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal at [2(2)].  It is of note that as a  result  of
    the guilty plea that the sentencing in this case  was  reduced  to  six
    years.  Otherwise the starting  point  would  have  been  eight  years'
    imprisonment.  Significant weight is to be attached to deterrence.


41. We consider also that there is no  indication  of  serious  criminality
    before the index offence. The sentencing judge did note that it was  an
    isolated event.  The appellant has been here lawfully for a  number  of
    years and has a good track record of  employment  and  being  a  stable
    force for his extended family.


42. We note, also, that the index offence must have been traumatic for  the
    victim, as the  sentencing  judge  noted.  He  was  left  with  serious
    scarring and a lifelong injury.


43. Drawing these strands together, we do find that the public interest  in
    deporting the appellant is increased, the sentence imposed being a full
    50% greater than the 4 years triggering section 117C (6).


44. Against that, we balance the effect of deporting the appellant  on  him
    and on his family. We note that he has no serious health  problems  and
    has transferable skills. He has been here lawfully  for  a  significant
    period.  These factors are, however, not ones to which any real  weight
    can be attached.


45. We do, however, consider that there are in this case,  very  compelling
    circumstances, those being the effects  on  not  just  the  appellant's
    minor children and his wife, but on two other vulnerable adults and two
    other vulnerable children who face the bleak prospect  of  being  taken
    into care.  In effect, this appellant is a lynch pin  holding  together
    an extended family which, if he is removed, will collapse, resulting in
    significant suffering for four children and two vulnerable adults, both
    of whom suffer from serious mental ill-health.


46. Accordingly, on the particular facts of this appeal which  are  unusual
    and where the effect  of  deportation  would  extend  well  beyond  the
    appellant's nuclear family, we are satisfied that deportation would  be
    disproportionate.  We therefore allow the appeal





Notice of Decision


1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and we set is aside.  We remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal


Signed                                  Date 9 July 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
