
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15126/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On January 7 2019                            |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                            mr Jubel Ahmed Mizan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford, Counsel, instructed by Samad & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh and  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor on February 3, 2009.   His  visa  enabled  him  to
    remain in this country until July 2009.  When  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom he had been living in Bangladesh for a period  of  nine  years,
    nine months and sixteen days.  On January  27,  2012  he  submitted  an
    application on family/private life grounds  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom but this was refused without a right of appeal  on  January  3,
    2013.

 2. On September 20, 2016 the appellant submitted an application for  leave
    to remain on family/private life grounds based on his relationship with
    his sister and her family and on private life grounds  under  paragraph
    276ADE HC 395.

 3. The respondent refused that application on  November  2,  2017  on  the
    grounds that he failed  to  satisfy  the  eligibility  requirements  of
    Section E-LTRC 1.6 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  because
    neither of his parents resided in the United Kingdom.   The  respondent
    also rejected his claim under paragraph 276ADE HC 395  because  he  did
    not in the respondent's view satisfy the requirements of  that  Section
    and it would not be unreasonable to require him to leave.

 4.  The  respondent  did   consider   whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances based on the fact that the appellant had been living with
    one of his sisters since he arrived in this country  and  he  also  had
    another sister living here.  He claimed he had lost  contact  with  his
    family since his mother returned back to Bangladesh.

 5. The appellant lodged his appeal on  November  15,  2017  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dhaliwal on May 24,
    2018 but in a decision promulgated on June 29, 2018 the Judge dismissed
    his appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal was sought on July 12,  2018  and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Simpson on August 14, 2018.
     She found there was an arguable error of law and referred to the  fact
    that whilst there had been an extensive examination of the  appellant's
    circumstances  there  had  been  a  failure  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant  would  have   satisfied   the   requirement   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v) HC 395, as well as 276ADE(1)(iv)  HC  395.   Other  issues
    were also highlighted in the permission.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 8. At the commencement of the hearing Mrs Aboni indicated that she had had
    an opportunity to discuss the nature of this appeal with Ms  Rutherford
    and the position today was that the appellant  had  now  been  in  this
    country for nine years, eleven months and four days and as he was  over
    the age of 18 and under the age of 25, he would therefore now meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) HC 395 and as this was  a  human
    rights appeal she accepted  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  in  such
    circumstances  to  require  him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    therefore accepted there was an error in law and rather than adjourning
    the case to be reheard  either  by  this  Tribunal  or  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, she indicated that she would be content for the  decision  to
    be remade and the appeal allowed on human rights grounds.

    FINDINGS

 9. Having considered the evidence in this matter  it  is  clear  that  the
    appellant has been here for a considerable period of time and if he was
    today submitting a fresh application under  the  Immigration  Rules  he
    would clearly satisfy paragraph 276ADE HC 395 due to his  age  and  the
    fact that he has been in this country for more than half his life.

10. The approach  therefore  suggested  by  Mrs  Aboni  is  a  common-sense
    approach and whilst technically  he  does  not,  with  regard  to  this
    application, satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) HC 395,
    I accept there is a strong human right point because he has spent  more
    than half his life here.

11. I accept the Judge did consider the length  of  time  here,  but  I  in
    assessing reasonableness I find the insufficient weight was  placed  on
    the fact that he had spent the period of time in  this  country  having
    arrived here as a minor.  In such circumstances and taking into account
    the observations above I find there has been an error in law.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  remake  the
decision and allow the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed                              Date         18/01/2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the appeal I do not make a fee award as  the  appeal
has been allowed due to current circumstances.

Signed                              Date         18/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
