
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15325/2017
                                                               HU/16132/2017
                                                               HU/16135/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th December 2018                          |On 5th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   D N D O
                                    M T C
                                    J N O
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Jones (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A J Blake, promulgated on 31st August  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 16th August 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family of Ghanaian nationals.  The first Appellant
    is the father, and he was born  on  26th  November  1976.   The  second
    Appellant is the mother, and she was born on 25th September 1978.   The
    third Appellant is their child, and he was born on 4th March 2016,  and
    is currently just over 2 years of age.

The Essence of the Appellants' Appeal

 3. The essence of the Appellants' appeal focuses upon the condition of the
    third Appellant.  This is a child who was born to the first and  second
    Appellants 24 weeks prematurely.  He had spent some  time  in  neonatal
    intensive care.   He  was  readmitted  on  several  occasions.  He  had
    extensive healthcare provided from neurology.  He also  had  additional
    physiotherapy, together with language  and  speech  therapy.  This  was
    followed by further frequent appointments for his eyesight and hearing.
     He has had extensive in and outpatient treatment in  relation  to  the
    chronic lung disease that he has developed as a result  of  being  born
    prematurely and the incubation to which he was subject. The  first  and
    second Appellants claim that they are unable to return  back  to  Ghana
    where treatment for their child would not be available, or would not be
    attainable by them, given their stringent financial circumstances.   It
    is a feature of the appeal, nevertheless, that the child  was  born  to
    them when they were  in  a  "precarious"  immigration  situation,  both
    having remained in the UK unlawfully for a number of years.

The Judge's Determination

 4. It was for this reason, that the manner in which the  appeal  proceeded
    before the judge was that "the appeal was only being pursued outside of
    the Rules on the basis of the best interests  of  the  third  Appellant
    child" (paragraph  69).   The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  first
    Appellant and concluded that, "I had no doubt that he was an honest and
    credible witness. I noted that  his  evidence  had  gone  unchallenged"
    (paragraph 70).  The judge then went on to refer to the case law of  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and the decision in Kaur [2017] UKUT  14
    (at paragraph 72 of the determination).  He referred to the Appellant's
    condition and "in particular, I noted he  had  delayed  development  in
    walking and speaking.  More importantly I noted he had a  chronic  lung
    problem ..." (paragraph 72).  He  also  regarded  it,  "as  honest  the
    anecdotal evidence that had been given by the  Appellant  that  he  had
    spoken to some doctor friends who had advised  him  that  such  medical
    procedures would not be available to  the  third  Appellant  in  Ghana"
    (paragraph 78).  The judge went  on  to  conclude  that  this  was  "an
    overwhelmingly powerful case" and that the third  Appellant  should  be
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.  It was clearly "in  his  best
    interests to receive medical treatment outlined in the medical reports.
     I found that his removal would be very  likely  to  cause  unnecessary
    suffering and distress both for him and his family on all the facts  of
    the case" (paragraph 82).  The judge went on to also  state  that  this
    was a case where "the third Appellant's best interests did not outweigh
    the public interest of his removal on the peculiar facts  at  large  in
    the case" (paragraph 83).

 5. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge had elevated  the  best
    interests of the child above what was required,  so  that  rather  than
    treating this factor as "a primary consideration", what the  judge  has
    done was to make it "the primary consideration".  Moreover in the  case
    of Zoumbas [2014] EWCA Civ 874, the Supreme Court had  recognised  that
    in that case none of the Appellants "has the right to  remain  in  this
    country.  If the mother is removed, the father has no independent right
    to remain.  If the parents are removed, then it is entirely  reasonable
    to expect the children to  go  with  them  ..."  (paragraph  60).   The
    grounds also stated that the evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  the
    removal would breach Article 3 or 8 in terms of the moral and  physical
    integrity of the third child, and the case law of N applied, which  had
    not been considered by the judge.

 7. On 25th October 2018 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 6th December 2018, Mr Kotas,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, adopted the grounds  of  application.
    In clear, concise, and measured submissions, he stated that  the  child
    in this case was not a "qualifying" child, being only some 2  years  of
    age.  Therefore, the judge ought to have  given  equal  weight  to  the
    public interest  in  this  case,  rather  than  prioritising  the  best
    interests of the child, which he appears to  have  done  (at  paragraph
    81).  He had gone on to conclude that this was a case where  the  third
    Appellant's "best interests did outweigh the  public  interest  of  his
    removal on the peculiar facts at large in the case", but there  was  no
    recognition in this entire calculus of the fact that  the  position  of
    the first and second Appellants was "precarious".  That  went  directly
    to what would be in the public interest.

 9. Second, one had to consider the position in the "real  world",  and  in
    circumstances where this was not a qualifying child, it  was  difficult
    to see why constant references were made by the judge to  the  decision
    in MA (Pakistan), because that case is known for how the reasonableness
    criterion is to be factored into a situation where there is a child who
    would otherwise qualify to remain here.

10. Third, the judge was wrong to have taken at face  value  the  anecdotal
    evidence (at paragraph 78) given by the first Appellant, when  he  said
    that he had spoken "to some doctor friends who  had  advised  him  that
    such medical procedures would not be  available  in  Ghana"  (paragraph
    78).

11. Finally, the factual findings were, in any event, open to question.  If
    it was indeed the case, as the judge had found, that the removal of the
    third Appellant "would visit  catastrophic  results  on  their  overall
    wellbeing", it did not make sense for the judge in the next  breath  to
    also say that, "I noted from the evidence that it was  far  from  clear
    what the prognosis was for the third Appellant" (paragraph  79).   This
    is no doubt a difficulty which, I am bound  to  say,  was  not  of  the
    judge's making, because as was noted, by the Appellants' Counsel at the
    hearing, "there had been no comprehensive expert  medical  report  made
    available because the Appellants did not have  the  finance  to  obtain
    one" (paragraph 61).

12. For her part, Ms Jones submitted that she would rely upon her  skeleton
    argument, which was helpfully clear and well referenced in relation  to
    what was stated  in  the  determination,  with  cross-references.   She
    submitted that this was a decision that was unimpeachable.  She  stated
    that the judge  had  indeed  taken  into  account  "the  issue  of  the
    precariousness of their immigration status," which the judge said  "was
    a fact-sensitive one" (paragraph 68).  The judge had, for that  reason,
    been expressly asked to look at this appeal on the basis of  it  "being
    pursued outside of the Rules" (paragraph 69).

13.  The  criticism  of  the  judge's  reference  to  MA   (Pakistan)   was
    misconceived, because what the judge was there doing, was not  treating
    this matter as if the Appellant was a "qualifying"  child,  but  making
    the obviously more pertinent point, from the angle of the Secretary  of
    State, that "the public interest elements as referred to in Section 117
    of the 2002 Act", are such that "the best interests of the child  could
    be overridden by public interest considerations even if it were in  his
    best interests to remain in the UK"  (paragraph  80).   It  was  there,
    submitted Ms Jones, that the judge had  referred  to  the  case  of  MA
    (Pakistan).

14. In the same way, the judge's reference to EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874, was again to emphasise the fact, as endorsed by the  Court  of
    Appeal, that "a Tribunal should apply the  proportionality  test  where
    wider public interest considerations were in play and in  circumstances
    where the best interests of a child dictated that  they  should  remain
    the United Kingdom," in the particular manner that had been set out  in
    that case at paragraphs 34 to 37 (which the judge noted in full in  the
    body of the determination).

15. Ms Jones went on to say, however, that she would have  to  accept  that
    the judge's acceptance of  "the  anecdotal  evidence"  from  the  first
    Appellant, that he had spoken to some doctor friends who had  told  him
    that treatment would not be available in Ghana, was an error, but  this
    was not a material error.  In  fact,  the  error  had  only  been  made
    because the judge had already accepted the Appellant as  a  person  who
    had provided honest and credible evidence, and had also in relation  to
    this matter provided "honest anecdotal evidence" (paragraph 78).

16. As for there being a lack of clarity as to what medical evidence  would
    be available in Ghana, there was  none.   This  is  because  the  first
    Appellant was cross-examined on this issue.   The  judge  set  out  the
    nature of the cross-examination.   During  the  cross-examination,  the
    Appellant had stated that he did not think it would guarantee  that  he
    would receive any financial support in Ghana for his child's  treatment
    (paragraph 50).  He had gone on to say that the economy in Ghana was in
    a bad way and that "it would be very hard for him to  find  employment"
    (paragraph 51).  He had further stated that "it was an unfortunate fact
    that there was a very high rate of unemployment  in  Ghana"  (paragraph
    52).  The judge had then made an  express  finding  of  credibility  in
    relation to this issue by stating (at paragraph 70)  that,  "I  had  no
    doubt that he was an honest and credible witness.   I  noted  that  his
    evidence had gone unchallenged". I can say straight-away that  it  does
    appear to me to be the case that on this particular issue the  evidence
    was indeed unchallenged, by the Presenting Officer.

17. In reply, Mr Kotas submitted that it  was  difficult  to  see  how  the
    statement by the judge that he had "accepted as  honest  the  anecdotal
    evidence that had been given by the Appellant that  he  had  spoken  to
    some doctor friends" could not be material.  This is because if it  was
    simply anecdotal evidence, it could equally  be  assumed  that  medical
    treatment was indeed available in Ghana.   To  attach  weight  to  this
    evidence was plainly a material error.  Second, the judge had  made  no
    express finding as to the circumstances in Ghana of the third Appellant
    being able to get the necessary treatment.  All that the judge had said
    was that he had found the Appellant  to  be  "an  honest  and  credible
    witness" and that "his evidence had gone unchallenged" (paragraph  70).
    This was not enough.  There had  to  be  a  specific  finding  on  this
    specific issue.  Third, these matters were all relevant to the question
    of what would happen to this third Appellant were he to  accompany  his
    parents to Ghana.  That third question could not be decided without  an
    appropriate consideration being given in a full and  fair  way  to  the
    first two questions.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come  to  this
    conclusion, notwithstanding Mr Kotas's admirable submissions before me.
     Nevertheless, I am of the view that, it is not the case that the judge
    has prioritised the "best interests of the child" or  with  the  public
    interest considerations in this case.

19. The judge has consistently referred to the Section  117B  consideration
    (paragraph 67), to the "precariousness  of  their  immigration  status"
    (paragraph 68), to the fact that the best interests of the child "could
    be overridden by public interest considerations even if it were in  his
    best interests to remain in the UK" (paragraph 80), and to  the  proper
    way in which the proportionality test is to be applied, in cases  where
    the public interest considerations are in play (paragraph 81).

20. He has come to the view, in the light of the  particular  circumstances
    of the third Appellant child (which are set out at paragraph 77),  that
    if the Appellant were to be required to return  to  Ghana  this  "would
    visit catastrophic results" on the whole family (paragraph  79).   That
    conclusion was open to the judge, even in circumstances  where  it  was
    not clear what the prognosis was for the third Appellant.  The  judge's
    findings were that this was "an overwhelmingly powerful case" on behalf
    of the Appellant, in relation to his best  interests,  because  if  the
    Appellant were to be removed this would "very likely cause  unnecessary
    suffering and distress both for him and his family on all the facts  of
    the case" (paragraph 82).

21. In so concluding, the judge did not lose sight of the public  interest,
    because he went on to say that "the third  Appellant's  best  interests
    did outweigh the public interest of his removal on the  peculiar  facts
    at large in the case" (paragraph 83).

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  an  error  of
    law.  The decision shall stand.

23. An anonymity direction is made.

24. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

25. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th March 2019

