
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15144/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|                                     |On 19 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  LILI WAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The SSHD's decision dated 28 August 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Gurung-Thapa, promulgated on  8  November
         2019.

     iv) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge R C Campbell, dated  4  August
         2020, on the view that the decision arguably  lacked  reasoning  on
         how the requirements of the rules were  met  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing, and did not show due weight given to the public interest.

     vi) The UT's directions, issued with  a  view  to  deciding  without  a
         hearing whether the FtT erred  in  law  and,  if  so,  whether  its
         decision should be set aside; and  giving  parties  the  chance  to
         submit on whether there should be a hearing.

    vii) The appellant's submissions in response, dated 15 September 2020.

 3. Neither party seeks a  hearing.   The  UT  may  now  decide  the  above
    questions, in terms of rules 2 and 34, without a hearing.

 4. There is no submission on file from the SSHD.

 5. The FtT decision is terse.  It is certainly arguable that  it  did  not
    explain its finding that the requirements of the rules were met at  the
    date of the hearing.  That conclusion was not comprehensible, unless by
    reference to the underlying evidence.  The appellant said  in  the  FtT
    that the  evidence  was  there,  and  continues  to  do  so,  tendering
    comprehensive bundles.  The SSHD has not taken the matter any  further,
    and so has not shown that the decision should  be  set  aside  on  this
    point.

 6. On proportionality, or the weighing of the public interest, it  is  far
    from axiomatic that compliance with the rules at the date of an  appeal
    hearing, rather  than  by  tendering  all  required  evidence  with  an
    application, leads to success.  It is  often  proportionate  to  expect
    compliance by way of a fresh application.  Equally, however,  there  is
    no fixed rule the other way, that a fresh application should always  be
    expected.  The FtT has said nothing about why it came down on the  side
    it did.  The issue was, at least, finely balanced.  Again, however,  as
    the SSHD has not sought to advance the matter any further, no error  of
    law has been shown by the FtT coming down on the side it did.

 7. In the alternative, if the decision of the FtT had been set  aside,  on
    all  currently  available  information  I  would  have  held  that  the
    appellant meets the requirements of the rules at this date, other  than
    in formal respects, and that, on a fine balance,  the  public  interest
    does not require that she is  put  to  making  a  further  application.



 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
            13 November 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

