
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
HU/15704/2017

                                                HU/15706/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 October 2018                     |On 7 November 2018              |
|                                       |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               BEG MAYA THAPA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                                BIRKASH THAPA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms N Nnamani (counsel) instructed by Howe & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:  Ms K Pal,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Birk  promulgated  on  19  June  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellants' appeals.



Background


3. The First Appellant was born on 28 August 1986. The second appellant  was
born on 1 July 1985. They are both citizens of Nepal.  The  appellants  were
married on 28 November 2011. The appellants entered the UK on  12  September
2012, the first appellant as a student  and  the  second  appellant  as  her
dependent partner. On 17 October 2017 both appellants  applied  for  further
leave to remain in the UK. The respondent refused those  applications  on  8
November 2017. The first appellant's father is a former Gurkha  soldier  who
has retired in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Birk ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 6 September 2018 Judge  Smith
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      There was an arguable error of law. This was a  case  which  concerned
      the historical  injustice  suffered  by  Gurkhas  generally,  and  the
      appellant's father specifically. So much was clear from the basis upon
      which the  appellant's  advanced  their  initial  application  to  the
      respondent, the respondent's decision in relation to  Mrs  Thapa,  and
      the arguments advanced by both sides at the hearing (see the record of
      proceedings). Yet the judge did not make a single reference  to  those
      arguments, or the authorities upon which they are based  (for  example
      Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320, Ghising and  others
      (Ghurkhas/BOCs; historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC),
      thereby failing to resolve an issue of law which was  central  to  the
      determination of the proceedings.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellants, Ms Nnamani moved the grounds of appeal. She  told
me that the Judge failed to assess whether  or  not  there  is  family  life
between the appellants and the first appellant's father,  who  is  a  former
Gurkha soldier who settled in the UK, and that the Judge failed to  properly
consider the proportionality of the respondent's decision.

(b) Ms Nnamani took me to [18] of the decision,  where  the  Judge  makes  a
finding that article 8 family life exists for the appellants.  She  told  me
that the Judge then refers to medical evidence at [22] of the  decision  but
fails to consider the gap in the care  provided  to  the  first  appellant's
parents which would be created if the appellants were removed.

(c) Ms Nnamani referred me to  Rai  v  ECO  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320;  Ghising
((family life - adults- Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT  160;  R(Gurung)  v
SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 289; and PT (Sri Lanka) v ECO  [206] EWCA  Civ  612.   She
told me that evidence had been led and  submissions  have  been  made  about
historical injustice, and there is no reference at all in  the  decision  to
either the caselaw or to the historic injustice arguments. She told me  that
because  historic  injustice  has  not  been  considered   the   article   8
proportionality assessment is fundamentally flawed. She reminded me that  in
the appellant's application, and in  the  respondents  reasons  for  refusal
letter, the respondent's policy of settlement for adult children  of  former
Gurkhas who completed service in the brigade of Gurkhas of the British  army
between 1948 and July 1997 is considered, but  the  Judge  simply  does  not
deal with that crucial part of the appellant's case.

(d) Ms Nnamani told me that the decision is tainted  by  material  error  of
law and urged me to set the decision aside.

6.(a) For the respondent, Ms Pal told me that even if the decision  contains
an error of law, it is not a material error. She  told  me  that  the  Judge
specifically found that there is article 8 family life by "the  smallest  of
margins" and found  that  there  is  no  financial  dependency  between  the
appellant and the first  appellant's  parents.  She  reminded  me  that  the
appellants married each other in 2011 and came to the UK in 2012. The  first
appellant's father did not enter the UK until 16 May 2015.

(b) Ms Pal took me through the decision  and  reminded  me  that  the  Judge
rejected the first appellant's evidence about the degree of  care  that  she
offers her parents, and found that there are  other  family  members  living
close to the first appellant's parents.  She  emphasised  that  the  finding
that  there  is  no  dependency  between  the  appellant's  and  the   first
appellant's parents.

(c) Ms Pal conceded that the decision does not  consider  submissions  which
were made relying on Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320; Ghising ((family life  -
adults- Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160; R(Gurung) v SSHD [2013] 1  WLR
289; and PT (Sri Lanka) v ECO   [206]  EWCA  Civ  612,  but  told  me  that,
insofar as that might be an error, it is not a material error  and  did  not
impact negatively on the remainder of the decision. She urged me to  dismiss
the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. In Ghising and others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]
UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that (i) In  finding  that  the  weight  to  be
accorded to the historic wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to  be
regarded as less than that to be accorded the  historic  wrong  suffered  by
British Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal in Gurung and  others  [2013]
EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha or BOC cases, the  effect  of
the historic wrong is to reverse or otherwise  alter  the  burden  of  proof
that  applies  in  Article  8  proportionality  assessments;  (ii)  When  an
Appellant has shown that there is family/private life and the decision  made
by the Respondent amounts to an interference with it, the burden  lies  with
the Respondent to show that a decision to remove is proportionate  (although
Appellants will, in practice, bear the responsibility of  adducing  evidence
that lies  within  their  remit  and  about  which  the  Respondent  may  be
unaware); (iii) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others  was  not  the
burden of proof but, rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a  proportionality
assessment. The Court held that, as in the case of BOCs, the historic  wrong
suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen should be given  substantial  weight;  (iv)
Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and,  but  for  the
historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled in the  UK  long  ago,
this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article 8  proportionality
assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the  matters  relied  on  by  the
SSHD/ ECO consist solely of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
immigration policy; (v) It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha
(and BOC) cases will not necessarily succeed, even though (a)  their  family
life engages Article 8(1); and (b) the evidence shows they would  have  come
to the United  Kingdom  with  their  father,  but  for  the  injustice  that
prevented the latter from settling here  earlier.   If  the  Respondent  can
point to matters over and above the public interest in  maintaining  a  firm
immigration policy, which argue in favour  of  removal  or  the  refusal  of
leave to enter, these matters  must  be  given  appropriate  weight  in  the
balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus, a bad immigration  history  and/or
criminal behaviour may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors
bearing on the Appellant's side of the balance.

8. In Patel, Modha and Odedara v ECO (Mumbai) (2010) EWCA Civ 17  the  Court
of Appeal recognised that one could set out to compensate for  a  historical
wrong, but one could not reverse the passage of time.   Where  children  had
grown up and embarked on lives of their own,  the  bonds  which  constituted
family life would no longer be there and Article 8 would have  no  purchase.
However, what might constitute an extant family  life  fell  well  short  of
what constituted dependency.  Many adult children might still have a  family
life with  parents  settled  in  the  UK,  not  by  leave  or  by  force  of
circumstance, but by long delayed right. That was what gave  the  historical
wrong a potential relevance to Article 8 claims.   That  did  not  make  the
ECHR a mechanism for turning back the clock, but it did make the  historical
wrong potentially relevant to the application of Article 8(2).  If,  by  the
time the adult children sought entry they were no longer part of the  family
life of the  BOC  who  had  finally  secured  citizenship  in  the  UK,  the
threshold of Article 8 would not  be  crossed  and  the  proportionality  of
excluding them would not be an issue.  If they came  within  the  protection
of Article 8(1) however, the balance of factors determining  proportionality
for the purposes of Article 8(2)  would  be  influenced  by  the  historical
wrong, perhaps decisively.

9. In PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ  612
it was held that some tribunals appeared  to  have  read  Kugathas    [2003]
EWCA  Civ  31  as  establishing  a  rebuttable   presumption   against   any
relationship between an adult  child  and  his  parents  or  siblings  being
sufficient to engage Article 8. That was not correct.  Kugathas  required  a
fact-sensitive approach, and should  be  understood  in  the  light  of  the
subsequent case law summarised in Ghising (family life  -  adults  -  Gurkha
policy) [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  There  was  no
legal or factual presumption as to the existence or absence of  family  life
for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  nor  was  there   any   requirement   of
exceptionality. It all depended on the  facts.  The  line  of  case-law  was
again considered in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer,  New  Delhi  [2017]  EWCA
Civ 320 (in the context of the adult son of a former Gurkha soldier).

10. At [18] the Judge clearly makes a finding that  article  8  family  life
exists. It does not matter that the Judge qualified that finding  by  saying
that

      Family life is established only by the smallest margin.

The Judge's finding is that article  8  family  life  exists.  That  finding
should have led the  Judge  to  consider  the  Gurkha  policy  and  historic
injustice because it is  an  undisputed  fact  that  the  first  appellant's
father is a Gurkha veteran who settled in the UK in 2015. The  Judge  should
have  considered  the  Gurkha  policy   and   historic   injustice   because
submissions were made on historic injustice and the caselaw  set  out  above
was cited to the Judge.

11. Consideration of historic injustice in this case is a  crucial  part  of
the proportionality assessment and it is missing from the decision. That  is
a material error of law. The error  is  material  because  consideration  of
historic injustice may result in a different outcome  and  because,  without
consideration of historic injustice, the decision is incomplete.

12.  Because the decision is tainted by material  error  of  law  I  set  it
aside. I can substitute my own decision.

The facts

13. The second appellant is the first appellant's husband.  Both  appellants
are citizens of Nepal. The appellant were married in November 2011 and  came
to the UK in September 2012. The  first  appellant  came  to  the  UK  as  a
student, the second  appellant  came  as  the  first  appellant's  dependent
partner.

14. The first appellant's father is a former Gurkha soldier who  retired  to
the UK in May 2015. It was he who told both appellants to come to the UK  so
that the first appellant could study. He funded the appellants'  journey  to
the UK and funded the courses of study taken by  the  first  appellant.  The
appellants have  been  financially  dependent  upon  the  first  appellant's
father throughout their time in the UK.

15. Neither of the appellants can satisfy the requirements  of  annex  K  of
the immigration rules, but family life within the meaning  of  article  8(1)
of the 1950 convention exists between the first  appellant  and  her  father
and between the first and second appellants.

16. If it had been possible for the appellant's father to enter  the  UK  on
discharge from the army, he would have come to the UK  then,  and  he  would
have brought his entire family with him. The prospect of  entry  to  the  UK
only opened up to the appellant 's father when annex  K  was  introduced  to
the rules in 2015.




The Immigration Rules

17. It is conceded that the  appellants  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
annex  K  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appellants  cannot   meet   the
requirements of appendix FM. Because of their ages and the  length  of  time
the  appellants  have  been  in  the  UK  the  appellants  cannot  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) to (v). It is not argued  that  there
are any obstacles to reintegration in Nepal, so that the  appellants  cannot
meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

Article 8 ECHR

18.  In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD   [2016] UKSC 60 it was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

19. I have to determine the following separate questions:

     (i) Does family life,  private  life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8
    (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with
    (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law
    (iv) If so, was the interference in pursuit of one  of  the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and
    (v) If so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

20. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

21. I remind myself of what is said in  Ghising and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:
historic wrong; weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC),  in  Patel,  Modha  and
Odedara v ECO (Mumbai) (2010) EWCA  Civ  17,  in  PT  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Entry
Clearance Officer,  Chennai  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  612   and  in  Rai  v  Entry
Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

22. On the facts as  I  find  them  to  be  the  first  appellant  is  still
dependent upon  her  parents  financially.  The  first  appellant's  parents
provide her accommodation and her income. On the facts as  I  find  them  to
be, it is because of an acknowledged historical  injustice  that  the  first
appellant and her parents did not come to the UK  together  before  2015.  I
therefore find that family life within the meaning of article 8 of the  1950
convention exists.

23. As I find that article 8 family life exists, the burden of  proof  moves
to the respondent. Section 117B  of  the  2002  tells  me  that  immigration
control is in the public interest, but that is not  all  that  there  is  to
assessment  of   proportionality.   The   appellant   is   not   financially
independent, those are factors which I must  weigh  against  the  appellant.
Against those I weigh the historical injustice as discussed in  Ghising  and
others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT  00567  (IAC)   &
Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

24. Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight)  [2013]  UKUT
00567 (IAC)  tells me that

    where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and, but for  the  historic
    wrong, the Appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago,  this
    will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article 8  proportionality
    assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the matters relied on by the
    SSHD/ ECO consist solely of the public interest in maintaining  a  firm
    immigration policy

25. On the facts as I find  them  to  be  the  first  appellant  would  have
settled in the UK  with  her  parents  as  a  child  were  it  not  for  the
historical injustice which is recognised by  both  the  respondent  and  the
courts. The respondent's decision renders the first  appellant  a  secondary
victim to that injustice. When I consider all of these matters  I  can  only
find that the respondent's decision is  a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
right to respect for  family  life.   I  find  that  the  Decision  appealed
against causes the United Kingdom  to  be  in  breach  of  the  law  or  its
obligations under the 1950 Convention.

26. The first appellant's appeal is  allowed  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.
Family life clearly exists between the first  and  second  appellants.  They
are married. The second appellant's previous grant of  leave  to  remain  in
the UK had been entirely  dependent  on  the  leave  granted  to  the  first
appellant. The first appellant's appeal succeeds. If the second  appellant's
appeal does not succeed, then separation will be forced on  the  appellants.
That separation will be a disproportionate breach of  the  second  appellant
article 8 rights.



CONCLUSION

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 19 June  2018  is
tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.

28. I substitute my own decision.







29. The appeals are allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.







Signed
         Date  29 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

