
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15316/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 15 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    D. H.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Boyle, Solicitor, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia  who  applied  for  a  grant  of
    discretionary leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  an  overstayer.  That
    application was refused on 2 June 2016.  His  wife  and  children  were
    however granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK on 2 June 2014,
    and this was  subsequently  varied  with  the  result  that  leave  was
    extended to expire on 16 December 2019. It was always accepted  by  the
    Appellant that he did not qualify under the  Immigration  Rules  for  a
    grant of leave to remain [16];  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  was
    advanced on Article 8 grounds.  That  appeal  came  before  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge Head Rapson on 6 November 2017, and it  was  allowed  by
    decision promulgated on 24 November 2017.

 2. The Respondent sought permission to appeal from the First tier Tribunal
    on the extremely brief ground that the Judge "had offered no  reasoning
    whatsoever for the  finding  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  were
    credible and the decision was disproportionate." Thus it  was  asserted
    the Respondent was unable to identify why the appeal had been allowed.

 3. That application for  permission  came  before  Designated  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 11 January 2018. He rejected that ground, as
    drafted, concluding that adequate reasons  had  been  offered  for  the
    credibility findings, and  thus  for  the  Judge's  acceptance  of  the
    relationships relied upon between the  Appellant,  his  wife,  and  his
    children. He rejected the assertion that the Judge needed to have  done
    more in this respect, and concluded that she had undertaken an exercise
    to balance the interests of the  members  of  the  family  against  the
    public interest. That disposed of the challenge raised in the  grounds,
    and ordinarily one would have  expected  a  refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal to have followed.  The  Designated  Judge  went  on  however  to
    conclude that it was instead arguable that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    properly   identify,   and   then   balance,   the   public    interest
    considerations, because the  Judge  had  not  dealt  with  either;  the
    reasons why  the  Immigration  Rules  were  not  met,  the  Appellant's
    immigration history, or, the fact that neither the Appellant's wife nor
    his children were British citizens. Thus it was concluded the Judge had
    failed to consider the reasonableness or otherwise of  the  expectation
    that the children should leave the UK to  live  with  their  father  in
    Ethiopia.

 4. Before me Mr McVeety accepted that permission to appeal  had  not  been
    granted to the Respondent on the basis of the grounds  as  drafted.  He
    confirmed that upon due reflection the Respondent did not seek to renew
    the original challenge, and accepted the Designated Judge's  view  that
    it was unarguable.

 5. Turning then to the grant of permission as  framed  by  the  Designated
    Judge, Mr McVeety accepted that he was in some difficulty  in  adopting
    the criticisms of the decision that it contained. It had been confirmed
    to the Judge at the outset of the hearing in the  First  tier  Tribunal
    that the Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules  [16].  The  Judge  had  dealt  expressly  with  the  Appellant's
    immigration history [8-15, 31-34], and the lack of British  citizenship
    of his wife and children [1 & 9]. Indeed it was plain when the decision
    as read as a whole that the Judge was well aware that the entire family
    were citizens of Ethiopia, and that she correctly saw the central issue
    of primary fact in the appeal as being whether  the  Appellant  enjoyed
    the genuine and subsisting spousal and  parental  relationships  relied
    upon and which were disputed by the Respondent.

 6. Since  the  Appellant's  wife  and  children  had  twice  been  granted
    discretionary leave to remain  by  the  Respondent  [15],  and  it  was
    accepted that both of his children were "qualifying children"  for  the
    purposes of section 117,  the  question  that  arose  for  the  Judge's
    decision in consequence was whether or not it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the UK; AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180.
    In the circumstances Mr McVeety acknowledged that the only criticism of
    the decision that he could advance was that the Judge should have added
    perhaps only a sentence to make it  clear  to  the  reader  beyond  any
    doubt, that having found  the  relationships  relied  upon  did  indeed
    exist, she was satisfied that in all the circumstances of the appeal it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the  UK;
    s117B(6). As he very fairly accepted, when the decision is  read  as  a
    while, it is tolerably clear to the reader that  this  was  indeed  the
    Judge's approach, and her decision.

 7. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission
    to appeal was granted, in my judgement the Judge did properly  consider
    the competing interests and balanced them, giving adequate reasons  for
    her conclusions. I therefore dismiss the  Respondent's  challenge,  and
    confirm the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 8. An anonymity direction is made in the interests of the children.

Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 24 November 2017 did not involve the  making  of
an error of law sufficient to require the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  Article  8  appeal  is
accordingly confirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  of  the  individuals  referred  to  in  this
decision.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 13 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
