
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15505/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 30 March 2021                   |On: 07 April 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              genevieve birago
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri of Tamsons Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 13 May  1985.  She  appeals,
   with  permission,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
   dismissing her human rights appeal.

2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 14 December 2012  with  leave
   to enter as a visitor, valid until 15 May 2013, and  thereafter  remained
   without leave. She commenced a relationship with her spouse,  Gavin  John
   Stamper, in 2014. They started living together in August  2014  and  they
   were married in a proxy marriage which took place in  Accra  on  22  June
   2018. Prior to their marriage, on 2  May  2017,  the  appellant  made  an
   application for leave to remain on the basis of her  family  and  private
   life, but the application was refused and certified as clearly  unfounded
   on 15 December 2017 and permission was refused to judicially review  that
   decision. The appellant then made a further application  on  28  November
   2018, subsequent to the marriage, but that was rejected  under  paragraph
   353 of the immigration rules as further submissions not  amounting  to  a
   fresh claim.

3. On 20 July 2019 the appellant sought a reconsideration  of  the  decision
   on the basis that there had been a significant change of circumstances in
   view of her marriage to a British citizen. It was submitted that she  had
   no family to return to in Ghana and that she had  an  established  family
   and private life in the UK. There would be  insurmountable  obstacles  to
   her family life continuing in Ghana.

4. The respondent, in  a  decision  dated  5  September  2019,  treated  the
   submissions as a fresh Article 8 claim, but  refused  the  claim  on  the
   basis  that  the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  any   insurmountable
   obstacles to her family life continuing in  Ghana,  or  very  significant
   obstacles to integration in Ghana or compelling circumstances outside the
   rules. The respondent took account of the appellant's claim that she  was
   HIV positive  and  was  on  medication,  but  noted  that  treatment  was
   available in Ghana and did not consider that that the high threshold  for
   making out an Article 3 claim had been met.

5. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese on 8 November 2019. The appellant  and
   sponsor gave oral evidence before the judge. The case put  to  the  judge
   was that the sponsor's mother was entirely reliant on him  for  her  care
   and that he could not, therefore, leave the UK. Further, the sponsor  had
   a mortgage in the UK and he would not be able to pay it if he had to move
   to Ghana as he would not be able to find employment there.  In  addition,
   the appellant was pregnant and HIV positive. The  judge  considered  that
   EX.1 of Appendix FM  did  not  apply  as  the  appellant  had  failed  to
   demonstrate insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in  Ghana.
   The sponsor appeared not to have  done  much  research  about  living  in
   Ghana. The appellant's medical condition would not lead to  a  breach  of
   Article 3 or 8 as she  could  access  medical  treatment  in  Ghana.  The
   appellant would be able to obtain employment in Ghana and the sponsor was
   self-employed. There was also the option of the appellant making a  fresh
   entry clearance application to re-join her husband in the UK.  There  was
   no evidence that the appellant was not fit to travel as a result of being
   pregnant. The judge dismissed the appeal.

6. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision on the basis  that
   the judge had erred in  his  proportionality  assessment  by  failing  to
   address the impact of removal and other relevant factors such as the fact
   that the appellant had no  family  in  Ghana  and  failing  to  make  any
   significant findings on the fact that the sponsor had  serious  financial
   commitments in the UK which would be compromised by having to relocate to
   Ghana. Further, the grounds asserted that the judge failed  to  make  any
   reference to or findings on the case of Chikwamba v  Secretary  of  State
   for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1779  and  whether  it  was
   proportionate to  require  the  appellant  to  make  an  entry  clearance
   application from Ghana.

7. Permission was refused in the First-tier Tribunal, but was granted on  18
   November 2020 by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on a renewed application, on
   the following basis:

     "It is arguable that there was a failure to engage with  the  Chikwamba
   arguments made on the appellant's behalf which are  relevant  given  that
   her husband may be unable to satisfy the financial  requirements.  It  is
   further arguable that there was  a  failure  to  assess  the  appellant's
   circumstances holistically given that  she  was  both  HIV  positive  and
   pregnant at the time of the hearing."

8. In a Rule 24 response dated 3 December 2020, Mr Bates for the  respondent
   submitted that it was unclear what Chikwamba arguments were made  by  the
   appellant and that Chikwamba style considerations were  irrelevant  where
   it was unclear whether the  full  requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE  were
   satisfied.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the  case   of   Younas   (section
   117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT  129  in  submitting  that
   Chikwamba was not applicable in this case. The Rule 24  response  pointed
   out that permission had been granted  on  a  matter  not  raised  in  the
   grounds, namely the appellant's HIV status, and there was no  reason  why
   the appellant's pregnancy would be an insurmountable obstacle  to  family
   life continuing in Ghana. The judge had taken  all  relevant  facts  into
   account when making his proportionality assessment and  the  grounds  did
   not disclose any error of law by the judge.

9. The matter then came before me for a  remote  hearing  conducted  through
   Skype for Business. The parties made submissions.  Mr  Tampuri  submitted
   that the judge had failed to make a proper proportionality assessment and
   had failed to follow the principles in Chikwamba and Razgar,  R  (on  the
   Application of) v. Sectretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]
   UKHL 27. The judge had criticised the appellant for overstaying  but  had
   failed to consider the problems she  would  face  in  Ghana.  Ms  Everett
   relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that there  was  little  she
   could add as it was very thorough and comprehensive.

Discussion and conclusions

10. I entirely agree with Ms Everett that the Rule  24  response  fully  and
   properly addresses all the matters raised in the appellant's grounds.  It
   seems to me that both the grounds,  and  indeed  the  appellant's  actual
   claim, have little merit. The judge clearly  followed  the  proper  steps
   when considering the appellant's Article 8 claim, firstly by  considering
   whether the requirements of the immigration  rules  in  Appendix  FM  and
   paragraph 276ADE(1) were met on family and private life grounds and  then
   considering whether there were compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances
   outside the rules.

11. Contrary to the assertions made in the grounds, the  judge  undertook  a
   full and proper assessment of the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  and
   sponsor in the UK and  Ghana  and  the  extent  of  their  ties  to  both
   countries. The judge gave full consideration to the sponsor's commitments
   in the UK and to the couple's concerns about the difficulties they  would
   face in relocating to Ghana, taking account of  the  appellant's  medical
   condition and  the  treatment  she  was  receiving  in  the  UK  and  her
   pregnancy. He provided clear and cogent reasons as to why  the  appellant
   and sponsor had not demonstrated  'insurmountable  obstacles'  to  family
   life continuing in Ghana and why there  would  be  no  'very  significant
   obstacles' to the appellant's  integration  in  Ghana.  For  the  reasons
   properly given, the judge was fully entitled to conclude  that  paragraph
   EX.1 of Appendix FM did not apply and that the requirements in  paragraph
   276ADE(1) were not met. The judge then considered all  of  those  matters
   when assessing proportionality outside the immigration rules and he  took
   account of the relevant public interest factors in section  117B  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and asylum Act 2002, as he was required to do.

12. At the end of [20] the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  the
   option of making a fresh entry clearance application and it was  in  that
   regard that the grounds rely on the principles in Chikwamba and criticise
   the judge for having failed to engage with the matter. I agree  with  the
   respondent, in the Rule 24 response, that it is  unclear  what  Chikwamba
   arguments were actually made on  behalf  of  the  appellant.  Mr  Tampuri
   referred to his skeleton argument  before  the  judge  in  that  respect.
   However, the fact that the case was mentioned before the judge  was  not,
   without more, sufficient to show that the principles in the case applied,
   when they clearly did not. The judge was not directed to  evidence  which
   showed that the entry clearance requirements would be  satisfied  by  the
   appellant if an application was made and, in any  event,  the  respondent
   properly relies on the case of Younas which provides a full  response  to
   the appellant's case on that basis.

13. As the Upper Tribunal stated  in  Younas,  the Court  of  Appeal,  when
   interpreting Chikwamba, made it clear that the case did not stand for the
   proposition that it was sufficient, in  order  to  resist  removal  under
   Article 8, for an appellant to show that he or she would  succeed  in  an
   entry clearance application. The Tribunal stated as follows:

   "90.   Chikwamba pre-dates Part 5A of the Nationality  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), which was inserted by  the  Immigration
   Act 2014. Section 117A(2) of the  2002  Act  provides  that  a  court  or
   tribunal, when considering "the  public  interest  question," must have
   regard to the considerations listed in section 117B (and  117C  in  cases
   concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, which is not relevant to
   this appeal). The "public interest question" is defined as "the  question
   of whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for  private
   and family life is justified under article 8(2)". There is  no  exception
   in Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  (or  elsewhere)  for  cases  in  which  an
   appellant, following removal, will succeed in an  application  for  entry
   clearance. Accordingly, an appellant in an Article 8 human rights  appeal
   who argues that there is no public  interest  in  removal  because  after
   leaving the UK he or she will be granted entry  clearance  must,  in  all
   cases, address the relevant considerations in Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act
   including section 117B(1), which  stipulates  that  "the  maintenance  of
   effective immigration controls  is  in  the  public  interest".  Reliance
   on Chikwamba does not obviate the need to do this."

14. That was precisely  what  the  judge  was  addressing  at  [18]  of  his
   decision when he responded to the points raised by the appellant  in  the
   skeleton argument in relation to Chikwamba. He was perfectly entitled  to
   take the appellant's lengthy period of  overstaying  into  account,  when
   considering the public interest.

15. Accordingly I find no merit in  the  grounds.  The  judge  followed  the
   correct approach when considering the appellant's Article 8 claim in line
   with the relevant Article  8  jurisprudence.  He  undertook  a  full  and
   comprehensive proportionality assessment and provided clear and  cogently
   reasoned findings. He was fully entitled to reach the  decision  that  he
   did and he made no errors of law.

DECISION

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  30 March 2021
