
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15615/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 6th February 2019   On 14th February 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    A M W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr I Ali, Counsel, instructed by Trent Chambers
For the respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant, born on 1 August 2009, is a national of Malawi. He
      applied on 23 March 2016 for entry clearance in order to join and
      settle with his mother, hereinafter referred to as his sponsor.

   2. The application was refused by the entry clearance officer under
      paragraph 320(1) of the immigration rules on 20 May 2016.This was on
      the basis the application being sought was for a reason not covered by
      the rules. The refusal letter refers to his sponsor as having
      discretionary leave and states that as a consequence she did not have
      sufficient status to sponsor her son under the rules.

   3. The grounds of appeal referred to paragraph 301 of the rules and
      stated the appellant's sponsor had been given further leave to remain
      under the 10 year settlement route. The grounds contend that the entry
      clearance officer was wrong to conclude the sponsor was not entitled
      to bring dependents to the United Kingdom. The remainder of the
      grounds then seek to address the requirements of paragraph 301,
      suggesting they are met.

   4. The decision was reviewed by the entry clearance manager in light of
      the grounds of appeal. The reconsideration continued to maintain the
      application did not fall under any category in the rules as the
      sponsor had only limited leave. The manager stated that the sponsor
      had been granted limited leave to remain on human rights grounds as a
      parent of a child here. The sponsor had been in the United Kingdom
      since 2003 at which stage the appellant was 3. There was insufficient
      evidence that she had been involved in his life. It was felt that the
      current arrangements could continue and did not justify the grant of
      entry clearance outside the rules.

The First tier Tribunal

   5. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bannerman on 23
      October 2017. In a decision promulgated on 15 November 2017 the appeal
      was dismissed.

   6. The parties were represented. The appellant's sponsor gave evidence,
      stating she came to the United Kingdom in March 2003 and had returned
      to Malawi on 3 occasions, the last time being in March 2016. She
      stated that the appellant had been cared for by her own mother but she
      has suffered a series of strokes. He was presently being looked after
      by a friend. She said that she sent him money and maintained regular
      contact.

   7. At hearing the appellant's representative again raised paragraph 301
      and referred to the decision of TD Yemen [2006] UKAIT 49 on the
      question of sole responsibility.

   8. At paragraph 39 the judge said that paragraph 320(i) did not assist
      the appellant on the basis the evidence had not established sole
      responsibility. The judge accepted that the sponsor's mother had
      suffered a stroke in December 2015. However, it was pointed out that
      the sponsor had only visited once since then. The judge did not see
      evidence that the appellant was suffering because of the current care
      arrangements. The judge took the view that the sponsor had only
      recently been involved in the appellant's care and she had not had
      sole responsibility for him.

   9. At paragraph 52 the judge stated the sponsor made a choice in pursuing
      her life in the United Kingdom. The judge then referred to looking at
      matters outside the rules and did not find anything which assisted the
      appellant. The judge then refers to dismissing the appeal under the
      rules.

The Upper Tribunal

  10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge misdirected himself or failed to give adequate reasons,
      particularly in concluding that the sponsor did not have sole
      responsibility. The Judge had referred to paragraph 320(1) but there
      was no reference to paragraph 301.

  11. At hearing, Mr Diwnycz, acknowledged that neither the primary decision-
      makers nor the judge appeared to have adequately considered 301(1)(b).
      Mr I Ali relied upon his skeleton argument. He said that the reasons
      for the refusal was expanded upon by the entry clearance manager but
      that the application of paragraph 301 was not considered, either by
      the respondent or the judge. I was referred to paragraphs 29, 30,31 of
      the decision and it was submitted there had been no reasoning on the
      question of sole responsibility. He went on to say that the
      appellant's grandmother was unwell and that the school report
      indicated a deterioration in his condition.

Consideration

  12. The file contains a screen-print of the content of the application.
      The application was made on 23 March 2016 and was for settlement of
      the sponsor's child. Mr Diwnycz was unable to advise me if there is a
      generic application form or whether the individual had to indicate if
      the application was being made under any particular rule. This is
      relevant to the refusal decision which states the application was
      considered under paragraph 320(1) of the rules. If that rule is
      considered it relates to the grounds on which entry clearance is to be
      refused. It is not an enabling provision.

  13. The refusal states that the appellant's sponsor has discretionary
      leave which does not entitle her to bring any dependants to the United
      Kingdom. However, paragraph 301 does provide for leave with a view to
      settlement as a child of a parent who in turn has limited leave.
      Paragraph 301 (i)(b) covers the situation where one parent has been
      given limited leave to remain with a view to settlement and has had
      sole responsibility for the child or alternatively, (c), there are
      serious compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion
      of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements for the childcare
      have been made.

  14. It is my conclusion that the Judge's decision has been skewed by 2
      events. The 1st of these is the refusal decision which was based upon
      the sponsor not having settled status and asserting therefore she
      could not sponsor. This is incorrect and her status was not bar her
      from acting as sponsor for an application under paragraph 320. It
      seems likely that the basis for the refusal well have influenced the
      way the judge approached the appeal.

  15. The 2nd distortion is that the judge does not appear to have
      appreciated there was a limited right of appeal. In this case the
      appeal was concerned with the appellant's article 8 rights. The first
      issue to determine was whether family life within the meaning of
      article 8 existed, given the long separation between the appellant and
      his sponsor. If family life existed then a Razgar sequential approach
      could have been anticipated. On this basis the judge could have
      progressed to the proportionality issue when matters are looked at
      least initially through the prism of the rules.

  16. I am mindful that the appeal concerns a young child and the approach
      taken by the entry clearance officer and the judge may have distorted
      the consideration of his best interests. I find there was a material
      error in the concluding the sponsor did not have the status to so act.
      There is also an inadequacy of reasoning in the assessment of the
      question of sole responsibility and whether there were other
      compelling circumstances. Consequently, the decision is remitted for a
      de novo hearing in the first-tier Tribunal.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bannerman materially errs in law
and is set aside. The appeal is remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-
tier Tribunal.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.



Directions.

   1. Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal Birmingham.
      This location will convenience the sponsor.
   2. The appellant's representatives are to update the appeal bundle. At
      hearing it was indicated his sponsor has now obtained a custody order
      from the courts in Malawi. They should seek to provide evidence along
      the lines argued already about sole responsibility and the appellant
      circumstances.it remains open to them to argue any other matter felt
      relevant.
   3. There is no need for an interpreter
   4. The hearing should last no longer than an hour.


Francis J Farrelly
dated 10 February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.
