
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15703/2018
                                                               HU/15708/2018
                                                               HU/15712/2018
                                                               HU/15715/2018
                                                               HU/15716/2018
                                                               HU/15719/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st November 2019                |On 11th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              Mr JUSTICE NICOL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     KF
                                     KH
                                     AF
                                     FF
                                     MF
                                     ZF
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Meredith instructed by The Migrants Law
Project,
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik instructed by GLD


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants  in
this determination. This direction applies to, amongst others, all  parties.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings

      1. For reasons set out in a decision promulgated on  18th  June  2019,
         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker found errors of law in the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul,  who  had  allowed  their  appeals
         against a decision of the respondent refusing them entry clearance,
         such that the decision was set aside to be remade. The remaking  of
         the decision came before Mr Justice Nicol and Upper Tribunal  Judge
         Coker on 21st November 2019.

         Background

      2. The following, briefly  outlined,  background  is  not  subject  to
         challenge.

      3. The appellants in this decision, are the mother, father and younger
         siblings of an 18-year-old young man, date of  birth  31st  January
         2000, who is recognised as a refugee in the UK. He and  his  family
         are Syrian nationals. In 2013, when the sponsor was  aged  13,  the
         family fled Syria and lived in Jordan. During their time in  Jordan
         the family lived in difficult conditions; the  sponsor  experienced
         exploitative labour arrangements, arrest and detention for  working
         without permission while trying  to  support  his  family  and  was
         sexually assaulted. In August 2015, aged 15, he left his family  in
         Jordan and travelled across Europe to Calais  where  he  lived  for
         several months. Whilst in Calais he witnessed violence including  a
         fight in which a man was killed. He then travelled to Germany  and,
         following a 'take charge' request by Germany, he  was  admitted  to
         the UK to join a maternal aunt, her husband and their sons  on  1st
         July 2016 at which time he was aged  16.  That  relationship  broke
         down and in August 2016 the sponsor left that home;  he  was  taken
         into Local Authority care in accordance with s20 Children Act 1989.



      4. The last Children in Care Review meeting took place on 7th November
         2017 which stated, inter alia, that the sponsor would  continue  to
         be supported by the Onwards and Upwards Team (OUT) after  his  18th
         Birthday but there would be no further review meetings. That report
         refers to him meeting the Support Housing Worker  (Tom  Conway)  at
         his then accommodation every three to  four  weeks  for  'key  work
         sessions' but they also saw each other two to three times  a  week.
         Although the review recommended that he  be  visited  by  a  social
         worker every 6 to 8 weeks, there were  no  disclosed  records  that
         this had in fact occurred. The sponsor continued  to  live  at  the
         supported accommodation until March 2019  and  then  moved  to  his
         current address - permanent independent accommodation. The outreach
         support continued until September 2019. The sponsor  is  no  longer
         eligible  for  'add-ons'  such  as  psychotherapeutic  counselling,
         bursary allowance for travel to college or help with education  and
         employment advisors.

      5. Mr Conway has continued to see him occasionally, for  example  when
         the sponsor is passing his previous accommodation;  these  meetings
         are not under any  formal  arrangement.  Mr  Conway  expressed  his
         concern that the sponsor's previous social  network,  described  in
         the last Review as being active with regular visits to his extended
         family members is no longer in place because he lives some distance
         away  from  them.  He  expresses  concern  that  the  sponsor,  who
         previously had difficulty opening  up  to  staff  at  his  previous
         supported accommodation, was not able  to  seek  support  from  his
         allocated personal advisor, whom he only sees every three months or
         so in any event and this is likely to end soon.

      6. On 1st September 2016 the sponsor was assaulted by three men whilst
         walking in Willesden with his cousin; the police  had  been  called
         but no further action resulted.

      7. The sponsor has been examined by Dr Datta, a  specialist  registrar
         in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and two reports are relied  upon
         - 21st November 2018 and 13th September 2019.  The  respondent  did
         not, in her grounds of appeal against the decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge, challenge the qualifications of  Dr  Datta  or
         the findings made. Dr Datta's second report was prepared after  the
         First-tier Tribunal decision was set aside; there was no request by
         the respondent for Dr Datta to be called to be  cross-examined  and
         no challenge to her report. Dr Datta, in her first report concludes
         that the sponsor

             "presents with post-traumatic stress  disorder  and  co-morbid
             major depressive disorder. The aetiology for his PTSD are  the
             traumas  described  in  his   history   which   include:   his
             experiences of the  war  in  Syria;  his  exploitative  labour
             arrangements and sexual assault in Jordan; and a traumatic and
             lengthy journey to the United Kingdom which included a stay in
             the Calais jungle camp (as an unaccompanied  minor)  where  he
             witnessed extreme violence. There is  an  ongoing  significant
             exacerbation of these symptoms due to his  current  separation
             from his family...he will not be able to  fully  recover  from
             his PTSD or depressive  disorder  without  long  terms  social
             stability, a key component of which is family support. This is
             because social stability is a necessary pre-requisite  to  the
             specialist psychological treatment that I recommend...".

      8. In her second report, Dr Datta concluded, inter alia,

             "... The inability to reunite with  his  family  promptly  has
             resulted in further deterioration in his mental state and is a
             barrier to effective  treatment  at  present....it  is  highly
             likely that this  deterioration  will  continue  if  continued
             separation occurs and the risk will only be reduced with  long
             term  supportive  social  stability  now,  which   undoubtedly
             involved reunification with his family. In  my  opinion,  [the
             sponsor's] clearly worsening PTSD and depression  in  relation
             to the ongoing separation from his family  is  preventing  him
             from discussing his sexual assault in detail  as  is  required
             for treatment of the associated post traumatic symptoms."

         Dr Datta refers to the sponsor's loneliness his accommodation,  his
         profoundly different perspective to college, that he doesn't really
         have friends, feelings of lack of settlement and  worry  about  his
         family. She concludes that that his symptoms  are  consistent  with
         PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder - severe subtype. She states

             "..[she] can no longer recommend a  trial  of  anti-depressant
             medication; this on the basis of how [the sponsor's]  symptoms
             have   developed....at    present    medication    would    be
             contraindicated unless [the sponsor] was in a highly supported
             environment such as accommodation where he has  access  to  24
             hour professional support, as he does not  have  the  proximal
             support of his family....in order for [the sponsor] to receive
             from his psychiatric disorders; he requires as a  necessity  a
             safe and stable social situation for   significant  period  of
             time and this equates to him being reunited with his family in
             the UK."

      9. There was delay in determining the sponsor's asylum claim; On  25th
         June 2017, the respondent, in response to a complaint about  delay,
         stated that they aimed to take a decision on the  sponsor's  asylum
         claim within three months.  On  31st  October  2017  the  sponsor's
         solicitors  were  informed  by   telephone   that   the   sponsor's
         application had been passed to a new team set up to make  decisions
         on old cases. In response to a further complaint by his solicitors,
         the sponsor was informed on 23rd November 2017 that  the  sponsor's
         case 'was now ready to go to the team that makes decisions'. On 1st
         December 2017, the sponsor  received  a  letter  stating  that  the
         formal complaint about delay had been  upheld.   On  19th  December
         2017, the  sponsor,  through  his  solicitors,  sent  a  pre-action
         protocol letter challenging what they submitted was an ongoing  and
         unlawful delay in reaching a decision on the sponsor's  substantive
         asylum application.  They  relied  upon  the  Procedures  Directive
         )2013/32/EU) Article 31 although the UK  has  opted  out  of  this.
         Nevertheless, paragraphs 333A[1], 350[2] of the  Immigration  Rules
         are of relevance to the question of delay.  The  response  to  that
         letter,  dated  22nd  December  2017  stated  that   the   relevant
         department [of the Home Office] would contact them within 3 months.



     10. The sponsor was recognised as a refugee on 4th January 2018 some 18
         months after his claim was made. He became 18 on 31st January 2018.
         On 25th  January  2018,  his  parents  and  siblings  sought  entry
         clearance and were refused in decisions dated 28th  February  2018:
         they fall out with the Immigration  Rules,  and  the  ECO  was  not
         satisfied that there were exceptional circumstances which warranted
         a grant of leave outside the Rules.

         Remaking the decision

     11. The fundamental issue in these appeals is  the  proportionality  of
         the  respondent's  decisions  to  refuse  entry  clearance  to  the
         sponsor's parents and younger siblings. Although submitted  in  her
         skeleton, that the decisions were not in accordance  with  the  law
         and thus in breach  of  Article  8(2),  this  was,  correctly,  not
         pursued by Ms Meredith  in  the  light  of  Charles  (human  rights
         appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 89 (IAC).

     12. In extradition cases where it is alleged that  the  return  of  the
         requested  person  would  be  contrary  to  Article  8  ECHR,   the
         Divisional Court has recommended drawing up a balance sheet of  the
         factors favouring return and those against. A similar approach  can
         usefully be adopted where the issue is not extradition, but whether
         an immigration decision would put the UK in breach of Article 8.

     13. We think it helpful to set out some important starting points.

     14. First, it is  the  sponsor's  rights  under  Article  8  which  are
         engaged. It is he, and only he, who is in the UK. By Article  1  of
         the ECHR the UK undertook  'to  secure  to  everyone  within  [its]
         jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in section 1  of  this
         Convention'. Those rights and freedoms include, of course,  Article
         8. There are certain exceptions where the Convention has an  extra-
         territorial reach, but none of them  is  relevant  in  the  present
         context. As Ms Meredith submitted, there are cases where Article  8
         has been held to require the admission of someone  who  is  outside
         the  UK,  but  that  is  because  their  exclusion  would   be   an
         impermissible interference with the private or  family  life  of  a
         family member who is in the UK -see for instance Secretary of State
         for the Home Department v Tahir Abbas [2017] EWCA Civ 1393.  We  do
         not therefore agree with Ms Meredith that the Appellants themselves
         have Article 8 rights for present purposes since they  are  all  in
         Jordan.

     15. Next, some of the Appellants are children. We  do  not  doubt  that
         life for Syrian refugees in Jordanian refugee camps is hard and for
         children it will be harder still, but  that,  too  is  at  best  of
         attenuated relevance to the present issue before us.  As  Mr  Malik
         observed, the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 s.55(1)
         applies to 'children who are in the United Kingdom'.  Part  of  the
         purpose of s.55 was to incorporate partially into English  law  the
         United Nations Convention on the Rights of  the  Child.  ('UNCRC').
         Article 3 of the UNCRC says 'In all  actions  concerning  children,
         whether  undertaken   by   public   or   private   social   welfare
         institutions,  courts  of  law,   administrative   authorities   or
         legislative bodies, the best interests of  the  child  shall  be  a
         primary consideration.' In AT and AHI  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
         Abud Dhabi [ 2016] UKUT 00227 (IAC) ('AT') to which we will return,
         McClosky J, then President of the Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber), annexed to his judgment 'Every Child  Matters'  by
         UKBA  (2009).  Section  55(3)  of  the  2009  Act  requires  people
         exercising functions to  have  regard  to  guidance  given  by  the
         Secretary of State. 'Every Child  Matters'  is  that  guidance.  At
         paragraph 2.6 of this document UKBA  acknowledged  the  status  and
         importance of  a  number  of  international  instruments  including
         UNCRC. At paragraph 2.7 it said, 'Every child matters even if  they
         are subject to immigration control. In accordance  with  the  UNCRC
         the best interests of a  child  will  be  a  primary  consideration
         (although not  necessarily  the  only  consideration)  when  making
         decisions affecting  children.'  Paragraph  2.34  of  'Every  Child
         Matters' says, 'The statutory duty in section 55 of  the  2009  Act
         does not apply in relation to children who are outside  the  United
         Kingdom. However, UK Border  Agency  staff  working  overseas  must
         adhere to the spirit of the duty and make enquiries when they  have
         reason to suspect that a child may be  in  need  of  protection  or
         safeguarding, or presents welfare needs that require attention.  In
         some instances, international or local agreements are in place that
         permit or require children to be referred  to  the  authorities  of
         other countries and UK Border Agency staff will abide by these. The
         Supreme Court noted this paragraph of 'Every Child  Matters'  in  R
         (MM) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10, [2017] 1 WLR 771 at [47]. As  Mr  Malik
         put it in his submissions to us, while s.55 does not in terms apply
         to the child appellants, the spirit of the duty under UNCRC may  be
         relevant. We agree that this is as high as  the  relevance  of  the
         UNCRC to the position of the children Appellants can be put.

     16. Next, Ms Meredith relied heavily on AT as to which Mr Malik made  a
         number of criticisms. We think it  necessary  to  address  each  of
         these:

          a) AT is not binding authority. Ms Meredith  accepted  that  this
             was correct, as do we. It remains persuasive authority, as  Mr
             Malik accepted, although he  suggested  that  because  of  his
             other comments it should not carry a great deal of weight.

          b) AT was different because the sponsor had been a child when the
             application was made, when the ECO refused entry  clearance[3]
             and at the date of remaking by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  the
             present case the sponsor was an adult  when  the  ECO  refused
             entry clearances (28th February 2018) since he  turned  18  on
             31st January  2018.  We  accept  that  this  is  an  important
             difference. We note as well  that  s.55(6)  of  the  2009  Act
             defines children (in common with other  UK  statutes  and  the
             UNCRC at Article 1) as a person under 18. Ms Meredith referred
             us to paragraph 27 of the  Immigration  Rules  which  concerns
             those who applied for entry clearance when they were  children
             but who become adults before a decision is made.  However,  we
             agree with Mr Malik that this  paragraph  is  nothing  to  the
             point: it concerns applicants for  entry  clearance.  In  this
             case it is the sponsor who has become  an  adult  between  the
             making of the application and the ECO's decision.

          c) Mr Malik observed that McCloskey J had been wrong to say  that
             there was a  'blanket  prohibition'  on  relatives  joining  a
             refugee in the UK other than a spouse  or  minor  child  of  a
             refugee (see AT at [11] and [22]). We agree with Mr Malik that
             this was an exaggeration. There is not a prohibition on  other
             relatives joining a refugee (as there  is,  for  instance,  on
             those who have been deported from the UK being  granted  entry
             clearance - Immigration Rules paragraph  320(2)(a))  There  is
             simply no provision for family reunion  for  a  family  member
             with a refugee in such circumstances. We agree that this was a
             mistake on the part of McCloskey J.  However, it does not seem
             to us to have been material. It did not lead him to  make  any
             consequential error based on this exaggeration.

          d) Mr Malik drew our attention to AT [22] where McCloskey J.  had
             relied on his own previous decision in ZAT and others  v  SSHD
             (Article8  -Dublin  Regulation  -Interface  -Proportionality).
             However, the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  ZAT  had
             subsequently been reversed by the Court of Appeal -see  R  (ZT
             (Syria) and others) v SSHD (UNHCR intervening) [2016] EWCA Civ
             810, [2016] 1 WLR 4894. At [64] the Court of Appeal emphasised
             the importance of a fact-sensitive analysis.  We  accept  that
             such an analysis is  critical.  Otherwise  ZAT  concerned  the
             interpretation of the UK's obligations under  the  Dublin  III
             regulation which is not material to the present matter.

          e) Finally, Mr Malik drew attention to [39] of AT where McCloskey
             J. had said, 'Next, it is necessary  to  give  effect  to  the
             principles enunciated in Mathieson (Mathieson v  Secretary  of
             State for Work and Pensions [2011] UKSC 4, [2011]  2  AC  166)
             together with  those  aspects  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
             statutory guidance noted in [31] above [this is a reference to
             the 'Every Child Matters' document to which  we  have  already
             referred]. I do not deduce from any  of  these  principles  or
             sources that the  Secretary  of  State  is  under  a  duty  to
             facilitate reunification for this family in the United Kingdom
             with the result that the impugned decisions  of  the  ECO  are
             vitiated. The existence of an absolute duty of this nature was
             not argued and I do not consider  that  such  a  duty  exists.
             However, in my view the orientation of  these  principles  and
             policies  is  to  favour  rather  than  undermine,  what   the
             Appellants seek to achieve by these appeals. They qualify  for
             substantial weight in the proportionality balancing exercise.'
             [emphasis in the original]. Mr Malik argues that  this  is  to
             misunderstand Mathieson. At [44] Lord Wilson said  this,  'The
             noun adopted by the Grand Chamber in  the  Neulinger  case  54
             EHRR 1087, cited above, is  "harmony".  A  conclusion  reached
             without  reference  to  international  Conventions,  that  the
             Secretary of State has failed to establish  justification  for
             the difference in his treatment  of  those  severely  disabled
             children who are required to remain in hospital for a  lengthy
             period would harmonise with a conclusion  that  his  different
             treatment of their rights  violates  their  rights  under  two
             international Conventions.' Mr Malik submitted in his skeleton
             argument,  'It  is  one  thing  to  say  that   a   particular
             conclusion,  "reached  without  reference   to   international
             Conventions"  will  "harmonise"   with   those   international
             conventions,  it  is  quite  another  to  attach  "substantial
             weight" to the "orientation" of international "principles  and
             polices". We agree that there is force in this criticism of Mr
             Malik's.

     17. Standing back, we conclude as follows regarding AT:

          a) is incumbent on us  to  conduct  an  intensive  fact-sensitive
             exercise to decide whether  there  would  be  disproportionate
             interference with this sponsor's private and  family  life  if
             the Appellants' refusals of entry clearance were upheld.  With
             respect, to FTTJ Paul we do not share his description of AT as
             'all-embracing'. The SSHD did not seek to appeal the  decision
             and, accordingly, it was dispositive of the factual  situation
             with which the Tribunal was then presented, but it was no more
             than that.

          b) AT is an example of how that can be the case,  although  there
             are (inevitably) differences between the sets of facts  in  AT
             and the present case, notably that AT was a  child  both  when
             the ECO refused entry clearances to  his  family  members  and
             when the Upper Tribunal took the final decision.

          c) We accept that it is Mathieson rather  than  AT  which  should
             guide us in relation to the role of international  instruments
             which have not been incorporated into domestic law. It may  be
             material that a particular outcome would be  in  harmony  with
             such instruments, but that is not  the  same  as  saying  they
             should be accorded substantial weight.

         Although AT is a reported decision and of persuasive authority,  in
         the light of ZT, the starting and significant point is the  Article
         8 rights of the individual who is in the UK.

     18. We then turn to consider the factors which weigh in the balance  as
         to why the refusal of entry clearance  is  not  a  disproportionate
         interference with the sponsor's right to private and family life.

          a) We start with Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
             s.117B  which  is   headed   'Article   8:   public   interest
             considerations  applicable  in  all  cases'.  Subsection   (1)
             provides, 'The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls
             is in the public interest.'

          b) Section 117B(2) says, 'It is in the public  interest,  and  in
             particular in the interests of the economic well-being of  the
             United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in
             the UK are able to speak English, because  persons  who  speak
             English-(a) Are less of a burden on  taxpayers,  and  (b)  Are
             better able to integrate into society. FTTJ Paul described the
             Appellants at [22] as 'non-English speaking' and there  is  no
             evidence before us to  suggest  that  is  incorrect.  We  must
             therefore proceed on the basis that this is a  factor  against
             the grant of entry clearance.

          c) Section 117B(3) says, 'It is in the public  interest,  and  in
             particular in the interests of the economic well-being of  the
             United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in
             the UK are financially independent, because such persons  -(a)
             Are not a burden on taxpayers, and  (b)  Are  better  able  to
             integrate into society. FTTJ Paul also  said  at  [22],  '[The
             Appellants] will find it very difficult to integrate into  the
             UK, and will likely be a drain on resources for a considerable
             period of time. The fact that it is a large family  aggravates
             the potential impact on the public  purse  in  this  country.'
             Again, we have had no contrary evidence.

             Ms Meredith noted that  there  is  no  requirement  under  the
             Immigration Rules for refugees themselves or their spouses  or
             minor children to show that they can live in  the  UK  without
             recourse to public funds. That is correct, but we  agree  with
             Mr Malik that it is nothing to the point. The  Appellants  are
             not entitled to claim asylum in the UK  since  the  obligation
             under Article 33 of the Refugee  Convention  applies  only  to
             refugees who are in the territory of a Member  State  and  the
             Appellants, even if they are refugees, are not in the UK.  The
             Appellants are not the spouses or the minor  children  of  the
             sponsor. The Appellants rely on Article  8.  It  is  for  that
             reason that s.117B of  the  2002  Act  is  relevant.  We  must
             therefore also  proceed  on  the  basis  that  their  lack  of
             financial independence, too, is a factor against the grant  of
             entry clearance. FTTJ Paul commented on the  fact  that  there
             were a large number of Appellants. We raised with both parties
             whether they considered that all the Appellants  must  succeed
             in their appeals or all must fail, or whether there was  scope
             for differentiation between the Appellants. Both  Ms  Meredith
             and Mr Malik agreed  that  all  the  appeals  stood  together.
             Either all must succeed, or all must fail.  They  were  agreed
             that there  was  no  scope  for  differentiating  between  the
             Appellants.

          d) The SSHD's policy as expressed in the Immigration Rules is  to
             cater for the family reunification of refugees in only limited
             circumstances. Thus, provision is made for the  partner  of  a
             refugee  (paragraph  352A),  minor  children  of   a   refugee
             (paragraph 352E). In addition, there  are  general  provisions
             for the admission of other  family  members  (see  Immigration
             Rules Appendix FM) of which refugees, like other sponsors  can
             take advantage. Otherwise, as  is  said  in  the  Home  Office
             document  'Family  Reunion:  for  refugees  and   those   with
             humanitarian protection' (19th March 2019) at p.30, 'Where the
             applicant is a  parent,  grandparent,  brother  or  sister  of
             someone with  refugee  status  or  someone  with  humanitarian
             protection leave, they  will  not  qualify  under  the  family
             reunion provisions.' As was made clear in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC
             11 the purpose of the Immigration Rules is to enable  decision
             makers to understand and apply the appropriate  weight  to  be
             given to the public interest.  Whether  through  s.117B(1)  or
             otherwise, we accept that the fact that  the appellants do not
             meet the Immigration Rules is an adverse factor.

          e)  We  were  not  referred  to  any  international  or  national
             provision or jurisprudence that supports entry to  the  UK  of
             parents and/or siblings of adult refugees.

     19. We turn to the factors which suggest  that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with   the
         sponsor's private and family life.

          a) Ms Meredith laid particular stress on the sponsor's mental ill
             health. The sponsor had arrived in the UK as an  unaccompanied
             minor. He had had traumatic experiences. While  in  Syria,  he
             had witnessed the violent suppression of a peaceful protest he
             had attended. His home had been destroyed by  bombing.  People
             he had known had been arbitrarily arrested. He and his  family
             had fled to Jordan He had worked without permission  and  been
             exploited in consequence. He had  also  been  sexually  abused
             while in Jordan. At 15 he left Jordan  and  travelled  through
             Turkey and Greece. He had lived for 2 years in the camp  known
             as 'the Jungle' in Calais. He had witnessed a fight in which a
             man had been killed. He had claimed  asylum  in  Germany,  but
             because he had an aunt living in the UK, the UK had agreed  to
             take  charge  of  his  asylum  application.  Although  he  had
             originally stayed with his aunt, that relationship had  broken
             down. He  had  been  a  looked  after  child  with  the  local
             authority (the London Borough of Barnet), but that arrangement
             had formally come to  an  end  when  he  became  18  save  for
             occasional support as detailed above (paragraph 5).

             We have two reports from Dr Datta. We have referred  to  these
             in more detail above. The first is dated 21st  November  2018.
             Dr Datta is a Specialist Registrar in the field of  child  and
             adolescent psychiatry. Although Mr Malik noted that  Dr  Datta
             was still undergoing training, he did not dispute that she was
             qualified to provide an expert report. We note as well that Dr
             Datta is supervised  by  Dr  Susannah  Fairweather  who  is  a
             Consultant Psychiatrist. No issue was taken  with  Dr  Datta's
             level of skill before the FTT and we  have  no  hesitation  in
             accepting her professional opinion, against which there is  no
             evidence. In this first report Dr  Datta  concluded  that  the
             sponsor  suffered  from  clear   psychiatric   disorders   and
             fulfilled the diagnostic criteria  for  post-traumatic  stress
             disorder. She commented that his PTSD 'would be  severe  based
             on the frequency and number  of  symptoms  expressed  and  the
             level of functional impairment he suffers  as  a  result.'  Dr
             Datta  also  considered  that  the  sponsor   suffered   major
             depressive  disorder  which  would  be  severe  based  on  the
             frequency and number of his symptoms. Dr Datta considered that
             the sponsor needed psychiatric treatment with  medication  and
             specialist psychological treatment, but  she  considered  that
             his situation was particularly related to separation from  his
             family and, absent family reunification, 'formal psychological
             treatment is almost irrelevant.'  Dr  Datta  saw  the  sponsor
             again on 28th June 2019 and provided a second report  on  13th
             September 2019. She reported a deterioration in his condition,
             both his PTSD and his depression were now worse than when  she
             had seen him previously. In her view that deterioration  would
             continue if he was not reunited with his family.  The  sponsor
             was close to one of his cousins  but  had  not  been  able  to
             discuss his mental health problems with him.

          b) A second factor on which Ms Meredith had relied was the  delay
             in dealing with the sponsor's application for asylum.  He  had
             been transferred to the UK from Germany on 1st July  2016  and
             he claimed asylum on arrival. He was not granted asylum  until
             4th January 2018. Since the sponsor was from Syria and  indeed
             from the Governorate of Dereaa (which even by Syrian standards
             was particularly troubled) and since there was no question  of
             there being a safe  alternative  country  (since  the  UK  had
             agreed to take charge of  his  application  for  asylum)  that
             length of time was difficult to  explain.  Solicitors  on  the
             sponsor's  behalf  had  complained  about  the  delay  on  2nd
             November 2017. The complaint was upheld by  the  SSHD  on  1st
             December 2017.  When  there  was  still  no  decision  on  the
             sponsor's application for asylum, the solicitors wrote a  Pre-
             Action Protocol letter on 19th December 2017. Whether for that
             or some independent reason, the sponsor was granted asylum, as
             we have said on 4th January 2018. The PAP letter also  alerted
             the SSHD to the  sponsor's  intention,  as  and  when  he  was
             granted asylum to apply for his family in Jordan to join  him.
             Mr Malik submitted that it would not be  right  to  allow  the
             appeal as some form of discipline of the SSHD because  of  any
             past delay, if such there had been. He relied on T Afghanistan
             [2015] UKSC 40. We  understand  that  principle.  However,  Mr
             Malik agreed that, if the Tribunal considered that  there  had
             been unreasonable delay in deciding the sponsor's application,
             that would potentially, be a factor to consider in the overall
             Article 8 balance.

         The Article 8 balance: our conclusion

     20. In our view this is a case where it  would  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with the sponsor's private and family life  to  refuse
         his family the entry clearances  that  they  seek.  We  reach  that
         conclusion for the following reasons:

          a) We accept Mr Malik's  submission  that  what  is  required  is
             intensively fact specific. It follows  that  we  have  decided
             this appeal against the particular factual background  of  the
             sponsor as it relates to these appellants.

          b) It is not unusual for those who have fled war and  persecution
             to be traumatised, but this sponsor's  mental  ill  health  is
             striking even by such standards. The medical  evidence  relied
             upon is particularly detailed, comprehensive and up  to  date.
             The recent report illustrates what was flagged up in the first
             report. The sponsor suffers severe  PTSD.  He  suffers  severe
             depressive   disorder.   Depression,    as    understood    by
             psychiatrists, is not be confused with being downcast  at  the
             beginning (or end) of  a  week.  It  is  a  recognised  mental
             illness that has to satisfy internationally  agreed  criteria.
             Even so, depression can be classified  as  mild,  moderate  or
             severe. In the sponsor's case, his is Major depression of  the
             severe subtype.

          c) In the relatively short interval between Dr Datta's first  and
             second examination of the sponsor (November  2018-June  2019),
             his PTSD and depression had both deteriorated.

          d) As Mr Malik agreed, an underlying public interest which can be
             detected behind the 2002 Act s.117B(2) and (3) is the value of
             those who come to the UK integrating and settling successfully
             here. The sponsor's  prospects  of  integrating  and  settling
             successfully according to Dr Datta  are  intimately  bound  up
             with whether he can be joined by his family.  This  is  not  a
             case where drugs are a possible  alternative.  In  her  second
             report Dr Datta says 'Therefore, at present, medication  would
             be contraindicated.' Nor is therapy  an  alternative  form  of
             treatment. As Dr Datta  also  said,  'He  is  unlikely  to  be
             capable  of  embarking  on  this  challenging  trauma  related
             therapeutic work until family reunification has occurred.'  Mr
             Malik asked us to note that Dr Datta's view was that this  was
             'unlikely' not impossible. With respect to Mr  Malik,  we  are
             unimpressed by that distinction.

          e) We recognise that the sponsor does have relatives in  the  UK.
             Indeed, it was because of them that  the  UK  agreed  to  take
             charge of his asylum application. He does  apparently  have  a
             friendship with his cousin Omran. However,  the  relationship,
             in terms of day to day living with his  aunt  broke  down  and
             that was why he moved out from her home. As  Barnet  noted  in
             its Care Plan, '[A] was previously living  with  his  Aunt  in
             their home. This placement has broken down, as a result of the
             youngest son (14) in the home not getting  on  with  [A],  and
             this adding stress to the family [redaction] As a  result  [A]
             after staying in their house  from  01/08/2016  was  asked  to
             leave, making him homeless.' Although there  is  reference  in
             the Children in Care Reviews and  in  the  sponsor's  and  his
             aunt's witness statements to contact between them,  we  accept
             that this contact is no substitute for the required  emotional
             support that can, according to Dr Datta, only be obtained from
             his parents. We are aware that Dr Datta has not addressed this
             directly in either of her reports, but we are  satisfied  that
             the overarching tenor of her report is  such  as  to  make  it
             plain that the sponsor's extended family  in  the  UK  are  of
             little or  no  assistance  to  him  in  terms  of  his  future
             integration, establishment and mental well-being.

          f) Since he became an adult, the formal support,  save  for  very
             limited support from a personal advisor whom he sees  at  most
             every three months, from Barnet has come to an  end,  although
             Mr Conway, the Housing Officer with the organisation which was
             assisting the sponsor until he moved to permanent  independent
             accommodation has continued to take an  interest  in  him.  Mr
             Conway gave evidence before the FTT. Mr Conway explains in  an
             updating witness statement of 20th  September  2019  that  the
             sponsor 'appears to be maintaining his accommodation, avoiding
             trouble with the law and  continuing  in  education.  On  this
             basis he is likely  to  be  lower  priority  on  his  personal
             adviser's case  load  compared  to  some  others.'  Mr  Conway
             continues, 'I consider that [the  sponsor]  needs  consistent,
             regular, support and care in order for him to be able to  open
             up and deal with the trauma that he has experienced. That type
             of support is not available  from  either  Barnet  Foyer  [the
             organisation  for  which  Mr  Conway  works]  or   the   Local
             Authority....  the  only  path  to  him  fully  realising  his
             potential is if his family is able to finally be reunited with
             him to provide  him  the  close  support  and  care  described
             above.'

          g) The sponsor is not a child. He was not a child  when  the  ECO
             took his decisions. He was not a child when  the  FTT  allowed
             the appeal. He is not a child now. It does not  seem  fruitful
             to us to attempt to parse precisely which of  those  dates  is
             the critical one. But, in this context it is relevant that the
             decision on the sponsor's asylum application was  delayed.  It
             is not necessary for us to decide if the delay was so great as
             to be unlawful. The delay was anyway such that the solicitors'
             complaint was upheld. Had  the  application  been  dealt  with
             expeditiously, the sponsor would have been in  a  position  to
             apply  earlier  for  the  Appellants  to  join  him  (as   the
             solicitors had indicated in  their  PAP  was  his  intention).
             There would in those circumstances, still have been  no  right
             for  the  sponsor  to  be  joined  by  his  family  under  the
             Immigration Rules, but, the SSHD would have  been  obliged  in
             those  circumstances  to  consider  his  best   interests   in
             accordance with s.55 of  the  2009  Act.  Had  the  SSHD  been
             obliged to consider the sponsor's best interests, we  have  no
             doubt that it would have been plain that  his  best  interests
             would have been for him to be reunited  with  his  family.  Of
             course, the sponsor's best interest would not then necessarily
             have then been determinative,  but  they  would  have  been  a
             primary  consideration.  To  that  extent  the  sponsor  (and,
             indirectly, the Appellants) have been prejudiced by the delay.
             We consider that Mr Malik was right to concede that this is  a
             factor which can properly be taken into account in the overall
             Article 8 assessment.  On its own, this factor would not  have
             had a significant impact, but it is nevertheless a  matter  we
             have factored into our decision.

          h) We have recognised that, even though s.55 of the 2009 Act does
             not apply to children outside the UK, the SSHD's policy is  to
             have regard to the spirit of the provision so far as  children
             abroad are concerned. We do not consider that this  takes  the
             Appellants' case much further. Of course, we recognise, as  we
             have done, that the conditions of Syrian  refugees  in  Jordan
             are harsh and they would, no doubt, be better off in  England.
             But, the children in Jordan are with their parents,  which  is
             usually the best arrangements for children (see  for  instance
             Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88  (IAC)).  The
             last sentence of  paragraph  2.34  of  'Every  Child  Matters'
             refers  to  international  or  local  agreements  which  might
             require children to be referred to the  authorities  of  other
             countries. We have not been told of any such  agreements  that
             are applicable in this case.

          i) As we have observed, both parties were agreed that the appeals
             stand or fall together. The SSHD is entitled  to  comment,  in
             line with the 2002 Act s.117B(2) and  (3)  that  none  of  the
             Appellants apparently speak  English  and  none  of  them  are
             likely  (in  the  short  to  medium  term  at  least)  to   be
             financially independent. We recognise that the total impact on
             taxpayers could  be  significant.  As  against  that,  if  the
             sponsor does not have the support of his family which Dr Datta
             considers to be essential for his mental health to recover, he
             will be a cost to the taxpayer, whereas if he were to recover,
             Mr Conway's views suggest  that  he  could  be  a  flourishing
             member of society. While s.117B(3)  means  that  the  Tribunal
             must be alive to the impact of its decisions on the  taxpayer,
             it would be invidious if the Article 8 balance was seen as  no
             more than a book keeping exercise.

          j) At times in  his  submissions,  Mr  Malik  suggested  that  an
             alternative to the Appellants being  granted  entry  clearance
             would be for him to visit his family  in  Jordan.  There  are,
             though, several reasons why that alternative is unreal. First,
             as Ms Meredith  observed,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  such  a
             temporary visit would  provide  him  with  the  stability  and
             support which Dr Datta considers essential for  his  recovery;
             secondly, Jordan is not a party to the Refugee Convention. The
             Appellants are able to stay in Jordan for the time being,  but
             their position there is precarious. That may  be  their  least
             worse alternative. But the sponsor is presently protected.  He
             would be ill advised to go to  Jordan  for  even  a  temporary
             visit. In any event, Jordan was where the sponsor was sexually
             abused. As he says in his witness statement of 28th July 2016,
             he fears that if he went to Jordan he would be arrested as  he
             had been before. He would have no rights  there.  Thirdly,  it
             would be dependent on the sponsor having the means to pay  for
             such a trip. There is no  evidence  that  he  does  have  such
             means.

          k) We agree with Ms Meredith that the present  situation  is  not
             directly comparable to some of the other cases where Article 8
             of the ECHR has been invoked. Thus, this is  not  a  situation
             where a foreign criminal  opposes  deportation  on  Article  8
             grounds. Nor is the present case directly  comparable  to  the
             situation where a person has no leave to remain but relies  on
             Article 8 to resist their removal. But while those cases  will
             raise considerations peculiar to them, we  do  agree  with  Mr
             Malik that there does have  to  be  something  exceptional  or
             compelling about the circumstances of the present case to make
             the denial  of  entry  clearance,  which  would  otherwise  be
             consistent with  the  Immigration  Rules,  a  disproportionate
             interference with the sponsor's family or private life. In our
             view, though, there are  such  circumstances  in  as  we  have
             explained.

     21. We have decided this case on Article 8  grounds.  In  her  skeleton
         argument, Ms Meredith referred also to Article  14  in  conjunction
         with Article 8. Article 14 prohibits discrimination in  conjunction
         with one of the other rights in the  Convention.  In  her  skeleton
         argument,  Ms  Meredith  had  suggested   that   there   had   been
         discrimination against the sponsor as a person who was disabled  on
         account of his mental ill health. In her oral submissions,  though,
         she made it clear that she was not  pursuing  a  discrete  argument
         relying on Article 14 together with Article 8. It was not  entirely
         clear to us whether she also  chose  to  abandon  another  argument
         signalled in her skeleton argument which relied on the Equality Act
         2010. In any event, this was not a matter which had been raised  in
         the Appellants' grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It
         would also have had formidable difficulties in terms of Schedule  3
         paragraph 16 of the  Equalities  Act  2010.  However,  as  we  have
         already made clear, the sponsor's  mental  ill  health  is  a  very
         material factor in the Article 8 balance and, it may be, that  this
         was what Ms Meredith wished to emphasise by her  reference  to  his
         disability.

         Conclusion

     22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law and has been set aside.

     23. We re-make  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  our
         conclusion is the same and the Appellants' appeals are allowed. The
         decision to refuse them entry clearance  was  a  violation  of  the
         sponsor's rights under Article 8 ECHR.




         Anonymity

         The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13  of  the
         Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) Rules 2014.

         We continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




         Date 28th November 2019


         Mr Justice Nicol
-----------------------
[1] Where a decision cannot be taken within 6 months, the SSHD should
provide information on the likely time frame, if requested
[2] Particular priority and care should be given to children's applications
[3] AT was born 10th July 2000. His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier
Tribunal on 7th April 2014 following a hearing on 4th April 2014. That
decision was set aside because of error of law on 30th July 2014 and again
on 22nd July 2015. The decision was remade by the Upper Tribunal on 23rd
March 2016.

