
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/15195/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 4 February 2019             |On 15 February 2019                    |
|                               |                                       |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                              RKIA MOUTAOUAKEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Sheffield

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A A Khan (counsel) instructed by Morden solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Jones QC  promulgated  on  31/10/2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.
Background


3. The Appellant was born on 28/06/1968 and is a  national  of  Morocco.  On
03/08/2017 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a person  with  indefinite  leave
to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Jones QC ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision.  Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  14/12/2018  Judge  O'Brien
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The Judge records at paragraph 4 that the  ECO's  incorrect  financial
      calculation was not pursued at the appeal. However, it was a prominent
      and central ground of appeal and was repeated in clear  terms  in  the
      appellant's witness statement. No concession on the point is  recorded
      in the Judge's note. It is arguable that the Judge has failed to  make
      findings on a material point in issue.

The Hearing

5. (a) As soon as Mr Khan moved the grounds of  appeal,  Mr  Duffy  told  me
that a rule 24 response had been  served  which  accepts  that  the  Judge's
decision contains a material error of law. He asked me to set  the  decision
aside and remit this  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh  fact-
finding.

6. (a) Mr Khan asked me to substitute my  own  decision  rather  than  remit
this case to the First-tier Tribunal. He told me that this case is far  from
complicated and that  the  only  issue  is  the  calculation  of  income  to
determine whether the sponsor can  adequately  maintain  the  appellant.  Mr
Khan took me to paragraph 4 of the grounds of  appeal  and  referred  me  to
page 50 of the respondent's bundle, which discloses the  award  of  personal
independence payment made to the sponsor.

(b) I mentioned to Mr Khan that the respondent's decision is not  restricted
to the question of maintenance. The respondent does not  accept  that  there
is a genuine and subsisting relationship between the appellant and  sponsor.
Mr Khan told me that the Judge's decision implicitly accepts that  there  is
a genuine and subsisting relationship. He urged me  to  preserve  a  finding
that the relationship between the appellant and sponsor is  genuine  and  to
deal with the financial aspects of this appeal.

Analysis

7. On 12 May 2017 the appellant applied for entry clearance  as  the  spouse
of the sponsor, Mr M P Nahavadi. On 3 August  2017  the  respondent  refused
the appellant's application saying that the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
eligibility relationship requirement set out in paragraph E-ECP2.1  to  2.10
of  the  immigration  rules,  because  the  respondent  believes  that   the
appellant and sponsor did not meet before 19 January  2016.  The  respondent
says

    "I therefore am not satisfied your relationship with  your  sponsor  is
    genuine and subsisting or that you intend to live together  permanently
    in the UK."

8.  The  respondent's  decision  maker  then  turned  to  the  adequacy   of
maintenance and carries out a calculation of income before  concluding  that
the sponsor's income is less than the level of Income Support  available  to
a British family of equivalent size, so that  the  maintenance  requirements
of the immigration rules are not met.

9. The Judge's decision contains two material errors of law.  The  first  is
that the Judge refers to the dispute over the calculation of income  at  [4]
of the decision, and then declines to engage with one of the central  issues
in this appeal. The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly
challenged  the  entry  clearance  officer's  arithmetic.  The   appellant's
witness statement provides the appellant's evidence about the level  of  his
income. The Judge made no findings in relation to  the  appellant's  income,
and so elided the question of adequacy of maintenance.

10. The  second  material  error  of  law  is  that  the  challenge  to  the
relationship between the appellant and sponsor is not dealt with at  all  by
the Judge.

11. The Judge failed to engage with two core issues which were  in  dispute.
That is a material error of law. I set the decision aside.

12. I consider whether I can substitute my own decision. The  dispute  about
the adequacy of maintenance is clearly focused  but  there  is  insufficient
evidence before me about the genuine nature of relationship and  whether  or
not that relationship  is  subsisting.  The  financial  evidence  is  dated.
Evidence is required about the  nature  and  quality  of  relationship.  The
material errors in the decision relate to an inadequacy of fact  finding.  I
cannot substitute my  own  decision.  A  further  fact-finding  exercise  is
necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

13. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


14. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

15. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Jones QC.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

17. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  31  October  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.



Signed
              Date 13 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




