
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15525/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2019                        |On 9 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                               DEQO ALI SHIRE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms. H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hall, promulgated  on  15  October  2018,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "The grounds are arguable.  It is arguable that the judge erred  in
         adding additional hurdles not present in Appendix FM-SE ,  such  as
         evidence to show that the diagnosis was accurate, details of  tests
         undertaken, and details at  the  doctors  qualifications,  none  of
         which appear in the Rules (all of these may have been  relevant  to
         weight,  but  arguably  not  to  whether  the  specified   evidence
         requirements were met).

         There may be unusual circumstances in  which  a  judge  can  reject
         expert evidence where there is no conflicting expert evidence,  but
         it is arguable that the judge erred in this  case  in  refusing  to
         accept the diagnosis and  opinion  of  a  doctor  without  adequate
         reasons.

         It is also arguable that  there  were  no  reasons  given  for  the
         judge's conclusion on  E-ECDR.2.5  (see  [29]  and  [32]);  and  in
         evaluating this issue there was  arguably  a  need  to  assess  the
         sponsor's oral evidence  and  the  relevant  documentary  evidence,
         including from the carer, none of which the judge mentions.

         The need for findings on this evidence also arguably applied in the
         Article 8 proportionality assessment outside the Rules."

 3. There was no attendance on behalf of the Appellant.   The  file  showed
    that notice of the time, date and place of the hearing had been sent to
    the Appellant's representatives and to the Sponsor, at the last address
    notified by the Sponsor to the Tribunal, on 26 March 2019.   There  was
    no  application  for  an  adjournment.   The  Tribunal  telephoned  the
    Appellant's representatives.  There was no answer and so a message  was
    left asking them to contact the Tribunal.  There was  no  response.   I
    was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed  with
    the hearing in accordance with rules 2 and 38 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. I heard submissions from Ms Aboni.  I reserved my decision.

Error of Law

 5. The Judge states at [25] to [28]:

         "The medical evidence relied upon by the  appellant  is  a  medical
         certificate dated 5 November 2017 issued by St  Michael  Clinic  in
         Addis Ababa Ethiopia.  I do not find that this evidence proves that
         E-ECDR.2.4 is satisfied as it  does  not  prove  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities that as a result of age, illness or  disability,  the
         appellant requires long-term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday
         tasks.  I reach this conclusion for the following reasons. [25]

         There is no satisfactory evidence of the qualification or expertise
         of the author of the certificate.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the
         author is  a  general  medical  practitioner  or  specialist.   The
         certificate has been issued following one examination on  24  March
         2017.  No satisfactory details have been given  as  to  what  tests
         were carried out in order for a diagnosis of dementia to  be  made.
         [26]

         It is not clear why  the  conclusion  has  been  reached  that  the
         appellant "needs close family care and support as she  is  old  and
         cannot support herself"  and  there  is  no  satisfactory  evidence
         within the certificate to show that the appellant cannot  undertake
         everyday tasks such as for example washing, dressing  and  cooking.
         The diagnosis indicates that she has  a  urinary  tract  infection,
         kidney stones, gastritis and left shoulder joint  arthritis.   That
         diagnosis,  without  more,  does  not  prove  on  the  balance   of
         probabilities that the appellant cannot undertake  everyday  tasks.
         The diagnosis also refers to dementia, but  as  I  have  previously
         stated, I do not accept that sufficient evidence has been produced,
         to show that it is an accurate diagnosis, in  the  absence  of  any
         explanation as the nature of tests carried out, and the absence  of
         qualification or expertise of the author to make such a  diagnosis.
         [27]

         Additional medical evidence is provided in the  appellant's  bundle
         at pages 11-15.  This takes the form of a referral slip  issued  by
         Washington Medical Centre in  Addis  Ababa  dated  19  April  2018.
         There is no mention of dementia.  An abdominal ultrasound scan  was
         carried out, with the result given as a normal scan.  There  is  no
         mention within this medical evidence  of  the  appellant  requiring
         long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks. [28]"

 6. The Judge has set out the medical evidence which was provided in  order
    to show that the  immigration  rules  were  met.   He  then  states  in
    conclusion that the specified evidence has not been provided, and so it
    has not been shown that the Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  E-
    ECDR.2.4.  He states it is  therefore  not  necessary  to  consider  E-
    ECDR.2.5, "but in any event I find that the specified evidence required
    by paragraph 35 appendix FM-SE has not been provided".

 7. The grounds of appeal have set out paragraph 34  from  Appendix  FM-SE,
    which applies to the evidence which must be provided to show that "as a
    result of age, illness or disability, the applicant requires  long-term
    personal care".  It states that the evidence must be  independent,  and
    must be from a doctor or other health professional.

 8. I find that the Appellant provided evidence from a doctor.   The  Judge
    attached no weight to this as there was no satisfactory evidence of the
    qualification or expertise of the doctor.  However  the  stamp  at  the
    bottom indicates that the person who signed it is a doctor.  This meets
    the requirements set out in paragraph 34.  There is no requirement that
    the doctor be a specialist in any particular area.

 9. I find that the Judge has set a higher bar than is set in paragraph  34
    in  relation  to  the  qualification  or  expertise  of   the   medical
    professional, given that it is clear from the certificate that he is  a
    doctor.

10. However I find that this error  is  not  material.  Paragraph  34(1)(a)
    states that the evidence must show that the Appellant  "cannot  perform
    everyday tasks".  The certificate does not  state  that  the  Appellant
    cannot perform everyday tasks.  It states that she needs "close  family
    care and support", but it is  not  evidence  that  she  cannot  perform
    everyday tasks.  The Judge made this finding at [27]  where  he  stated
    that "there is no satisfactory evidence within the certificate to  show
    that the appellant cannot undertake everyday tasks such as for  example
    washing, dressing and cooking".  This finding was open to him.

11. Further, any error when considering E-ECDR.2.4 cannot  be  material  as
    the Appellant did not provide evidence  required  by  paragraph  35  of
    Appendix FM-SE to show that she was unable to obtain the required level
    of care in Ethiopia so as to meet E-ECDR.2.5.  Paragraph 35 of Appendix
    FM-SE is also set out in the grounds of appeal.  The evidence  must  be
    provided from "(a) a central or local health  authority;  (b)  a  local
    authority;  or  (c)  a  doctor  or  other  health  professional".   The
    Appellant did not provide any evidence from one  of  these  sources  to
    show that the care that she requires is not available in  Ethiopia,  as
    found by the Judge at [29].  The grant of permission to  appeal  refers
    to the fact that  there  was  a  need  to  assess  the  Sponsor's  oral
    evidence, but such evidence would not meet the requirements of Appendix
    FM-SE.

12. There is also reference in the grant to the evidence of the  carer.   I
    have considered this evidence (pages  10  and  21  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle).  These are two letters from Ayan Salah Mohamed.  There  is  no
    reference to this individual being  from  a  central  or  local  health
    authority, from a local authority, or to him being a  doctor  or  other
    health professional.   It  states  only  that  he  is  the  Appellant's
    "guardian".  Neither does this evidence state that the Appellant  would
    be unable to obtain the required  level  of  care  in  Ethiopia.   This
    evidence does not meet the requirements set  out  in  paragraph  35  of
    Appendix FM-SE.  The Judge did not err when finding that the  Appellant
    had not provided evidence to show that E-ECDR.2.5 was met.

13. I therefore find that any error in the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    evidence which was provided to show that  E-ECDR.2.4  was  met  is  not
    material as the evidence did not show  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    perform everyday tasks such as to meet the requirements of  E-ECDR.2.4.
    Further, the Appellant had not provided the specified evidence to  show
    that E-ECDR.2.5 was met.

14. I therefore find that there is no material error of law in the  Judge's
    consideration of whether or not the Appellant met the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules.

15. The grant of permission also refers to the need for  findings  on  this
    evidence for the purposes of the proportionality assessment outside the
    requirements of the immigration  rules.   I  have  found  there  is  no
    material error of law in the Judge's consideration of  the  immigration
    rules.  The extent to which an individual meets the requirements of the
    immigration  rules  is  clearly  significant  to  any   proportionality
    assessment.  The Judge has stated that the  Appellant  has  not  proved
    that she needs long-term personal care, or that any care required would
    not be available in Ethiopia [32].  These are  findings  which  he  was
    entitled  to  make,  and  which  he  has  taken  into  account  in  the
    proportionality assessment.  I find that there is no error  of  law  in
    the Judge's consideration of Article 8.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    a material error of law and I do not set the decision aside.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 8 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
