
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15584/2018 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2020                       |On 21 July 2020                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                     J K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of  Rwanda,  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom early in 2002 and  applied  for  asylum.  His  application  was
    unsuccessful, but he was granted exceptional leave to remain  until  25
    April 2006 and on 3 January 2007 he was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

2.   On 9 December  2016  he  was  convicted  of  one  count  of  theft  and
    sentenced to 12 months imprisonment. He was served with  a  deportation
    order on 21 December 2016 and on 17 July 2018 the Appellant refused his
    human rights claim.

3.   He appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke allowed  his  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 9 September 2019. The  Appellant  appealed
    against this decision and  on  1  October  2019  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin, sitting in the First-tier Tribunal, granted her  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

4.   The error of  law  hearing  was  listed  for  16  April  2020  but  was
    adjourned due to the restrictions imposed on account  of  the  Covid-19
    Pandemic. Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan gave further directions  on  29
    April 2020. He said that his preliminary view  was  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to determine whether there had been an error of law on  the
    papers. The  parties  were  invited  to  make  further  submissions  in
    relation to the substance of the appeal and to  indicate  whether  they
    considered that a hearing was necessary.

5.    The Appellant filed and served written submissions in response  on  14
    May 2020 and the Respondent filed and served his submissions, which had
    been drafted by counsel, on 21 May 2020.  Counsel  submitted  that  the
    hearing  could  proceed  on  the  papers  unless  the  Upper   Tribunal
    considered that there had been an error of law, when the appeal  should
    be remitted to the Frist-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing in the light of
    up-to-date evidence. The Appellant had not objected to the error of law
    proceeding on the papers. Having carefully read both  sets  of  written
    submissions, it is clear that the error of law hearing  would  turn  on
    the competing interpretation of relevant case law.  The submissions had
    addressed this case law in detail, as  had  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Rourke. I have reminded  myself  of  the  need  to  ensure  that  the
    proceedings  are  conducted  in  a  fair  and  just  manner  and   that
    unnecessary delay is avoided.  I  have  also  taken  into  account  the
    Respondent's human rights and  the  effect  of  further  delay  on  his
    private and family life. Having considered all of this, I have  decided
    that it is lawful and proper to proceed without a hearing.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke's decision  was  very  detailed  and
    addressed all of the relevant legal issues which arose  in  the  appeal
    before him.  He also carefully referred himself to the appropriate law.
    He found that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  Respondent's  wife
    and his youngest child to remain in the United Kingdom without him  but
    that it would be unduly harsh to expect them to join him in  Rwanda  in
    the light of the decision in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

7.    However,  he  went  on  to  apply  MS  (s.117C(6):  'very   compelling
    circumstances') Philippines [2019] UKUT 122 (IAC)  and  other  relevant
    case law  and  find  that,  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    Respondent's case, there were very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    particular, in paragraph 28 of his decision  he  detailed  the  factors
    which amounted to such very compelling circumstances.

8.   The Appellant submitted that  no  such  very  compelling  circumstances
    existed but did not  directly  address  the  majority  of  the  factors
    addressed by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke. She  did  not  dispute
    his finding that:

         "The [Respondent] is clearly, despite his criminal  convictions,  a
         man of real standing in his community.  The  unchallenged  evidence
         provided in this respect states that he stood in front of his whole
         congregation to admit his offence and apologise for it. It goes  on
         to state that he is very supportive in visiting the sick,  disabled
         and bereaved, providing practical support to them  and  is  a  'key
         contributor to the community'. A key indicator of that standing  is
         the support provided to him by the victim  of  his  crime  and  the
         fundraising by his community to refund the money".

9.   In addition, the Appellant did not dispute that the Respondent  was  "a
    man of strong, Christian conviction and driven by that agreed to donate
    a kidney to a person he only  obliquely  knew"  or  that  the  evidence
    indicated  that  his  offence  "was  driven  by  the   dire   financial
    consequences he suffered, stemming from the medical consequences of his
    kidney donation". In addition, she did not dispute the finding that the
    theft "was a 'one-off', out of character offence and  he  is  extremely
    unlikely to re-offend".

10.  Instead, she focused on Frist-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke's  finding
    that the Respondent may find it difficult to access treatment in Rwanda
    for his cancer and adequate monitoring as a result of having  only  one
    remaining kidney.  I have not given too much weight to this  submission
    as in his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke  was  careful  to
    find that the Respondent  "may"  need  treatment  for  a  "potentially"
    serious medical condition and that there was "at  least  the  potential
    for future decline in function" [of his  remaining  kidney].  From  the
    wording of sub-paragraph 28(iii) of his decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Rourke clearly understood and indicated that  these  particular
    findings were speculative.

11.  The Appellant also submitted that "given the fact that  deportation  is
    in the public interest  and  hat  the  family  life  and  private  life
    exemptions do not apply, it is difficult to understand how the FTTJ has
    arrived at the finding that the appellant's rehabilitation,  character,
    circumstances of the conviction  and  medical  condition  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation".

12   However, it was found in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 that:

         "... In principle there may be cases in which such an offender  can
         say that features of his case of a kind described in  Exceptions  1
         and 2 have such great force for Article 8  purposes  that  they  do
         constitute such very compelling  circumstances,  whether  taken  by
         themselves of in conjunction with other factors relevant to Article
         8 ...".

13.  The Appellant also submitted that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke
    had used "the fact that  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  12  months
    imprisonment to dilute the public interest, which is  contrary  to  the
    provisions under S117C which establishes the public interest". However,
    S117C has to  be  ready  in  conjunction  with  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules and paragraph  398  recognises  that  there  will  be
    circumstances where the public interest  will  be  outweighed  by  very
    compelling circumstances.  Furthermore, in MS the Upper Tribunal  found
    that:

         "In determining pursuant to section  117C(6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whether there are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2
         in subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public interest
         in the deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or tribunal  must
         take into account, together with any other relevant public interest
         considerations, the seriousness of the particular offence of  which
         the foreign criminal was convicted; not merely whether the  foreign
         criminal was or was not sentenced to imprisonment of  more  than  4
         years. Nothing in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53 demands a contrary conclusion".

14.  In Akinyemi v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 2098 the Court of Appeal also recognised that "the strength of  the
    public interest will be affected by factors  in  the  individual  case,
    i.e. it is a flexible or  moveable  interest  not  a  fixed  interest".
    Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke was entitled to take into
    account the reasons why the Respondent was only sentenced to 12  months
    imprisonment even though the  sum  involved  was  significant  and  the
    starting  point  for  sentencing  was  usually  two   years.   In   her
    submissions, the Appellant  sought  to  go  behind  the  HHJ  Heywood's
    decision as to the appropriate punishment for the Respondent's crime by
    singling out factors which had already been taken into account  by  the
    sentencing judge when reaching his or her decision.

15.  The Appellant also submitted that rehabilitation is only  one  part  of
    the deportation regime. It is correct that in Olarewaju v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 557 the Court  of  Appeal
    found that "the significance of rehabilitation is limited by  the  fact
    that the risk of reoffending is only one facet of the public interest".
    However, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke  did  not  rely  on  any
    assertion that the Respondent had not re-offended  since  his  release.
    The factors which he relied on  related  to  the  Respondent's  general
    contribution  to  the  community  and  were  clearly  relevant  to   an
    assessment   of   the   totality   of   the   Respondent's   individual
    circumstances. In addition the last part of paragraph 28 of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Rourke's decision indicates that he  was  taking  into
    account the strong public interest in deportation alongside the  public
    interest in recognising that justice was done in the wider sense.

16.  For all of these reasons I find that there were no  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke's decision.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke's decision is maintained.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 9 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


