
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15296/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2019                    |On 11th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              mrs jesmin begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a decision and reasons of Judge Carroll promulgated  on  21st  February
    2019 following a hearing at Taylor House on 5th February 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh and the wife of  her  British
    citizen Sponsor. She had sought and been refused entry clearance  as  a
    spouse under Appendix FM.  The refusal was on two bases.  The first was
    that there were discrepancies in the personal identification number  on
    the  Applicant's  birth  certificate  and  her  passport.   The   Entry
    Clearance Officer said that checks  had  been  made  and  there  was  a
    document verification report held by him which indicated that the birth
    certificate was a false document.  The second  basis  for  refusal  was
    that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not   satisfied   that   the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting.

 3. The judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  both  counts  finding  that  the
    documents were false.  In doing so the judge seems not  to  have  taken
    into account an original document with a translation from the  chairman
    of the relevant district in Bangladesh indicating that  the  error,  by
    misprinting one number, was indeed an error by the authorities.

 4. The judge was perhaps  encouraged  to  make  a  finding  of  dishonesty
    because in a previous appeal hearing a judge had found  that  documents
    submitted were indeed false.  However, on the  basis  of  the  original
    documents that I have seen there appears to be no reason to doubt them.



 5. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Lindsay  makes  the  point  that
    that there has been no opportunity to  verify  those  documents.   With
    regard to that I  would  say  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    apparently obtained a document verification report in relation  to  the
    original birth certificate but did not provide that to  the  court.   I
    also note that the Entry Clearance Officer was represented  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and made  no  application  for  an  adjournment  in
    relation to those documents in order that they be verified.

 6. Given the strength of evidence necessary to find a  document  is  false
    and an Appellant dishonest, I find that the judge in that  respect  has
    made an error and I substitute my own finding that, on the basis of the
    evidence before the Tribunal,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  has  not
    satisfied the burden to show that the document was false.

 7. However, the second part of the refusal  was  on  the  basis  that  the
    marriage is not subsisting.  The judge noted that the couple married in
    2004 and the bundle of evidence that he had been provided with did  not
    persuade him that the marriage or the relationship was subsisting.  The
    bundle included a number of money transfer receipts, fourteen in total,
    but only three predated the date of Decision under appeal.   Whilst  it
    is of course open to the judge to look at all the evidence  up  to  and
    including the date of hearing,  he  is  entitled  to  make  an  adverse
    finding on the basis that the money transfers only  arrived  after  the
    couple knew they had lost the application. Given  the  length  of  this
    marriage was fifteen years, one would have been entitled  to  expect  a
    great many more money transfer receipts prior to the date of  Decision.
    The judge also noted that in the fifteen  years  the  couple  had  been
    married the Sponsor had only visited his wife three times.

 8. On the basis of the evidence that the judge had it is unsurprising that
    he found the relationship not  to  be  subsisting  and  therefore  even
    though I found in the Appellant's favour in relation to the  documents,
    the Appellant cannot win because  the  marriage  was  not  genuine  and
    subsisting and for those reasons the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                  Date 30th June 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



