

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15857/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2020                     |On 29 April 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              LONGWANI NKWABILO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




    1. On 29 October 2019 First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal on human rights grounds. The  appellant  has  been
       granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


Background


    2. The appellant, a citizen of Zambia born on 3  January  2000,  entered
       the United Kingdom as a visitor on 23 January 2001 with  leave  valid
       until 13 June 2001. The Judge  records  the  appellant's  immigration
       history between [2 - 6]. The Judge's findings of  fact  are  set  out
       from [45] of the decision under challenge which can be summarised  in
       the following terms:



        a. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom when he was only one
           year old as a visitor and has had no  lawful  leave  since.  The
           Judge notes the appellant was a  minor  and  did  not  make  the
           decision to remain illegally [47].
        b. The appellant does not take responsibility for the offences  for
           which  he  has  been  convicted.  The  psychiatrist  notes   the
           appellant was unwilling or unable to explain his actions [48].
        c. The Judge accepts the appellant has not reoffended  since  April
           2018 but notes he has been aware of the  threat  of  deportation
           since May 2018 as well as potential consequences of  deportation
           given his father is  also  subject  to  deportation  proceedings
           [49].
        d. The appellant has undertaken a risk  assessment  which  assesses
           him as being low risk of reoffending provided he retains  family
           support, his immigration status is resolved, he  has  access  to
           structured activities, and avoids social peers. It was found  to
           be still too early to see whether the appellant can maintain his
           lack  of  reoffending  given  the  factors  identified  in   the
           psychiatrist's report [50].
        e. The report identified that part  of  the  appellant's  offending
           behaviour is as a result of the appellant becoming aware of  his
           lack of status in the UK and problems that arose  as  a  result,
           but that is an unresolved issue and an adverse factor that still
           exists [51].
        f. The Judge finds the appellant is a persistent offender [52].
        g.  The  Judge  finds  none  of  the  exceptions  in  section  117C
           Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  apply  to  the
           appellant [53].
        h. The appellant does not have a qualifying child or partner cannot
           rely on section 117C (5) [54].
        i. The appellant was therefore required  to  show  very  compelling
           circumstances which outweigh the public interest in  deportation
           [55].
        j. The Judge considered the merits of the appeal on the  basis  the
           appellant will be returning to Zambia alone [57].
        k. The Judge notes the diagnosis of  moderate  depressive  disorder
           and associated symptoms of anxiety and the doctor's opinion that
           the appellant's symptoms would increase if he  were  removed  to
           Zambia [58].
        l. The Judge finds Dr Birchall, the  author  of  an  expert  report
           relied upon by  the  appellant,  has  the  degree  of  expertise
           appropriate in reaching the opinion stated as well as relying on
           documentary sources and conversations with contacts [59].
        m. The Judge accepts the appellant has not returned to Zambia since
           he came to the United  Kingdom  aged  1  and  that  he  will  be
           returning to a country of which he has no memory of living.  The
           Judge finds the  appellant  will  have  retained  some  cultural
           connection to his own  family  unit  and  the  wider  family  in
           Zambia. The appellant  speaks  English  which  is  the  official
           language in Zambia and would not face linguistic  problems.  The
           appellant's access to the labour market may be hampered if he is
           unable  to  access  the  mainstream,  formal  employment  sector
           because he does not speak a tribal dialect, but he could in time
           learn the same. The risk assessment suggests there could be some
           cognitive development but the Judge notes the appellant has been
           able to obtain GCSEs in the UK [63].
        n. The Judge notes a Children and  Family  Assessment  stating  the
           appellant is vulnerable encouraging him to seek support although
           the appellant declined  to  do  so,  which  the  author  of  the
           assessment believes was because the appellant wanted to  protect
           his self-image and avoid an  analysis  of  the  reality  of  his
           situation. The Judge  finds  the  report  did  not  suggest  the
           appellant was particularly vulnerable to exploitation but rather
           that he was someone who did not want to  lose  face  before  his
           peers [64].
        o. The Judge records some concerns about the appellant returning to
           Zambia. Although it was  claimed  there  had  been  disagreement
           within the family about 10 years ago the Judge  finds  this  was
           not adequately explained. The Judge notes the  expert  referring
           to close social relationships in Zambia on tribal lines and  did
           not find the claim the family will be  unable  to  trace  family
           members in Zambia credible.  The  Judge  noted  the  appellant's
           mother did not say her family would  not  seek  to  support  the
           appellant notwithstanding the disagreement  10  years  ago.  The
           Judge notes the appellant is an adult who has some psychological
           difficulties and  some  cognitive  impairment  but  is  in  good
           physical health. The Judge finds  it  is  likely  the  appellant
           would face significant obstacles in  reintegrating  into  Zambia
           although even if very significant obstacles the appellant  could
           not meet the exceptions section 117C(4) of the 2002  Act  as  he
           has not lived lawfully in the UK for the majority of  his  life.
           The Judge  questions  whether  the  appellant  is  socially  and
           culturally integrated into the UK given his offending [65].
        p. The Judge finds the difficulties in reintegrating into Zambia on
           their own would not be sufficient to amount to  very  compelling
           circumstances [67].
        q. The Judge considers factors in the appellant's favour [67].
        r. The Judge refers to low risk of reoffending but also appellant's
           continued minimising of his  offending  as  noted  in  the  pre-
           sentence report and risk assessment. The Judge expresses concern
           over the appellant's lack of insight into the  reasons  for  and
           his responsibility for his offending which includes a conviction
           of possessing a knife blade/sharp pointed article and an offence
           of possession of an offensive weapon [68].
        s. The Judge find the appellant has lived in the UK for almost  all
           his life, has family in the UK, has  supportive  parents  and  a
           sister, that the relationship with family will be severed by his
           deportation, although the family will remain in contact and  all
           will do all they can to support the appellant  in  reintegrating
           into Zambia. The Judge finds the appellant  does  not  meet  the
           exceptions within section 117C(4) and (5) of the 2002  Act.  The
           Judge accepts the appellant will struggle on  return  to  Zambia
           but finds he will have the emotional support of  his  family  to
           assist in reintegrating, he speaks the language of  Zambia,  any
           difficulties are not sufficient to amount  to  very  significant
           obstacles, that although it be  a  shock  to  the  appellant  to
           return to a country where he has not  lived  since  he  was  one
           years old, he has a supportive family in the UK who will  assist
           in integration.  It was not found credible UK family  could  not
           trace their family in  Zambia  to  request  assistance  for  the
           appellant when he first  arrived  there.  The  Judge  notes  the
           appellant  is  not  receiving  treatment  in  the  UK  for   any
           psychological problems and the evidence did not show no  support
           was available in Zambia. The Judge found it had not  been  shown
           very compelling circumstances existed that outweighed the public
           interest in deportation and that the respondent  had  shown  the
           decision was justified as necessary and proportionate [69].



    3. The appellant sought permission to appeal 10 grounds.  The  grant  of
       permission  to  appeal  refers  to  three  specific  grounds  in  the
       following terms:






           "2.    I consider it arguable that the Judge erred a set out  at
                b), f) and i) grounds  and  whilst  I  do  not  consider  it
                arguable that the Judge took the wrong  approach  to  Maslov
                (the appellant is  in  a  very  different  position  to  the
                appellant in  Akinyemi  who  would  have  been  entitled  to
                British nationality if a proper application had  been  made)
                it is arguable as set out  in  a)  grounds  that  the  Judge
                should have considered the significance of all  but  one  of
                the appellant's convictions having  been  as  a  child  when
                considering her overall assessment of proportionality.


           3.     So far as the other grounds  were  concerned,  the  Judge
                considered  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  was   a
                persistent offender carefully and the  conclusion  to  which
                she came appears to be one open to her; the  Judge  did  not
                reverse the burden  of  proof  because  the  judge  did  not
                conclude  that  the  appellant  was  a  persistent  offender
                because she was not  sure  whether  he  would  relapse,  she
                concluded he was a persistent offender on the basis  of  the
                offences he had already  committed  and  the  absence  of  a
                sufficient period which had  passed  to  indicate  he  would
                remain crime free. I do  not  see  how  the  Judge  had  the
                material available to her to consider  how  the  appellant's
                lack of insight into the reasons for and the  responsibility
                for his offending might be affected by cognitive  impairment
                or  depression.  Although  the  appellant  might  have  some
                cognitive development issues he had  obtain  GCSEs  and  the
                psychiatrist did not consider  him  to  have  a  significant
                global learning disability; there does not  appear  to  have
                been any material in the psychiatric report which could have
                suggested that the appellant was not  taking  responsibility
                for  his   offending   because   of   cognitive   impairment
                /depression.  The  Judge's  point  at  [63]  was  that   the
                appellant's ability to speak English meant that he would  be
                able to communicate without too  much  difficulty;  she  was
                aware of  the  separate  point  about  the  difficulties  of
                obtaining employment if only English was spoken (see end  of
                the same paragraph). So far as ground  J  is  concerned,  at
                this moment the appellant's father is still in the  UK;  the
                appellant cannot have it both ways as the  Judge  considered
                the appellant's integration into Zambia as if he  would  not
                have the presence of his father to help him integrate.


           4.     Despite my comments I do not restrict the  grounds  which
                may be argued."


Error of law


    4. Ground 2(a) asserted legal error in the  Judge  failing  to  properly
       evaluate the relevance of the fact the appellant  committed  most  of
       his offences as a youth as per Maslov v Austria.


    5. At the date of  the  hearing  before  the  Judge  relevant  case  law
       indicated that the Maslov criteria did not apply to a person  in  the
       United Kingdom unlawfully which is the situation for this  appellant.
       It is not a case of an appellant who is a settled migrant.


    6. Relevant cases include, ED (Ghana) v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department [2012] EWCA Civ 39 in which an appellant came  to  the  UK
       aged 6 in 1997. Since the age of 13, he had been convicted of several
       offences including handling stolen goods and possessing an  offensive
       weapon.  For much, if not all, of his time in the UK he had been here
       unlawfully in terms of his immigration status. For  the  purposes  of
       Maslov v Austria (Application No. 1638/03) the Judge placed  emphasis
       on the fact that the Claimant had been in  the  UK  unlawfully.   The
       Claimant submitted that, although he  had  been  present  in  the  UK
       unlawfully, the specific facts of his case meant that  the  test  set
       out in Maslov required very special reasons justifying  his  removal.
       The Court of Appeal found that either an  individual's  presence  was
       "lawful" or "unlawful" in immigration terms.   The  determination  of
       that status then in turn indicated whether or not the need for  "very
       special reasons" applied in his case.  The Claimant could  not  claim
       "lawful" status.  Therefore as a matter of law, Maslov did not  apply
       to his case and the Judge was entirely correct  in  the  approach  he
       took (para 32).


    7. In Richards v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
       Civ 244 the Court of Appeal said that the  Upper  Tribunal  correctly
       held that the important case of Maslov v Austria (2007) 47  EHRR  496
       was of no assistance when the appellant had no right to  be  in  this
       country.


    8. In DM (Zimbabwe) [2015] EWCA Civ 1288 it was held that the  statement
       of general principle on deporting foreign  criminals  established  in
       Maslov v Austria (1638/03) that very serious reasons were required to
       justify the expulsion of a settled migrant who had  spent  the  major
       part of his childhood and youth in the host country, did not apply to
       criminal offenders who were unlawfully present in a country.  In  any
       assessment of a person's right to remain in a country under Article 8
       of the ECHR, it was important to consider whether he had any right to
       be there at all.


    9. Ms Radford refers in her submissions to the recent  decision  of  the
       Court of Appeal in CI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 in  which
       it was explained that the Maslov principles should have been  applied
       to the case of a settled migrant who had  lived  in  the  UK  from  a
       toddler (although he had not lived legally in the UK  for  more  than
       half his life).  The real distinction was whether  a  migrant  had  a
       right of residence or not; the length/proportion of their time with a
       right of residence went to weight rather  than  anything  else.    It
       would not be fair to give little weight to private  life  in  a  case
       where the grant of indefinite leave to remain was delayed when CI was
       a child through no fault of his.  CI  should  not  have  less  weight
       accorded to the fact he had spent his childhood and youth in  the  UK
       than would have been given if he had a vested right of residence  for
       most of that period.


   10. It is of importance to note that in CI (Nigeria) the Court of  Appeal
       considered that the law  on  Maslov  was  correctly  set  out  in  DM
       (Zimbabwe).


   11.  The  Judge  also  clearly  noted  the  appellant's  date  of  birth,
       immigration  history,  and  the  date  of  the  commission   of   the
       appellant's offences at [2 - 6] in the following terms:






           "2.    The appellant entered the UK  on  23  January  2001  with
                leave to enter as a visitor valid until 13 June 2001. On  28
                February 2008, the appellant's father applied for  leave  to
                remain outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant,  his
                mother and siblings all dependent on that  application.  The
                application was rejected on 11 March 2008  because  of  non-
                payment of the  application  fee.  On  27  April  2008,  the
                application was refused.  The  appellant's  mother  appealed
                against that decision.  The outcome of  the  appeal  is  not
                known.


           3.     On 11 October 2011, the  appellants  mother  applied  for
                leave to remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rues.  The
                appellant  and  his  siblings  were   dependants   on   that
                application. On 19 January 2012, the application was refused
                with no right of appeal.


           4.     On 7 April 2017, at  North  London  Juvenile  Court,  the
                appellant was convicted of affray.  He was given a  referral
                order for 6 months and was ordered to pay a victim surcharge
                of �20.00.  On 16 May 2017, the appellant's  mother  applied
                for leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
                appellant was listed as a  dependant  on  that  application.
                The  appellant's  application  was  refused  on  suitability
                grounds.


           5.     On 6 September 2017, at Black Country Juvenile Court, the
                appellant was convicted of  possessing  a  knife/blade/sharp
                pointed article in a public place and sentenced to 4  months
                curfew with electronic tagging.  On  22  November  2017,  at
                Black Country Juvenile Court , the appellant  was  convicted
                of aggravated vehicle taking, driving dangerously on road or
                place, using a vehicle whilst uninsured,  driving  otherwise
                than in accordance with a licence, possessing  a  controlled
                drug - Class B, Cannabis and conviction of an offence whilst
                a youth rehabilitation order was in force. The appellant was
                disqualified from driving.  On  8  April  2018,  at  Walsall
                Magistrates Court, the appellant was convicted of  2  counts
                of  possession  of  an  offensive  weapon   without   lawful
                authority or reasonable excuse. He was sentenced to 6 months
                concurrently in a Young offenders institution.


           6.     On 4 May 2018, the respondent notified the  appellant  of
                her intention  to  make  a  deportation  order  against  the
                appellant. In response to this, the appellant lodged a human
                rights claim. On 11 July 2018, a decision was made to refuse
                the appellant's  human  rights  claim.  The  appellant  gave
                Notice of Appeal against this decision."


   12. It was not made out before the Judge that the appellant had a  vested
       right of residence in the United Kingdom on the facts.


   13. According to the PNC printout made available to the Judge the offence
       of affray was committed on 6  December  2016  shortly  prior  to  the
       appellants 17th  birthday.  The  offences  which  the  appellant  was
       sentenced on 6 September 2017 include acts of theft committed  on  19
       August 2017 and the possession of a knife blade/sharp pointed article
       on 8th August 2017 when the  appellant  was  17  years  of  age.  The
       offences for which the appellant was convicted on  22  November  2017
       were when the appellant was still 17 years of age. The offence  which
       the appellant was convicted on 10 April 2018 occurred on 8 April 2018
       after the appellant had attained his majority.


   14. The Judge took into account the appellant's age when considering  the
       weight that could be given to this aspect and was clearly aware  that
       the majority of the offences had  been  committed  by  the  appellant
       whilst he remained a minor. No arguable material legal error is  made
       out.


   15. Ground (b) asserts there was no indication in the decision  that  the
       Judge weighed up the seriousness of the appellants offending  against
       the seriousness of the proposed interference  with  his  private  and
       family life. A reading of the determination as a whole shows there is
       no arguable merit in such a  submission.  The  Judge  considered  the
       proportionality of the claim weighing up  points  in  favour  of  the
       appellant and those in favour of the Secretary of  State.  The  Judge
       clearly took into account the impact upon the family  in  the  United
       Kingdom and the appellant when deciding whether  the  respondent  had
       established that the decision was proportionate to the legitimate aim
       relied upon. The  assertion  the  Judge  did  not  consider  how  the
       "relatively less  serious  nature  of  his  offending"  affected  the
       assessment of proportionality or very compelling circumstances has no
       merit as the Judge clearly considered the offences  in  the  decision
       under challenge. No arguable legal error is  made  out.  Disagreement
       with the Judge's conclusions regarding the proportionality assessment
       is not sufficient.


   16. Ground (c) asserts the Judge erred in her assessment of  whether  the
       appellant was a persistent offender failing to consider  the  limited
       length of time over which the offending has taken place  and  whether
       it was sufficiently long for the  appellant  to  be  described  as  a
       persistent offender.  It is  also  asserted  the  appellant  had  not
       offended since his release from a Young  Offenders  Institute  on  10
       July 2018. It is also pleaded, on the same issue, at Ground (d)  that
       it was irrational of the Judge to conclude that the appellant  was  a
       persistent offender on the basis that it was too soon to say  whether
       he would relapse into offending as it was for the respondent to prove
       the appellant is a persistent offender and not for the  appellant  to
       show he is not. The grounds assert if it was too soon to say  whether
       his offending would persist the respondent  had  not  discharged  the
       burden of proof. It is also argued it was irrational to conclude  the
       appellant was a persistent offender because one of the causes of  his
       offending was in his  immigration  status  which  had  not  yet  been
       resolved when the First-Tier Tribunal was being asked to resolve  the
       same.


   17. In Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT 187  (IAC)  it  was
       held:






        i) The question whether the appellant "is a persistent offender" is
           a question of mixed fact and law and falls to be  determined  by
           the Tribunal as at the date of the hearing before it;


       ii) The phrase "persistent offender" in s.117D(2)(c) of the 2002 Act
           must mean the same thing as "persistent offender"  in  paragraph
           398(c) of the Immigration Rules;


      iii) A "persistent offender" is someone who  keeps  on  breaking  the
           law. That does not  mean,  however,  that  he  has  to  keep  on
           offending until the date of the relevant decision  or  that  the
           continuity of the offending  cannot  be  broken.  A  "persistent
           offender" is not a permanent status that can never be lost  once
           it  is  acquired,  but  an  individual  can  be  regarded  as  a
           "persistent offender" for the purpose of the Rules and the  2002
           Act even though he may not have  offended  for  some  time.  The
           question whether he fits that description  will  depend  on  the
           overall picture and pattern of his  offending  over  his  entire
           offending history up to that date. Each case will  turn  on  its
           own facts.


   18. The Court of Appeal have approved what  was  said  about  "persistent
       offender" in Chege in the case of SC (Zimbabwe) v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
       Civ 929.  It was also explained in that case there was no requirement
       under paragraph 398(c) immigration rules to attach significant weight
       to the views of the SSHD in relation to whether the individual was  a
       persistent offender.


   19. In SC the Court also said that it  agreed  "in  substance"  with  the
       subsequent paragraphs from the decision in Chege. These included  the
       following:






           "57.   In order to answer the  question  whether  someone  is  a
                persistent offender, the decision-maker (be it the  Tribunal
                or the Secretary of State) must consider the  whole  history
                of the individual from the commission of the  first  offence
                up to the date of the decision and ask themselves whether he
                can properly be described as someone who keeps on committing
                criminal offences. Factors to be  taken  into  account  will
                include the overall pattern of offending, the  frequency  of
                the offences, their nature,  their  number,  the  period  or
                periods over which they are committed, and (where  relevant)
                any reasons underlying the offending, such as an alcohol  or
                drug dependency or association with other criminals. This is
                in  line  with  the  guidance  given  in   the   Immigration
                Directorate Instructions, Chapter 13, version 5.0 (dated  28
                July 2014) to which Mr Malik referred, which states  that  a
                persistent offender  is  "a  repeat  offender  who  shows  a
                pattern of offending over a period of  time".  The  guidance
                goes on to say "this can mean a series of offences committed
                in  a  fairly  short  timeframe,  or   which   escalate   in
                seriousness over time, or a long history of minor offences."




           58.    If the person concerned has been out  of  trouble  for  a
                significant period or  periods  within  the  overall  period
                under consideration, then the length of such periods and the
                reasons for his keeping out  of  trouble  may  be  important
                considerations, though  of  course  the  decision  maker  is
                entitled to bear in mind that the mere fact that someone has
                not been  convicted  for  some  time  does  not  necessarily
                signify that he has seen the  error  of  his  ways.  It  may
                simply mean that he has paused in his offending. It  is  the
                overall picture of his behaviour that matters.


           59.    If during those periods of apparent  good  behaviour  the
                person concerned was serving the custodial part of  a  short
                sentence, or was too unwell to go out and commit  the  kinds
                of offences he is generally prone to commit, there may be an
                explanation  for  the  hiatus  in  offending  which  is  not
                inconsistent  with  his  being  properly   regarded   as   a
                persistent offender. Likewise,  it  he  had  a  very  strong
                incentive not to commit  further  offences,  such  as  being
                subject to a community order, or a suspended sentence, or he
                is on  bail,  or  he  has  been  served  with  a  notice  of
                deportation, the fact  that  he  has  committed  no  further
                offences during that period may be of little significance in
                deciding whether, looking at his history as a whole, he fits
                the description.


           60.    On the other hand,  we  agree  with  First-tier  Tribunal
                Judge Whalan that an established  period  of  rehabilitation
                may lead properly to the conclusion that an individual is no
                longer a persistent offender. Depending  on  the  particular
                facts and circumstances, a former drug addict who has ceased
                shoplifting  to  feed  his   habit   after   a   period   in
                rehabilitation, and who  has  been  out  of  trouble  for  a
                significant period of time thereafter, might not be  capable
                of being termed a "persistent  offender"  because  when  his
                history is looked at in the round, it can no longer be  said
                that he is someone who keeps on offending."


   20. The Judges findings on this issue are set out between [48  -  52]  in
       the following terms:






           "48.   It is the respondent's position that the appellant  is  a
                persistent offender. The appellant's position is that he  is
                not a persistent offender. The appellant has been  convicted
                of a number of offences. I note that  the  majority  of  the
                offences occurred when the appellant was a  minor.  However,
                the most recent conviction occurred when the  appellant  was
                not a minor. There are similarities in the offences  with  2
                of the offences being for possession of an offensive  weapon
                without  lawful  authority  or  reasonable  excuse  and  one
                offence  of  possession  of  a   knife/blade/sharp   pointed
                article. The appellant does not really  take  responsibility
                for the offences stating that the first offence involving  a
                knife occurred because he had picked up the lock knife  when
                he saw it on the ground and that he intended to  dispose  of
                it. He also takes no  real  responsibility  for  the  second
                offence of having an offensive weapon stating  that  he  had
                the items with him because he was  on  the  way  to  help  a
                friend meant his  bike.  The  psychiatrist  notes  that  the
                appellant was unwilling or unable to explain  why,  if  that
                were the  case,  one  of  the  items  was  tucked  into  his
                waistband.


           49.    It is true that the appellant has  not  reoffended  since
                April 2018 but it is also true that he has been aware of the
                threat of deportation since May 2018  which  will  no  doubt
                have some deterrent effect he is well aware of the potential
                consequences of deportation given that his  father  is  also
                subject  to  deportation  proceedings   and   is   currently
                appealing against the dismissal of his appeal by the  First-
                tier Tribunal.


           50.    The appellant has  undertaken  a  risk  assessment  which
                assesses him as being a low risk of reoffending but this  is
                with  the  proviso  that  he  retains  family  support,  his
                immigration status is resolved, he has access to  structured
                activities  and  avoids  anti  social  peers.   Whilst   the
                appellant has not been convicted  of  any  further  offences
                since May 2018, part of that period was during the time when
                he was serving a sentence of imprisonment and  it  is  still
                quite early to see whether the appellant  can  maintain  his
                lack of reoffending given the factors which were  identified
                by the psychiatrist is  playing  a  part  in  the  offending
                behaviour, the fact is required to ensure that the  risk  of
                reoffending remains low and his propensity to  minimise  his
                responsibility for the offences.


           51.    It was submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
                reason for the offending behaviour was, at least in part,  a
                result of the appellant becoming aware of his lack of status
                in the UK and the problems which then arose as a  result  of
                that. The psychiatric report and Social Services  assessment
                confirm that this played a part in the offending  behaviour.
                However, this remains an unresolved issue  in  that  adverse
                factor still exists.


           52.    Taking account of all the evidence and relevant case law,
                I find that the appellant is a persistent offender."


   21. The Judge  clearly  considered  this  matters  she  was  required  to
       including  the  appellant's  circumstances,  the  chronology  of  the
       offending behaviour, the  nature  of  the  offending  behaviour,  and
       contributing factors. No arguable legal error  is  made  out  in  the
       Judge's conclusion that the appellant has continued  to  offend.  The
       fact the offences were committed since shortly before  the  appellant
       attained the age of 17 and continued into  adulthood  clearly  showed
       that at the date of the hearing this was a finding available  to  the
       Judge on the evidence. Whilst the grounds assert the  Judge  did  not
       consider whether a sufficiently long period had  passed,  Ms  Radford
       identified no authority or test which  specified  what  will  be  the
       minimum period. There is in fact no such test as it is a question  of
       fact depending on all the circumstances of the case.


   22. The fact the appellant claims to have been under great  strain  as  a
       result of family upheaval is a factor considered  by  the  Judge  who
       clearly weighed in the assessment the psychiatric and Social  Workers
       report.  There  is  nothing  arguably  irrational  about  the   Judge
       commenting that one of the factors identified, namely the appellant's
       immigration status, remained outstanding. The Judge was  fully  aware
       that this was an issue the First-Tier Tribunal was assessing but  the
       evidence does not show this was the only  factor  that  explains  the
       appellant's  conduct.  The  Judge  takes  particular  note   of   the
       appellant's refusal to acknowledge and accept responsibility for  his
       offending behaviour.


   23. The assertion the Judge somehow reversed the burden of proof  has  no
       arguable merit. The Judge weighed up all the evidence and in light of
       the same found the appellant is a persistent offender.  The  evidence
       before  the  Judge  suggested  the  appellant  had  broken  the   law
       repeatedly in the past and is likely to do so in the future. Adequate
       reasons are given in support of this contention and no arguable legal
       error is made out.


   24. Ground (e) asserts having accepted the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
       witness and having made adjustments to the procedure the Judge failed
       to consider how the appellant's disability impacted on his  evidence,
       in particular not considering how  far  his  "lack  of  insight  into
       reasons for and his  responsibility  for  his  offending"  have  been
       affected by cognitive impairment  and/or  depression.  The  appellant
       seeks to compare the error to that in AM (Afghanistan) [2018]  4  WLR
       78, at [33]:






           "33.   Given the emphasis on the determination of credibility on
                the facts of this appeal, there is particular force  in  the
                Guidance at [13] to [15]: "13. The weight to be placed  upon
                factors of vulnerability may differ depending on the  matter
                under appeal, the burden and standard of proof  and  whether
                the individual is a witness or an  appellant.  14.  Consider
                the evidence, allowing for  possible  different  degrees  of
                understanding by witnesses and appellant compared  to  those
                [who] are not vulnerable, in the context  of  evidence  from
                others associated with  the  appellant  and  the  background
                evidence before you. Where there were clear discrepancies in
                the oral evidence, consider the extent  to  which  the  age,
                vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was  an  element
                of that discrepancy or lack of  clarity.  15.  The  decision
                should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has  concluded   the
                appellant (or a witness)   is   a   child,   vulnerable   or
                sensitive,  the   effect   the   Tribunal   considered   the
                identified  vulnerability  had  in  assessing  the  evidence
                  before   it   and   this   whether   the   Tribunal    was
                satisfied  whether  the  appellant   had   established   his
                or her  case  to  the  relevant   standard   of   proof.  In
                asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given   to   objective
                indications of risk rather than necessarily to  a  state  of
                mind."


   25.  The Judge records at [13]:






           "13.   The appellant had provided medical evidence which  stated
                that he was suffering from moderate depression  and  anxiety
                in which stated that  there  were  some  concerns  over  his
                cognitive ability. Both parties agreed  that  the  appellant
                should be treated as a vulnerable witness.  I  reminded  the
                parties of the Joint Presidential  Guidance  No.2  of  2010:
                Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  appellant  guidance.
                Throughout the hearing,  I  remained  alert  as  to  whether
                questions were understood  by  the  appellant  and  on  some
                occasions, I suggested that question should be rephrased  so
                that the appellant fully understood the questions  which  he
                was being asked."


   26. In addition to considering and applying the guidance in  relation  to
       the conduct of the preceding the Judge also took careful note of  the
       evidence in the appellant's favour including the  psychiatric  report
       of Dr Wootton. The Judge specifically records at [58]:






           "58.   The  appellant  has  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from
                moderate depressive disorder  with  associated  symptoms  of
                anxiety. Dr Wootton, who assessed the appellant, notes  that
                symptoms are likely to fluctuate and  will  be  affected  by
                stressors such as the appellant's immigration status, family
                stress and difficulty accessing health and social  care.  In
                Dr  Wootton's  opinion,  the  appellant's   symptoms   would
                increase if he were removed to Zambia, in particular because
                the symptoms are 'closely linked with his current situation'
                [Q2.b.] Dr Wooton states:


                     'Clearly his mental health is relevant  here  is  given
                    his level of functioning is impaired  and  his  symptoms
                    include lack of motivation  it  is  likely  to  be  more
                    difficult for him to meet his needs and other people  in
                    a similar situation'."


   27. The Judge also took into account the Children  Family  assessment  in
       which concerns were expressed about the appellant's vulnerability  as
       a result of his trying to obtain status in the eyes  of  other  young
       people. It is not a case in which the Judge was unaware of or  failed
       to factor into the process the appellant's vulnerability.  The  Judge
       was clearly aware of the concerns raised by the psychiatrist and  how
       they would have impacted upon the appellant's evidence. The  concerns
       expressed by the Judge about the appellant's failure  to  acknowledge
       his culpability and responsibility for  the  offending  were  matters
       identified by the psychiatrist as were the factors playing a part  in
       his offending behaviour [48] and [50].  The Judge clearly  considered
       all relevant issues and recognised the limitations upon the appellant
       as evidenced by a sentence  in  [65]  in  the  following  terms  "the
       appellant is an adult who has  some  psychological  difficulties  and
       some cognitive impairment (although a specific diagnosis has not been
       made it was  clear  that  the  appellant  occasionally  struggled  to
       understand a question) but is in good physical  health.  No  arguable
       legal error material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  is  made
       out on this ground. The Judge considered and factored the  disability
       and vulnerability into her assessment of the evidence.


   28. Ground (f) asserts that when finding the appellant was not  receiving
       medical treatment the Judge erred as he was, as evidenced by  letters
       from a treating psychiatrist and mental health  practitioner  in  the
       supplementary bundle which it is claimed was relevant to  the  Judges
       proportionality assessment.


   29. The Judge at [69] writes:






           "69.   The appellant has lived in the UK for almost all  of  his
                life. He has family in  the  UK  with  whom  he  lives.  His
                parents and sister are clearly supportive of  the  appellant
                and they and the appellant will be extremely saddened by the
                appellant's deportation from the UK  which  will  sever  the
                family unit to some extent. However, the family  can  remain
                in contact with the appellant from the UK and will no  doubt
                do all that they can to support him  in  reintegrating  into
                Zambia although given their financial circumstances this may
                be emotional rather than practical  support.  The  appellant
                does not meet the exceptions within section 117C(4) and  (5)
                of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  I
                accept that the appellant will struggle on return to  Zambia
                because of the length of time which he has spent  away  from
                Zambia, his young age when he left and his lack  of  contact
                with Zambia  since  he  left.  However,  he  will  have  the
                emotional  support  of  his  family   to   assist   him   in
                reintegrating. He  speaks  English  which  is  the  official
                language of Zambia. His father's evidence was  that  he  had
                spoken English when he lived in Zambia and did  not  suggest
                that  speaking  English   placed   him   at   a   particular
                disadvantage. There will be difficulties  in  the  appellant
                reintegrating but I find that they  are  not  sufficient  to
                amount to very significant  obstacles.  I  accept  that  the
                appellant remains part of the family unit in the UK that the
                appellant's mother has the appellant's father and sister  to
                provide her with support and the evidence did not show  that
                the appellant played a significant part or  that  such  care
                could  not  be  provided  by   other   family   members   or
                professionals. It was submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
                that deportation would be tantamount to  exile.  I  accepted
                that it would be a shock to the appellant  to  return  to  a
                country where he has not lived since he was a year  old  but
                he has a supportive family in the UK who would do  all  they
                could to assist him in integrating into Zambia and I do  not
                find it credible that  the  family  could  not  trace  their
                family in Zambia to request  assistance  for  the  appellant
                when he first arrives in  Zambia.  The  appellant  has  some
                psychological problems but he is not receiving treatment  in
                the UK at the moment and the evidence did not show  that  no
                support at all was available in  Zambia.  I  find  that  the
                appellant has not  shown  that  there  are  very  compelling
                circumstances  which  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
                deportation. Taking account of all the evidence,  I  further
                find that the respondent has shown that the  decision  is  a
                justified, necessary and proportionate decision."


   30. Whilst the supplementary bundle contains details of a treatment plan,
       which included medication, the Judge was correct to report that there
       was no evidence showing that the appellant was receiving treatment in
       the UK. It was only in response to a question from the  bench  to  Ms
       Radford, asking whether the  appellant  was  taking  the  recommended
       prescribed medication, that she confirmed he was after  having  taken
       instructions. Until this time it does not appear this was known  even
       to the appellants legal representative who appeared  for  him  before
       the Judge. No arguable material error is made out.


   31. Whilst the country expert may have stated that no suitable  treatment
       it was available in Zambia  the  Judge  records  that  there  was  no
       diagnosis for the appellant's condition.  Country  information  shows
       there is a functioning health service in Zambia  providing  treatment
       for those  with  mental  health  issues  albeit  that  the  available
       medication is not the same as that available in the  United  Kingdom.
       What was not shown before the Judge was that the  appellant's  return
       would lead to a breach of article 3 ECHR on the basis of his  medical
       condition. It was not show medical treatment would not be available.


   32. Ground (g) asserts that the Judge accepted the  appellant  could  not
       enter the Zambian labour market without learning a new  language  and
       also found his family could not offer him any practical support,  yet
       failed to explain why the resultant lack of  subsistence  will  be  a
       significant  obstacle  but  not  a  very  significant  obstacles   to
       integration. Ground (h) asserts  the  Judge  concluded  that  as  the
       appellant's  father  spoke  English  the  appellant  would  not  face
       significant problems which is stated  to  be  illogical  as  speaking
       English was not claim to be a problem, the  problem  being  that  the
       appellant did not speak any tribal languages.


   33. The Judge accepted that  without  knowing  the  tribal  language  the
       appellant would find it difficult to enter the former  labour  market
       but found the appellant will have support of family members in Zambia
       on return and will be able to learn the language. As such  the  Judge
       found  that  there  will  be  no  very   significant   obstacles   to
       reintegration whilst accepting that it would  be  difficult  for  the
       appellant who would  face  significant  obstacles.  This  finding  is
       adequately reasoned, and no arguable material  legal  error  is  made
       out.


   34. Ground (i) challenges the Judge's decision regarding  the  assessment
       of the appellant's vulnerability but  the  Judge  clearly  took  into
       account the Children and Family Assessment and makes  clear  findings
       in support of the conclusions reached when considering  the  evidence
       as a whole.  The  Judge  found  the  appellant  to  be  a  vulnerable
       individual  and  also  comments  upon  aspects  of  the   appellant's
       presentation and personality contained in the reports. The claim  the
       Judge failed to consider material matters has no arguable merit. Just
       because the appellant may  disagree  with  the  Judge's  conclusions,
       arrived at having undertaken the necessary assessment, does not  mean
       such issues were not assessed.


   35. Ground (j) challenges the Judges conclusion regarding the  impact  of
       deportation upon the appellant's mother and sister in which the Judge
       concludes this will be mitigated by the presence of  his  father  who
       could  continue  to  support  them  where  the  appellant's  father's
       separate appeal had been dismissed and was an appeal currently before
       the Upper Tribunal. The grounds assert the appeals are  contradictory
       and cannot both stand and that there was no evidential basis on which
       the Judge concludes the appellant's mother and sister will  have  the
       support of the appellant's father.


   36.  The  Judge  who  granted  permission  commented  upon  this   ground
       specifically writing "at this moment the appellant's father is  still
       in the UK; the appellant cannot  have  it  both  ways  as  the  Judge
       considered the appellant's integration into Zambia as if he would not
       have the presence of his father help him integrate".


   37. Before the Upper Tribunal, at this hearing, Ms  Radford  advised  the
       court that the appellant's father's appeal had been  refused  by  the
       Upper Tribunal on 2 December 2019 meaning that he was now  likely  to
       be removed and would not be  available  to  provide  the  support  as
       anticipated by the Judge.


   38. Whilst it would have been preferable for the appeals  of  the  family
       unit to be been heard together that was not the case as noted by  the
       Judge. At [12] the Judge writes:






           "12.   At the beginning of the hearing , I asked for  an  update
                with regard to the appeal of the appellant's father  who  is
                also subject to deportation  proceedings.  Ms  Radford  said
                that the appellant's father's appeal had been refused before
                the First-tier Tribunal but that he had sought permission to
                appeal to the Upper Tribunal against this decision. She said
                that permission to appeal had  been  granted  and  that  the
                appellant's father was awaiting a hearing  date  before  the
                Upper Tribunal. Neither party provided me with a copy of the
                appellant's father's  appeal  decision  or  other  documents
                relating to the appellant's father."


   39. The Judge was entitled  to  proceed  as  she  did  in  light  of  the
       information made available. At  that  stage  the  appellant's  father
       remained in the  United  Kingdom.  It  is  also  the  case  when  the
       determination is read as a whole that the Judge  has  not  based  the
       assessment  of  proportionality  solely  on  the  presence   of   the
       appellants father in the United Kingdom. Whilst the Judge  does  find
       the appellant's mother has his father and sister to  provide  support
       it is not made out  the  Judge  would  have  come  to  any  different
       conclusion if the appellant's father was not available  in  light  of
       the presence of the sister, other  family  members,  friends,  and/or
       professionals who it was found could meet any needs  the  appellant's
       mother may have. If the appellant's father has lost his appeal and is
       to be deported to Zambia it also means the appellant  will  have  his
       father there to assist with his reintegration when  he  is  deported.
       The development with regard to the father's appeal, whilst  a  matter
       not known to the Judge, appears to weaken the appellant's claim  that
       the findings he could return to Zambia is infected by legal error  as
       he will now have his father with him, without undermining the Judge's
       conclusions as to the proportionality of the decision in light of the
       availability of other family support in the UK.


   40. Ms Radford's submission  that  the  Judge  failed  to  weigh  up  the
       evidence, failed to take relevant matters into account, and failed to
       consider material facts has no arguable  merit.  This  is  clearly  a
       carefully considered determination  and  the  conclusion  arrived  at
       follow proper consideration of relevant matters.  The  appellant  had
       not established an entitlement to an exception  under  the  Rules  or
       section 11 C.  Mr Tufan submitted that the Immigration Rules  include
       Maslov principles which  the  appellant  was  unable  to  established
       assisted him in this appeal.


   41. The appellant is a foreign criminal who is the subject  of  an  order
       for his deportation from the United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his
       persistent offending as found by the Judge. No remorse was shown, and
       the Judge's findings are supported by adequate reasoning. The  weight
       to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge. It  is  clear
       all relevant evidence was considered  with  the  required  degree  of
       anxious scrutiny.


   42. The appellant is unable to satisfy section 117B(6)  and  no  arguable
       legal error material to the manner in which the Judge  conducted  the
       assessment of the merits or the balancing exercise is made  out.  The
       fact the appellant does not like the decision and disagrees with  the
       same is not sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering  any
       further in this matter.


Decision


   43. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.






  Anonymity.


   44. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.





       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 25 March 2020
