
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15816/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st October 2018                           |On 25th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Chukwunyere [O]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Cox, promulgated on 12th June 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Priory Courts on 24th May 2018.  In the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, and  was  born  on  21st
    June 1971.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    11th November 2017, refusing his application for leave to remain in the
    UK as the partner of a person present and settled in  the  UK,  on  the
    grounds that  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM
    paragraph 276ADE.  The Respondent was not satisfied that the  Appellant
    met the eligibility relationship requirement as a partner as he had not
    lived with his partner for two years and was not married.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing on 24th May 2018 in  Birmingham,  Judge  Cox  heard  the
    Appellant give evidence.  The Appellant explained that he  had  visited
    his partner in the UK a number of times, to visit her as  well  as  his
    children.  In August 2016 he entered for the last time.  He arrived  as
    a visitor.  He intended to return.  His children did not want him to go
    back.  His previous visits had been in 2014 and 2015.  However, at  the
    time his children were young and they were unable to  persuade  him  to
    remain in this country.

 4. The Appellant also said that he three cousins in the UK.   In  Nigeria,
    however, he had his mother, his brother, and his sister.   He  did  not
    live with them in 2016.

 5. The Appellant went on to explain that since coming to the UK in 2016 he
    had always lived with his partner.  He referred to school documents and
    to church contacts in the bundle to demonstrate  the  strength  of  his
    claim.  He confirmed that his partner, [PC], was a British citizen, and
    worked in the  UK  as  a  teaching  assistant  and  also  claimed  some
    benefits.  She had come to the UK in 2008, and the  Appellant  and  his
    partner had then lived apart  for  some  seven  years.   The  Appellant
    explained that the last time he came his son  was  having  problems  in
    school, he needed support, and  he  had  in  fact  been  excluded  from
    school, and had to move to another school.  He offered support  to  his
    son.  He was supporting his son's homework.  The judge  recorded  that,
    "he felt his presence was helping the child and said if he could get  a
    job then the family would not be on benefits" (paragraph 20).

 6. With respect to his own work in Nigeria, the Appellant  explained  that
    he was a pharmacist.  He said that since coming to the UK  he  had  not
    owned it anymore.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  about  his  business
    partner, (paragraph 27) and explained that he was not returning back to
    Nigeria.  He had sold his share of the business.  The deaths  had  been
    paid.  He did not have any money due from the business (paragraph  29).



 7. When asked why he could not return back to Nigeria, the  Appellant  had
    explained that

         "The children are more stable and happier.  If he were to  go  back
         to Nigeria he said it would cause  disruption.   He  said  that  he
         could not return to Nigeria and visit as before as that was a visit
         a twice a year and that was not now the same.  There would be  long
         break whilst he applied to return" (paragraph 31).

 8. The judge then went on to hear evidence from the  Appellant's  partner,
    [PC], and she explained that she had relatives in the UK, such  as  her
    father and her brother, and also  more  distant  family  cousins.   She
    explained that she had not really lived  alone,  before  the  Appellant
    came to the UK, because she had a baby and then other children  in  the
    UK.  She explained "when separated from her partner she  did  not  talk
    about his coming to live in the UK and he visited three or four times a
    year" (paragraph 34).  She also went on to say that

         "Her oldest son is now a teenager and he needed his father to  help
         out.  She said that the oldest son had bad friends in school so the
         father needed to help  her  out  with  him.   She  added  that  her
         daughter cries when he, her father, the Appellant is not  here...."
         (paragraph 35).

 9. She went on to agree that only the youngest child was a British citizen
    but the other two children had applied  to  become  citizens  in  March
    2018.

The Judge's Findings

10. The judge started on the basis that the best interests of the  children
    were a primary consideration (paragraph 55).  He  recognised  that  one
    child is a British citizen, as is the mother and, "I find it is in  the
    best interest of the children to live with both of their parents  in  a
    stable home" (paragraph 56).  He accepted that the children were indeed
    those of the Appellant and his partner, "they have three  children  and
    in the past their family life was  conducted  in  two  countries.   The
    partner visited the Appellant in Nigeria and took the daughter with her
    and the Appellant has now more frequently visited  the  UK"  (paragraph
    57).  The daughter has lived in the UK  all  her  life  the  sons  were
    brought here by the father.  The judge observed  that  "none  of  these
    children have consistently lived with both of their parents  since  the
    mother left Nigeria" (paragraph 58).

11. In terms of the quality of the evidence before  him,  the  judge  found
    both witnesses to be "vague and inconsistent  in  the  details  of  the
    claims about their history" (paragraph 59).  He went on to say that, "I
    find it is not credible that the couple claimed to be in a relationship
    and to have three children and yet claim to never have discussed living
    together in the UK or indeed it seems in Nigeria" (paragraph  61).   He
    went on to also say that "the Appellant is the father  of  the  British
    child and whilst he has not lived with the mother for two  years  since
    entering the United Kingdom, he has a family life and indeed a  private
    life in the UK" (paragraph 64).

12. Crucially, in terms of the family set up between the Appellant and  his
    partner, the judge then observed that,

         "The Appellant has, I find, decided to change  the  nature  of  his
         family life from that established by visiting the UK over a  period
         of many years and indeed the majority of the children's lives.   He
         and the mother established that pattern when  she  left  the  older
         children in Nigeria.  They lived there with their father  for  many
         years and she had a child here alone whilst they remained overseas"
         (paragraph 65).

13. It was against this background, that the judge concluded that "the fact
    that the mother is  a  British  citizen  is  not  exceptional  and  the
    decision to remain was made when the Appellant was well aware he should
    leave the UK within the terms of his  visit  visa..."  (paragraph  66).
    The judge's view was clear that  "the  facts  are  plain  in  that  any
    application for leave would not succeed at this time as  the  financial
    grounds are not met and  therefore  there  is  no  case  to  argue  the
    Chikwamba principle" (paragraph 67).  It  was  further  concluded  that
    there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  for  the  Appellant  and  the
    partner continuing their family life  "as  they  did  in  the  past  by
    visits, of the partner choosing to move  to  Nigeria  if  she  and  the
    children wishes to do so.  They do not have to do  so  and  that  is  a
    matter for them.  There is no right to enjoy family life in the  UK..."
    (paragraph 68).   Towards  the  end  of  the  determination  the  judge
    emphasised the fact that "visits can  continue  as  before"  (paragraph
    85).

14. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

15. The grounds of application state that  there  were  more  documents  to
    prove that the Appellant has been  living  with  his  partner  and  the
    children since his arrival.  There is then a detailed reference made to
    these documents (see paragraph 2).  The grounds also  go  onto  explain
    the  problem  that  the  Appellant's  son  had  at  school  in  October
    (paragraph 4).  They go on to say that "we all  live  together  as  one
    family..." (paragraph 5).  They further state that "our three  children
    are now British as shown  by  the  award  of  citizenship  letters  and
    certificates submitted with this appeal" (paragraph 9).   They  further
    state that the Appellant has been employed and that he "made  financial
    contributions for the family upkeep, shopped for the family,  paid  for
    out of school club activities, dental care and others" (paragraph 10).

16. On 13th July 2018 permission to appeal was granted.  The basis of  this
    grant was that, in recognising that the Appellant was unrepresented and
    had  drafted  his  grounds   of   application   himself,   there   was,
    nevertheless, a possible  defect  in  the  proportionality  assessment.
    This arose for two reasons.  First, the judge  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant played a "fatherly role" to his children (see paragraph  74).
    Second, the judge accepted that family life with the children in the UK
    existed (see paragraph 64).  Against this background, there had been no
    reference by the judge to the Court of Appeal judgment in MA (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705, or to the test in Section 117B(6).  The judge  did
    not consider whether it is reasonable for the children to leave the  UK
    as is required when considering the test under Section  117B(6),  given
    that the  judge  had  found  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the children at least one of whom
    was a qualifying child.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 1st October 2018, the  Appellant  appeared,
    once again, unrepresented.  The Respondent  was  represented  by  Ms  H
    Aboni.  At the start of the morning, I called in the Appellant, knowing
    that he was unrepresented.  I  explained  to  him  that  the  grant  of
    permission in this case had been on the basis that the  proportionality
    exercise had not been undertaken from the view point of  the  children,
    and their best interests, together with the maintenance of  immigration
    control which  is  a  public  interest  consideration  under  statutory
    provisions.  I asked him whether he understood that this was the  basis
    upon which permission had  been  granted  because  the  judge  granting
    permission was quite clear that the Appellant and the Sponsor "were not
    credible  witnesses".   The  Appellant  said  that  he  understood  the
    position.  I asked him if he  wished  to  have  time  this  morning  to
    consider how to put the claim.  He said he would appreciate that.  That
    being so, I stood him out to the end of the  morning's  list.   I  then
    progressed with the other cases for the time being.

18. When the hearing reconvened,  the  Appellant  began,  surprisingly,  by
    saying that he had further  documentations  to  hand  up,  because  the
    nature of his claim had now changed.  He went on to say that,  although
    he had lived with his partner for two years  in  this  country,  he  no
    longer now did so.  He said that he had  in  fact  separated  from  his
    partner.  The relationship had broken down.  His partner had thrown him
    out.  This happened in June 2018.  The reason for this appears to  have
    been that the partner wished to move to Ireland, where  she  wished  to
    avail herself of the opportunity of her son going  to  university,  but
    without paying university fees, which was a requirement in  the  United
    Kingdom, but not in the Republic of Ireland.  He said that  if  he  was
    now returned back to Nigeria, he would lose all contact with  his  wife
    and children, as they wished now to move  to  Ireland.   He  said  that
    since 26th July 2018 he had not seen his children.  He said that he had
    a CAFCASS letter to prove this.  I said I was not in a position to look
    at any new documentation.  And asked  if  he  would  have  any  further
    submissions to make.  He said that he had none.

19. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that this was  a  complete  change  of
    circumstances, in a manner that was not  envisaged.   She  had  had  no
    notification until the Appellant made his oral submissions about such a
    drastic change of circumstances.  Given that this was the case  it  was
    open to the Appellant to make a fresh application on the changed  facts
    as alleged.  It was not open for this Tribunal to entertain  these  new
    arguments.  Secondly, insofar as permission had  been  granted  by  the
    Tribunal, there really had been no material error of law at all.   This
    was because Judge Fox  did  consider  the  children's  interests  quite
    independently from those of the adults.  This is clear  from  paragraph
    79 of the determination.  The judge explains that, "the mother does not
    have to leave the UK and the children can remain here  with  her.   The
    children have lived the majority of their lives with one  or  other  of
    their parents and only with both at  times  of  visits  and  since  the
    Appellant remained.  That has been their pattern of life.  The  parents
    did not discuss any change of plans for it but simply decided  suddenly
    to change" (paragraph 79).  This was simply  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision.

20. In reply, Mr [O] now stated that if he was sent back he would lose  his
    children.  This would have an impact on his family life.

No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

22. First and foremost, it is not the case, on a comprehensive  reading  of
    the determination, that the Rule in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705
    has not been taken into account.  The judge has in terms addressed  the
    position, by referring to the fact that this was a case where the modus
    operandi of the family was for the Appellant's partner to come  to  the
    UK with one child and then the Sponsor to visit, bringing  the  others.
    This pattern was established.  The judge makes express reference to how
    the Appellant's partner had left the older children  in  Nigeria  where
    they lived there with their father for many years and she had  a  child
    in the UK alone (paragraph 65).  The judge explained further  that  the
    way in which the family life had been kept intact  was  that  they  had
    made visits in the past (paragraph 68).

23. In his conclusion the judge further explained that the stark reality is
    that the mother does not have to leave the UK.  The children can remain
    in this country.  In fact, if the Appellant is now correct  in  stating
    what he has said, namely, that his partner  is  prepared  to  take  the
    children to the Republic of Ireland, then this  simply  reinforces  the
    very point that the judge himself made, namely, that  the  children  do
    not have to be  separated  from  the  mother  at  all.   As  the  judge
    explained "that has been their pattern  of  family  life".   (Paragraph
    79).  The plain reality is that the judge did not accept  the  evidence
    of the Sponsor  and  the  Appellant  about  their  immigration  history
    (paragraph 79).

24. In short, there is a world of difference between a situation,  although
    rarely met, where the family life is maintained, over very many  years,
    with regular visits being made by one spouse to the other  in  the  UK;
    and the situation where the family life in question crystalizes in  its
    essential aspects, by one spouse being with the other  spouse  in  this
    country.  The Appellant's situation falls in the former.  It  does  not
    fall in the latter.

25. In fact, the Appellant has only been with his partner in  this  country
    for two years from 2016, and he now maintains that as of June  she  has
    separated from him again, a matter on which I cannot hear evidence, and
    which must remain for determination on another day.  Suffice it to say,
    that since  the  test  for  a  successful  appeal  is  "perversity"  or
    "irrationality" the Appellant fails to demonstrate that the decision by
    Judge Cox was one that fell in that class of cases.

Decision

There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's   decision.    The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated 1st October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
