
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: HU/15929/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 December 2020              | On 19 January 2021              |
|                                 |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                               karamjeet kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rai, instructed by Gills Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Buchanan, against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Obhi
    ("the judge").   In  her  decision  of  21  November  2019,  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  of
    her human rights claim.

Background

 2. The appellant is an Indian national.  She was born on 14  January  1978
    and is therefore 42 years old.  She entered the United  Kingdom  on  29
    November 2011, holding entry clearance as  a  student.   The  appellant
    subsequently attempted to secure further leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom by a number of different  routes.   I  need  not  set  out  the
    chronology but  it  seems  that  there  were  two  applications  for  a
    derivative right to reside under the EU Treaties and five  applications
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds between March 2013  and  29
    November 2018.


 3. The appellant has been in a relationship with a British  citizen  since
    2016.  He is Mr Sarup Inder Singh Mitha,  who  was  born  in  India  in
    December 1949 but has lived in the UK for more than 50  years.   He  is
    now 71 years old.  Mr Mitha is a qualified optometrist and continues to
    work as a locum in that field.  Latterly, the appellant's  applications
    for leave to remain have taken her relationship with Mr Mitha as  their
    focus.

 4. In representations which were made by her  solicitors  on  28  November
    2018, 2 June 2019, 11 June  2019  and  2  August  2019,  the  appellant
    advanced a human rights claim which  was  based,  in  essence,  on  her
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr  Mitha.   Submissions  were
    made that this relationship could not continue in  India  and  that  it
    would be disproportionate to expect the appellant to  return  there  to
    make an application for entry clearance.  In respect of both  of  those
    submissions, the appellant relied on her relationship not only with the
    sponsor but also with  his  aged  parents,  Niranjan  Singh  Mitha  and
    Jaswant Singh, born on 21 August 1926 and 15 August 1932  respectively.
    The sponsor's parents are Indian nationals who were admitted to the  UK
    for settlement in September 2005.

 5. On 10 September 2019, the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim. Because the appellant was an overstayer, she  was  unable
    to meet the requirements of the Five-Year Route in Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the respondent turned immediately to the Ten-Year
    Route.  She accepted that there were no concerns  which  might  justify
    the refusal of the application on Suitability grounds.  It was accepted
    that she  met  the  relevant  parts  of  the  Eligibility  Relationship
    requirements, in that she and Mr Mitha had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  The respondent considered, therefore, whether this was a
    case to which the exception in paragraph EX1 of the  Immigration  Rules
    applied.  She noted that there were  no  dependent  children  and  that
    EX1(a) did not apply.  As for paragraph EX1(b), the respondent reminded
    herself that what was required was an insurmountable  obstacle  to  the
    continuation of family life abroad, and that  the  definition  of  such
    obstacles was a difficulty which could not be overcome or  which  would
    cause very serious hardship to sponsor or appellant (EX2 refers).   The
    respondent did  not  accept  that  the  sponsor's  ill  health  or  his
    employment required him to remain in the UK.  Nor did she  accept  that
    any care provided to the sponsor's parents could not be provided by the
    NHS or local authority.  She considered that the refusal  of  leave  to
    remain was compliant with her obligations under section 6 of the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Her  appeal  was
    heard by the judge, sitting at Nottingham Justice Centre on 8  November
    2019.  She received bundles of documents from  both  parties  and  oral
    evidence from the appellant, the  sponsor,  and  the  sponsor's  father
    (aged 93).  She then heard submissions from the representatives.


 7. The respondent submitted that there were no insurmountable obstacles to
    the  family  life  continuing  in  India  and  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate in Article 8 ECHR terms.  For the appellant, Mr Rai  made
    two principal submissions.  The first was that  the  sponsor's  parents
    were dependent upon the support and care provided by the appellant  and
    the sponsor and that they could not  be  left  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without adequate care.  The second was that the appellant would be very
    likely to meet the requirements for entry clearance  as  a  spouse  and
    that it was disproportionate to expect her to return to India  to  make
    an application for entry clearance.

 8. The judge noted that the appellant had made a  number  of  applications
    for status in the  United  Kingdom,  but  she  proceeded,  as  had  the
    respondent, on the basis that the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor was a genuine  and  subsisting  one:  [36].   She  then
    stated that the issue for her was whether  the  couple  could  live  in
    India or whether the appellant should make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse.   At [39], the judge stated that she had applied
    the test of insurmountable obstacles as considered by the Supreme Court
    in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11; [2017] 1 WLR 823 and had concluded  that  it
    would be difficult for the  couple  to  live  in  India  but  that  the
    difficulties  would  not  be  insurmountable.   The   reasoning   which
    underpinned that conclusion is largely to be found in the judge's [37],
    which I should set out in full:


         Mr Mitha has been in the UK for a very long time, he entered as  an
         18 year old in order to study and has lived here for  over  50  two
         years. He has however retained fairly close links to his country of
         origin as his elderly parents continued  to  live  in  India  until
         about 15 years ago when they came to the UK. He has a sister in the
         UK. I am told he has two sisters and that the other sister lives in
         the States. He last visited India three years ago, the  country  is
         not unknown to him, or entirely unfamiliar. He is almost  70  years
         of age, he tells me he is fit and healthy, to  the  point  that  he
         continues to work almost full time as a locum. He has  some  health
         concerns, but he is not physically dependent on his  wife,  and  he
         also undertakes some of the care tasks in relation to  his  elderly
         parents. He was formerly married but his wife sadly passed away. He
         has grown up children and grandchildren. He is settled  in  the  UK
         and it would be difficult for him to move his life back  to  India.
         However it is  not  impossible  and  there  are  no  insurmountable
         obstacles,  his  parents  live  in  the  UK  and  are  entitled  to
         assistance from the local authority in  relation  to  their  health
         needs. Mr Mitha has a sister and he has children. His parents could
         request carers from the same ethnic background as themselves, or Mr
         Mitha could employ private carers to look after them if they  chose
         to continue living in the UK . Both of his parents came to  the  UK
         when they were elderly, they too have lived the majority  of  their
         lives in India. Whilst they would have to  pay  for  healthcare  if
         they chose to return with him, Mr Mitha is able to afford the same.
         However they do not need to return, nor does he. He has choices  to
         make, one  of  which  is  that  he  does  return  to  remain  in  a
         relationship with the appellant. The other is to do what  countless
         others who are married to foreign spouses do, support her in making
         an application for entry clearance from abroad.

 9. At [40], the judge concluded  that  the  appellant's  reliance  on  the
    support she and the sponsor gave to his parents did not  amount  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle because they had a daughter  and  grandchildren
    living in the UK and could count on support from the local authority.


10. At [41], the judge recalled what had been said  in  Agyarko  about  the
    balance of proportionality being a matter for the courts to consider in
    the individual cases before them, whilst attaching considerable  weight
    at a general level to the policy enshrined in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    She also considered, at [42], what had been said by Lord Reed  at  [51]
    of Agyarko about the manner in which the public interest in immigration
    control might be reduced where it was certain that an  application  for
    entry clearance would be certain to succeed.  The judge  also  reminded
    herself, at [43], of the structured enquiry required by Razgar [2004] 2
    AC 368.

11. The judge found that  the  first  four  Razgar  questions  were  to  be
    answered in the affirmative: [44].  She recalled the  statutory  public
    interest questions in Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002: [45].  At [46], she did not accept that the  appellant
    had been threatened by her ex-husband in India.   Nor  did  she  accept
    that the appellant was certain to be granted  entry  clearance  in  the
    event that she made an application for the same, as she  did  not  have
    the information  she  required  under  Appendix  FM-SE  to  reach  that
    conclusion.  The judge noted that the sponsor was prepared  to  support
    an application for entry clearance and she considered,  at  [47],  that
    there were cogent reasons to expect her to take that course.  At  [48],
    the judge  summarised  her  conclusions,  finding  that  the  sponsor's
    parents could receive adequate care in the  event  that  the  appellant
    left for India.  She expressed concern,  firstly,  that  the  sponsor's
    father had come to court to  give  evidence  at  the  age  of  93  and,
    secondly, that the appellant had not sought to regularise her  position
    by making an application for entry  clearance.   So  it  was  that  she
    dismissed the appeal.


The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


12. There were three grounds of appeal to this  Tribunal.   The  first  was
    that the judge had misunderstood or misapplied the law as  regards  the
    threshold presented by EX1, by applying  a  test  of  impossibility  in
    place of 'very serious hardship'.  The second was that  the  judge  had
    ignored or overlooked relevant evidence in reaching the conclusion  she
    did in relation to EX1. The third ground was that the  judge  erred  in
    her application of the Chikwamba [2008] 1 WLR  1420  principle.   Judge
    Buchanan considered the  second  and  third  of  these  grounds  to  be
    arguable.  I pause here to  note  that  he  did  not  expressly  refuse
    permission on the first ground, although he was plainly unimpressed  by
    it.  He was  correct  to  conclude  that  there  was  nothing  in  that
    complaint.  Whilst the judge erroneously referred at  [37]  to  it  not
    being 'impossible' for the sponsor to relocate to India,  it  is  plain
    from the rest of the decision that she had well  in  mind  the  correct
    threshold.  So much is clear from her analysis of Agyarko and her self-
    directions.  The use of  the  word  'impossible'  in  [37]  was  merely
    infelicitous and does not begin to establish that the judge  fell  into
    error.
13. Having reflected on what was said by Judge Buchanan,  Mr  Rai  did  not
    attempt to develop any oral submissions on ground one.  In relation  to
    grounds two and three, however, he submitted that the judge had  fallen
    into clear  legal  error.   Developing  the  submissions  made  in  his
    skeleton argument, Mr Rai submitted that the judge had failed  to  take
    account of the sponsor's parents' dependence upon the sponsor  and  the
    appellant in concluding that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
    their return to India as a couple.  The sponsor had been found  by  the
    judge to be a credible witness. He had given evidence about the  health
    of his parents and their dependence upon him and  his  wife  for  three
    years or more.   The  judge's  resolution  of  that  issue  was  wholly
    inadequate, particularly when it was  recalled  that  the  respondent's
    guidance on insurmountable obstacles contemplated that such  dependency
    could, depending on the facts, give rise to an insurmountable obstacle.




14. For the respondent, Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the  judge  had  dealt
    adequately with the evidence  and  arguments  presented  to  her.   The
    consideration at [37] onwards was demonstrably  holistic,  encompassing
    the extent of the need for care and  the  alternative  provision  which
    might be available.  The reality, as the judge had found, was that  the
    sponsor had visited India quite regularly and could  live  there.   The
    judge had conducted an adequate and  lawful  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8 ECHR.


15. Mr Rai responded briefly, submitting that the judge had noted that  the
    appellant was a carer for the sponsor's parents and that  they  treated
    her as a daughter.

Analysis

16. Having considered the submissions made orally and in writing by Mr Rai,
    I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no legal error in the
    decision of the judge.  There are, as I have already noted, two grounds
    of appeal now advanced by Mr Rai.  I consider them in turn.


17. The first submission is that the judge omitted  relevant  matters  from
    her consideration of whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  the
    sponsor and the appellant  living  together  in  India.   The  relevant
    matter is said to be the sponsor's oral evidence that his sister in the
    UK would be unable to care for his parents.


18. The relevant evidence was recorded by the judge at [20], in  which  the
    sponsor  was  noted  to  have  said  that  his  sister  'has  her   own
    commitments'.  There is no reason to think that the judge lost sight of
    that evidence in reaching the conclusions which she reached at [37] and
    [40], however.  I  note  that  the  judge's  conclusion  was  that  the
    sponsor's sister and his nieces could support his parents 'practically'
    and that they could receive assistance from the local  authority.   The
    judge did not, contrary to Mr Rai's submissions,  rely  principally  on
    the notion of the sponsor's sister and her family providing  day-to-day
    care for the elderly parents.  She relied, instead, on  two  points  in
    deciding that there would not be very serious hardship if  the  sponsor
    and the appellant relocated to India.

19. The first possibility was the availability  of  local  authority  care.
    The judge analysed that possibility with some care, turning her mind to
    matters such as the ability of the local authority to provide carers of
    the same ethnicity, for example.  She was entitled to  conclude  -  for
    the reasons that she gave - that the sponsor's  parents  would  receive
    adequate care in the event that he and the appellant relocated to India
    and left them in the UK.  That conclusion did not turn on  the  ability
    of  the  sponsor's  sister  to  'step  in';  it  turned  on  the  local
    authority's obligation to provide care and the absence of  evidence  to
    show that it would not discharge that obligation. As in BL (Jamaica)  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 357, I consider that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    proceed on the basis that the local authority would perform its  duties
    under the law.

20. The second point taken by the judge is not  addressed  in  ground  two.
    She noted that the sponsor's parents would have a choice about  whether
    to leave the United Kingdom with the sponsor and  the  appellant.   She
    noted that the sponsor could pay for them to receive  medical  care  in
    India.  These points - taken by the judge in [37] - were also  open  to
    her.  The sponsor's parents are settled in the UK; they are not British
    citizens.  In the event that they are dependent upon care  provided  by
    the sponsor and the appellant, that care can be provided in the  UK  or
    in India.  There is no presumption that it should be received in the UK
    and,  in  the  absence  of  any  other  insurmountable   obstacles   to
    relocation, I cannot  see  anything  wrong  in  law  with  the  judge's
    conclusion that all four adults could  relocate  to  India,  where  the
    relationship could continue.  The judge  was  cognisant  of  the  other
    difficulties which there might be, but she was also aware of the  steps
    which could be taken to address those difficulties: the  sponsor  could
    continue to work; he has family there; he has visited the  country  and
    is not distanced from it; private medical care could be sought for  the
    sponsor's parents.  As Mr Melvin noted, this was the kind  of  holistic
    assessment required by cases such as Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civ  1925;
    [2020] 1 WLR 858.


21. I do not consider ground two to disclose an error of law on the part of
    the judge for the reasons above.

22. I turn to the third ground, by which Mr Rai submits  that  the  judge's
    treatment of his Chikwamaba argument was erroneous.  The  argument,  in
    particular, is that the judge left material matters out of  account  in
    concluding  that  she  had  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant would be certain to be granted entry clearance in  the  event
    that she made an application for the same.  That mode of expression was
    not the judge's own; she took it from what had been said by  Lord  Reed
    at [51] of Agyarko.  The judge  set  out  the  relevant  part  of  that
    decision and noted, at [46] of her decision, that  she  had  asked  the
    representatives for their submissions upon it.


23. The judge's conclusion was that she did not 'have the information  that
    would need to  be  provided  [to  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer]  under
    Appendix FM-SE of the  Immigration  Rules'.   Mr  Rai  criticises  this
    because there was before the judge a selection of material to show that
    the sponsor was earning significant sums  from  his  work  as  a  locum
    optometrist.  I note that there was a bank statement with a significant
    credit balance,  showing  regular  sums  paid  in  by  Specsavers,  for
    example.  The judge was entirely correct, however, to conclude  as  she
    did.  As Upper Tribunal Judge Gill explained in R (Chen) v SSHD  [2015]
    UKUT 189 (IAC); [2015] Imm AR 867, the onus is on  the  individual  who
    relies upon a submission such as this to establish that an  application
    for entry clearance from abroad would  be  granted:  [39]  refers.   In
    order to establish that she would  be  granted  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse, the appellant was required to show that  she  met  all  of  the
    requirements in Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   As  the  judge
    noted, that Appendix does not stand alone; Appendix  FM-SE  provides  a
    raft of additional evidential stipulations  as  regards  the  Financial
    Requirements which must be satisfied.


24. A self-employed individual such as the sponsor is required  to  provide
    the evidence listed in paragraph 7 of FM-SE,  the  focus  of  which  is
    plainly to establish the taxable income received by the  individual  in
    the tax year preceding the application.  The  evidence  adduced  before
    the judge omitted many of the documents  required,  however.   Although
    there were SA302 forms, they were for the years 2011-2016.   There  was
    no self-assessment tax return.   There  was  no  evidence  of  the  tax
    payable, paid and unpaid for the last full financial  year.   The  bank
    statements did not cover a full year.

25. Mr Rai's submission was that it was likely, in view of  the  fact  that
    Specsavers confirmed in its letter that  the  sponsor  was  earning  an
    average of �5500 per month, that the Financial  Requirements  would  be
    met.  But to proceed down that route would be to confuse the  certainty
    required  by  Agyarko  and  Chen  with  something   very   much   less.
    Considering the limited evidence before the  judge,  she  was  entirely
    correct to find that the appellant was unable to show  that  she  would
    certainly be granted entry clearance if she made the application.

26. Mr Rai makes a discrete point at [16] of his grounds of  appeal;  which
    is  that  the  respondent  had  taken  no  issue  with  the   Financial
    Requirements in the notice of decision.  The suggestion, therefore,  is
    that the judge had no reason to consider whether or not  the  appellant
    would not succeed in an application for entry clearance on that  basis.
    This submission proceeds  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, however.  As I endeavoured to  explain  at  the  start  of  this
    decision, the respondent's  consideration  in  the  letter  of  refusal
    focused on the Ten-Year Route under in Appendix FM.  There  would  have
    been no point in the respondent considering  the  requirements  of  the
    Five-Year Route because the appellant could not have hoped  to  satisfy
    the Immigration Status Requirement.   The  respondent  was  not  silent
    about the Financial Requirements because she tacitly accepted that they
    were met; she was silent about that issue because she  simply  did  not
    consider it.  When the judge came to consider for herself  whether  the
    appellant would meet the Financial Requirements of the entry  clearance
    rules from abroad, that was a matter upon which there was nothing  said
    by the respondent.  It was in those circumstances that  the  judge  was
    entirely correct, with respect, to consider the point for herself.

27. In any event, as the judge went on to note, there are  cogent  reasons,
    rooted  in  the  statutory  public  interest  considerations  and  this
    appellant's immigration history, to require her to leave the country to
    make an application for entry  clearance.   She  has  made  application
    after application, many of which the  judge  considered  to  have  been
    spurious, and she has endeavoured to remain in  the  UK  by  any  means
    possible.

28. I should also consider the point made by Mr Rai at [19] of the grounds.
     He  maintains  there  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  criticise  the
    appellant's representatives for the attendance of the sponsor's  father
    at court.  He submits that the judge focused on her concern about this,
    rather than noting that  the  attendance  of  this  elderly  man  spoke
    cogently to the extent of his dependence upon  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.  I do not consider the judge to have lost focus  in  this  way
    and she clearly understood (and recorded) exactly what was said by  the
    sponsor's father about the appellant and her role  in  his  life.   The
    judge was entitled to express concern about the fact that a 93 year old
    man with various health problems had made his  way  to  court  to  give
    evidence which was ultimately unchallenged.  Mr  Rai  makes  the  point
    that the appellant's representatives could  not  have  known  that  his
    evidence would be accepted  until  that  was  said  by  the  Presenting
    Officer.  That  is  simply  incorrect;  the  age  and  frailty  of  the
    sponsor's father could have been  communicated  to  the  respondent  in
    advance of the hearing and she could have been asked whether she wished
    to challenge the statement he had made in advance of the  hearing.   It
    is entirely unclear to me why that was not done.


29. Drawing these threads together, I consider that  the  judge  reached  a
    decision which was open to her when she concluded  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  that  her
    removal would not be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  There  is  no  proper
    basis for thinking that the FtT - which is an  expert  Tribunal  -  did
    anything other than understand and  apply  the  law  correctly  in  its
    specialist field.  The judge's decision contained a careful analysis of
    the authorities and an appreciation of  the  applicable  provisions  of
    primary and secondary legislation.  Her analysis of the facts  and  her
    application of those  findings  to  the  relevant  law  resulted  in  a
    decision which was not only open to her; it was clearly correct.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
dismissed and that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                            02 February 2021
