
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15254/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                        |On 8 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                 MARIAM [S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr. E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Real promulgated on 23rd October 2018.  The underlying decision that
      was the subject of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      was the decision of the respondent dated 5th July 2018 to refuse the
      appellant's application for leave to remain in the UK on human rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Ghana.  Her immigration history is not
      entirely clear.  She appears to have arrived in the UK in 2008, and
      subsequent applications made by her for leave to remain in the United
      Kingdom on human rights grounds, were refused in August 2013 and
      October 2015.  The appellant then appears to have made further
      submissions to the respondent, but in May 2016 and April 2017, the
      respondent refused to treat the further submissions as a fresh claim.
      On 9th January 2018, the appellant made an application for leave to
      remain in the UK on the basis of her family life with her two
      children, both of whom were born on 9th July 2012.  That application
      was refused for the reasons set out in a decision dated 5th July 2018
      that attracted an in-country right of appeal.  The appellant's appeal
      against that decision, was dismissed for the reasons set out in the
      decision of FtT Judge Real promulgated on 23rd October 2018.


   3. The appellant did not attend at the hearing of the appeal before the
      FtT Judge.  In her decision, the FtT Judge records that "The appeal
      was listed for determination on the papers, with the consent of both
      parties.".  The FtT Judge summarises the claim made by the appellant
      at paragraphs [4] to [7] of her decision.  At paragraph [16] of her
      decision, the FtT Judge states:


             "No documentary evidence has been filed by either party in
             support of the appeal.."


   4. In the grounds of appeal filed, the appellant claims that contrary to
      what is said by the FtT Judge, the appellant's representatives had in
      fact filed a bundle of documents in support of the appeal, that the
      FtT Judge has simply had no regard to.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Swaney on 12th November
      2018. The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
      the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
      remake the decision.


   6. I have carefully considered the Tribunal file and note that a bundle
      of documents containing the evidence relied upon by the appellant was
      in fact received by the Tribunal on 31st August 2018 from those that
      represented the appellant at the time.  That contains not only a copy
      of the application that was made by the appellant but also a number of
      other documents.  At the hearing of the appeal before me, Mr Tufan
      concedes that the Judge erroneously proceeds upon the basis that the
      appellant has not filed any evidence in support of the appeal.  He
      accepts that in the circumstances, the decision of the FtT cannot
      stand.  He concedes that the decision of the FtT contains a material
      error of law and should be set aside.


   7. I remind myself that in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105
      (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that where there is a defect or
      impropriety of a procedural nature in the proceedings at first
      instance, this may amount to a material error of law requiring the
      decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside.  The
      authorities referred to by the Upper Tribunal in MM (unfairness; E &
      R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) make it clear that upon an appeal
      such as this, the criterion to be applied is fairness and not
      reasonableness.  There are plainly concerns as to the status of the
      appellant's children and whether or not they are British Citizen's as
      claimed by the appellant.  That is a matter that requires careful
      consideration, and if they are found to be British Citizens, there
      will plainly be a need for the Tribunal to consider the consequences
      that flow from such a finding.


   8. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the FtT, or to re-
      make the decision myself.  As the Upper Tribunal did in MM
      (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC), I consider that
      where a first instance decision is set aside on the basis of an error
      of law involving the deprivation of the appellant's right to a fair
      hearing, the appropriate course will be to remit the matter to a newly
      constituted FtT for a fresh hearing.


   9. The appeal is allowed.


Notice of Decision


  10. The appeal is allowed, and the appeal is remitted to a newly
      constituted First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal with
      no findings preserved.


  11. No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no
      application for an anonymity direction before me.



Signed                                  Date          18th December 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

Whether or not a fee award is appropriate will  be  determined  by  the  FtT
following the re-hearing of the appeal.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

