
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15213/2017
                                                               hu/15218/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2019                               |On 21 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Petra Akuffo Aryee
                            Manuella Takyi Aryee
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Sowerby, Counsel instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the
    respondents are Ms Petra Akuffo Aryee  and  Ms  Manuella  Takyi  Ayree,
    siblings and citizens of Ghana born on 16 June 1997 and 28 August  1998
    respectively.  For the purposes of this decision and reasons I refer to
    the parties as they were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    siblings were the appellants and appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, dated  12  September
    2017, to refuse to grant the appellants' entry clearance as  the  adult
    children of a person present and settled in  the  UK.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 December 2018, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James
    allowed the appellants' appeals on human rights grounds, Article 8.

 2. The respondent appeals with permission on the grounds that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in finding that the appellants  enjoy  family
    life with their father and that this was a misdirection  of  law.   The
    grounds went on to argue that at [28] the judge  appeared  to  conflate
    being unmarried with being dependent and without any further compelling
    reasons this was insufficient to  allow  the  appeal  and  the  grounds
    argued that the case law including in Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31 had not been correctly followed and the judge had failed to properly
    apply the guidance that family ties between adults and their parents or
    siblings attract lesser protection unless there is "evidence of further
    elements of dependency, involving more than the normal emotional ties."

Error of Law Discussion

 3. Although  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  granted  permission  on
    entirely different grounds on the basis that (1) it was  arguable  that
    the judge had misapplied Devaseelan and; (2) that the judge had  failed
    to give weight to the public interests considerations,  the  permission
    judge made no reference to the decision of the President in  AZ  (error
    of law;  jurisdiction  PTA  practice)  Iran  [2018]  UKUT  00245  which
    provides including as follows:

         "Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted on  a
         ground that was not advanced by an applicant for  permission,  only
         if:

         (a)  The  judge  is  satisfied  that  the  ground  he  or  she  has
             identified as one which has a strong possibility of success:

             (i)  for the original appellant; or

             (ii) for the Secretary of State, where the ground relates to a
                  decision which, if undisturbed, would  breach  the  United
                  Kingdom's international treaty obligations; or

         (b)   (possibly)  the  ground  relates  to  an  issue  of   general
             importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to address."

 4. There was no suggestion or discussion by Judge Davidge  as  to  whether
    the additional grounds  which  he  identified  would,  if  undisturbed,
    breach the United Kingdom's international treaty  obligations  or  that
    the grounds related to issues of general importance.

 5. Ms Kenny did not suggest this was the case and  indeed  confirmed  that
    she sought only to rely on the grounds settled for permission to appeal
    (as summarised above).

 6. Although Mr Sowerby initially attempted to resist these grounds on  the
    basis  that  permission  was  not  granted  on  that  basis,  that   is
    misconceived including as Judge  Davidge,  at  [4]  of  the  permission
    decision, confirmed that "the grounds reveal an arguable error of  law"
    and unless specifically refused I am satisfied that all grounds settled
    in the permission application were arguable before me.

 7. The main issue argued by the Secretary of  State  in  the  grounds  for
    permission was that the judge's decision fell foul of the case  law  in
    relation to whether or not family  life  exists  for  adult  relatives.
    However, the judge, having set out in some detail the  evidence  before
    him at [18a] through to [18t] of the  decision  and  reasons,  directed
    himself  in  relation  to  the  relevant  jurisprudence,  including  of
    Kugathas, in respect of family life.  The judge considered  that  there
    was evidence of both emotional and financial dependency and  considered
    the sponsor's direction of the appellants' upbringing and  their  daily
    lives for a number  of  years,  not  least  as  they  are  not  leading
    independent lives.  The judge found  that  the  sponsor's  contact  and
    visits confirm this and their ties of affection remain in situ [27].

 8. It is therefore misconceived for the respondent to argue that the judge
    erred as the judge had in mind and applied  the  correct  test.   Those
    findings also have to be considered in the context of  the  appellants'
    situation which  the  judge  had  set  out,  including  the  judge  had
    accepted, for the adequate reasons he gave, that the  sponsor  had  had
    sole responsibility for the appellants since  February/March  2014  and
    accepted that their mother had abandoned them.

 9.  The  judge  also  accepted,  at  [28],  that  there  were  significant
    difficulties with the appellants' current living situation  with  their
    aunt who was not "fully welcoming to their presence" and that this  had
    led to the appellants' relying even more on their father for support."

10. In the context of the judge's reasoned findings, which  were  evidence-
    based, the judge clearly gave more than adequate  reasons  for  finding
    why there was family life and why the ties went beyond normal emotional
    ties between adult children and their father.

11. Ms Kenny in her oral argument submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    find compelling reasons  for  allowing  the  appellants'  appeal  under
    Article 8; it specifically being her contention that the judge  had  in
    effect run  a  "near  miss"  argument  in  that  these  appellants  had
    previously been unsuccessful before the First-tier Tribunal  when  they
    were minors, Judge Clarke finding in a decision promulgated on 14 April
    2016, that their appeal at that stage fell to be dismissed.  I  do  not
    agree.  I note in passing, that even if  Judge  Davidge's  grounds  had
    been properly before me, they have not been established,  including  as
    (contrary to that decision) the judge  correctly  directed  himself  in
    relation to Devaseelan, at [14], and took the previous judge's case  as
    a starting point and then considered  the  further  evidence  that  was
    adduced, including why it had not been available before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Although Judge Davidge identified a further  new  ground  in
    relation to public interest   considerations  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellants did not meet the immigration rules, again the judge properly
    directed himself as to the public interest considerations and addressed
    this including at [9] where the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellants
    could not meet the immigration rules and clearly therefore had this  in
    mind and at [31] and [32] where he considered the public  interest  and
    took into account the need for an effective immigration system.  It was
    open to the judge to come to the reasoned conclusions he did.

12. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  may  not  have  specifically
    highlighted why  the appellant's case was compelling, it is evident  on
    a fair reading of the decision that  the  judge  found  it  to  be  so,
    including in the acceptance of the evidence  that  the  appellants  had
    been abandoned by their mother and were currently in a very  precarious
    accommodation position and where they were dependent  on  their  father
    including that he directed their education, chose their  medical  care,
    their religious instruction and their church  attendance  and  that  he
    regularly visited them.  The judge also turned his  mind  to  the  fact
    that the appellants were over 18 but considered including as follows:

         "In coming to my decision I have taken into account the case of  AP
         (India) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA
         Civ 89 (13 February 2015) in particular paragraphs 41, 45  and  51.
         I find there is  family  life  between  the  appellants  and  their
         father,  and  their  ongoing  separation  constitutes  sufficiently
         serious interference with their family life to engage their Article
         8 ECHR rights, particularly in regard  to  their  position  as  two
         single unmarried dependent female daughters taking into account the
         cultural  milieu  and  context  in  Ghana.   The  abandonment   and
         rejection by their mother, and  placement  in  an  extended  family
         member's home which is not happy to do so, there are  clearly  some
         anxieties about the three young men being in the same household and
         how this conflicts with the father's  strict  religious  views,  as
         well as the paternal aunt's concerns  about  overcrowding  and  her
         wish not to house the daughters anymore.  The father confirmed that
         due to cultural and gender division of  Rules  in  Ghana  that  his
         daughters are required to cook, clean and care for the three  boys,
         in order to  remain  in  the  household,  even  though  the  father
         provides payment for their accommodation and maintenance.  This  is
         also of concern for the father, as was their moving from the family
         home in 2014 upsetting their stable family  household,  when  their
         mother abandoned them, and they had to  move  to  live  with  their
         paternal aunt.

         ...".

13. The judge also considered the guidance in Singh  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630
    regarding adult children and that there is not a bright light  where  a
    child will "suddenly cease to have a family life" at midnight when they
    turn 18.

14. The judge properly took into account, when considering family life, the
    compelling nature of this case and that family life had been  continued
    at a distance.  Whilst it may well be that another  Tribunal  may  have
    reached a different conclusion, that is not the test.  The  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for the conclusions reached and they could not be said
    to be irrational.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside and is maintained.

16. No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date:  19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
