
                                    [pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15387/2018
                                                               HU/15390/2018
                                                               HU/15391/2018
                                                               hu/15382/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st March 2019                   |On 05th April 2019                   |
|                                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                binod [K] (1)
                                Gita [S] (2)
                                  [G K] (3)
                                  [K k] (4)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr W. Rees of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nepal who were born on 31  October  1977
    (A1), 18 January 1989 (A2), 20 August 2013 (A3) and 21 April 2011 (A4).
    They Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  from  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Neville, given on second of January 2019.

The Appellants' Immigration History and Background

 2. The first appellant entered the UK on  28  April  2008  with  leave  to
    remain until 8 April 2013, but that leave  was  curtailed  with  effect
    from 2 January 2011. The second appellant joined her husband in the  UK
    on 19 October 2010 with valid leave to coincide with her husband's, the
    first appellant's. However, her leave was curtailed in  line  with  her
    husband's, so she was due to leave on or immediately  after  2  January
    2011. Their children, the third and fourth appellants, were born in the
    UK.

 3. The appellants, effectively, "went to ground" but on 8th  of  May  2018
    they claimed that their protected human rights were engaged  and  that,
    although they had no right to be here, their children had been born  in
    the UK and could not be expected to  go  to  Nepal.  Accordingly,  they
    invited the respondent to give them leave to remain under article 8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

 4. The respondent, in his decision dated 11  July  2018,  considered  that
    those protected human rights  were  outweighed  by  a  range  of  other
    factors not least of which was the  fact  that  the  appellants  had  a
    precarious immigration status and, having regard to the  provisions  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  and
    their failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  their
    applications were refused.

The appeal before the FTT

 5. The appeal against the decision to refuse the appellants' human  rights
    claims came before Judge of First Tier Tribunal Robertson on 9  October
    2018. On 25 October 2018 she decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  the
    grounds that the appellants  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and having weighed  up  the  best  interests  of  the
    children (the third  and  fourth  appellants)  the  judge  nevertheless
    concluded that it was proportionate  and  in  the  public  interest  to
    remove the appellants to  Nepal.  Strong  reasons  doing  so  had  been
    established on the facts. Accordingly, she dismissed the appeals.

 6. The appellants decided to appeal to the UT. FTTJ Neville extended  time
    for doing so and gave permission  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    arguably erred in considering the parents' adverse immigration  history
    as weighing against the child appellants. In so deciding, Judge Neville
    referred to paragraph 276 A.D. E (1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules  and
    section 117 B (6) of the 2002 Act. Having regard to the  provisions  of
    section 117 B (6) and the case of KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC  53,  which
    tried to explain that provision. The court held that the provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules and the application of article 8 in  the  context
    of children must be judged against  "best  interests"  requirements  of
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  (2009
    Act). The court further noted that paragraph 276 A.D. E  (1)  (vi)  did
    not import any requirement that the respondent should  consider  either
    the criminality or misconduct  of  a  parent  as  a  balancing  factor.
    Section 117 B (6), in substance, incorporates the same requirements and
    there is also an absence  of  such  a  required  balancing  feature  in
    relation to that provision.

The hearing

 7. The appellant claims that the decision of the FTT contained a  material
    error of law in that the judge had  mistakenly  referred  to  paragraph
    276ADE (vi) when she meant to refer to 276ADE (iv) at paragraph  22  VI
    of his decision as paragraph 276 ADE  (vi)  refers  to  applicants  for
    leave to remain who are "aged 18 years or above". More  importantly  he
    had placed excessive emphasis on  the  parents'  immigration  histories
    rather than the welfare of the children. He also  queried  the  judge's
    finding that the  child  appellants  had  retained  links  to  Nepalese
    culture, although I note that at paragraph 14 of the decision the judge
    noted that those relying on a Nepalese interpreter included  the  third
    appellant. The minor appellants had been born in the UK and had gone to
    school here. Mr Rees relied on several authorities including KO  [2018]
    UKSC 53 which was published very shortly before the  decision  in  this
    case was promulgated. These included:

       . JG Turkey [2019] UKUT 72

       . Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74

       . EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874

       . MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705

       . MT and ET (Nigeria) [2001] UKUT 88 at paragraph 30.

 8. Mr Rees  particularly  relied  on  the  decision  of  Elias  LJ  in  MA
    (Pakistan) at 36 where he said that:

         "Looking at section 117B (6) free from authority,  I  would  favour
         the argument of the appellants.  The  focus  on  paragraph  (b)  is
         solely on the child and I see  no  justification  for  reading  the
         concept of reasonableness to include a consideration of the conduct
         and immigration history of  the  parents  as  part  of  an  overall
         analysis of the public interest. I do not deny that this may result
         in some cases in undeserving applicants being  allowed  to  remain,
         but that is not in my view a reason for distorting the language  of
         the section. Moreover, in an  appropriate  case  the  Secretary  of
         State could render  someone  liable  to  deportation,  and  thereby
         render him ineligible to rely on this provision, by certifying that
         his or her presence would not be conducive to the public good."

 9. He argued that there was nothing  in  the  legislation  under  scrutiny
    about the importation of reasonable compliance with  immigration  rules
    where one is concerned with the welfare of children,  whose  interests,
    by virtue of section 55 of the 2009 Act, were a primary  consideration.
    He said powerful reasons had to be shown for removing these children to
    Nepal and they had  not  been.  ZH  Tanzania  remained  good  law.  The
    decision had been infected by the judge's  excessive  reliance  on  the
    parents' immigration histories.

10. The respondent, on the other hand, submitted that the  judge  had  been
    entitled to attach significant  weight  to  the  public  interest.  She
    submitted that the case of KO (Nigeria) broadly helped the respondent's
    case by stating that the interests of  children  had  to  be  evaluated
    independently and "reasonably". It was clear on the case  law  that  in
    considering adults' claims it was  perfectly  permissible  to  look  at
    their poor immigration history. In this case they  were  unlawfully  in
    the UK before they finally  sought  to  regularise  their  status.  The
    finding at paragraph 23 II of the decision that the  evidence  did  not
    suggest "...ties to the wider community" as opposed  to  the  "Nepalese
    diaspora" was plainly a finding open to the judge on the evidence.  She
    also concluded that the child  appellants  would  have  learned  enough
    Nepalese at home to be able to integrate in  Nepal.  A  best  interests
    assessment was carried out by the judge, who had in  mind  that  strong
    reasons were required before it  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  minor
    appellants to leave the UK and return to Nepal, but  the  reasons  were
    sufficiently strong here.

11. Mr Rees responded to say that the analysis in relation to  the  parents
    at paragraph 23 II decision was flawed. The finding at paragraph  23  I
    is also faulty. The findings at  paragraph  23  of  the  decision  were
    "tainted" by the  problems  Mr  Rees  had  identified  in  relation  to
    paragraph 22. In particular, to make the findings the judge had made in
    paragraph 22, V and VI, cogent reasons had to be found for  removing  a
    minor from the UK. I was also referred against paragraphs 15 and 16  of
    KO. The Supreme Court explained in those paragraphs that  the  parents'
    misconduct did not enter into the assessment of the child's welfare. Mr
    Rees also relied on the judgment of Lewison LJ in EV (Philippines)  and
    said that the insufficient weight had  been  attached  in  relation  to
    children primary interests in the paragraphs quoted above. In the light
    of the alleged material error of law, I was invited to remit the matter
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

Discussion

12. The present state of article 8 jurisprudence may best be  described  as
    in a state of flux, as the Supreme Court acknowledged in  KO.  However,
    it remains clear that the best interests of a child or children form an
    important part of the balancing exercise under article 8. Indeed, where
    there are  children  involved,  they  are  described  as  a  "paramount
    consideration". As far as the best interests of an adult  claimant  are
    concerned, where they are exercising a private or family  life  in  the
    UK, those interests need to be carefully balanced  against  the  public
    interest in removal but where the child is involved paragraph  276  ADE
    of the Immigration  Rules  and  section  117B  (6)  of  the  2002  Act,
    respectively,  make it clear, that the public interest does not require
    a removal of a child who has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
    seven years or an adult appellant who  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a "qualifying child" where it would  not  be
    reasonable (and in the child's best interests)  for that child to leave
    the UK. A "qualifying child" includes a child who has lived in  the  UK
    for a continuous period of seven years. The key issue here  is  whether
    the judge carried out a "best  interests"  assessment  or  whether  she
    allowed  the  adverse  view  she  reached  of  the  adult   appellants'
    immigration histories to influence that assessment.

13. The judge dealt with the issue of the children's welfare and was  fully
    cognisant of the fact that here the family would be returning to  Nepal
    as one family unit. Insofar as the child appellants  did  not  have  an
    adequate command of Nepalese, they would  soon  learn  these  languages
    and, in the case of the fourth appellant, she is described as a  bright
    child who would pick up  that  language  relatively  well.  Both  child
    appellants could soon learn that language, the judge found. It is by no
    means a negative that the child appellants would pick up  the  language
    and culture of their parents. The judge provided a thorough  review  of
    the case law, the only exception being the Supreme Court  case  of  KO,
    which was only published on the day the  decision  was  signed  by  the
    judge.

14. The judge clearly found there are no unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    to the minor appellants of their return with their  parents  to  Nepal.
    That was a finding open to her on the evidence she heard.  Furthermore,
    she gave full and adequate reasons for her decision. The judge  clearly
    made no error of law in her analysis of the facts,  being  fully  aware
    that the third and fourth appellants had both  been  in  the  UK  since
    birth and in the case of the fourth appellant had been in  the  UK  for
    seven years or more, having been born  on  21  April  2011.  Therefore,
    plainly the fourth appellant fell within paragraph 276 ADE  (iv)  which
    required it to be "reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK".
    The first and second appellants had family members in Nepal as well  as
    family members in the UK. The judge  did  not  accept  that  the  first
    appellant would be unable to find employment there.  The  reference  in
    the judge's decision to paragraph 276ADE (vi) should be a reference  to
    paragraph 276 ADE (iv). When the whole of the decision  is  read,  that
    the judge  did  not  accept  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child
    appellants lay with remaining in the UK  and  that  although  they  had
    never been to Nepal, yet alone lived or been educated in Nepal, it  had
    not been established on the evidence that they would suffer any social,
    educational, emotional or physical setback if they settled  there  with
    their parents.

15. Turning to the decision of the Supreme Court in KO, the court  made  it
    clear that each case turned on its own facts that a number of the cases
    reviewed, for example EV Philippines and  MA  Pakistan  were  concerned
    with cases where one parent had a right to remain in  the  UK  and  the
    other did not. In a number of the cases the father, a foreign criminal,
    stood to be deported and therefore the provisions of section  117C  (5)
    were in issue. Under that section an exception to the usual deportation
    requirement applied where the deportation would have  an  unduly  harsh
    impact on a qualifying child. That is not the  case  here,  where  both
    parents would be returning together to Nepal.  NS,  one  of  the  cases
    considered by the Supreme Court, was a closer case to this one.  There,
    both parents were to return to their own country because of their abuse
    of the Immigration Rules. As Lord Carnwath said, in paragraph  51,  the
    expectation was that the children would return to their own country  of
    Sri Lanka. Therefore, as far as the facts of this case are concerned, I
    do not consider that the case of KO changes the law.

Conclusions

16. This was a thorough and careful decision in  which  the  judge  reached
    clear conclusions according to the law. I have concluded that there was
    no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    accordingly that decision, to dismiss the appellants' appeals, stands.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds/ humanitarian  protection  grounds
/ human rights grounds/ under the immigration rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 03 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 03 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

