
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15506/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th November 2019              |On 13th December 2019              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                            MR DURGA PRASAD THEBE
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant seeks permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Louveaux  promulgated  on  19th  June  2019,  which
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant served in the British Gurkha Regiment for 17  years  from
    30th January 1986  and  was  discharged  on  16th  December  2002  with
    exemplary conduct.  He is married with  four  children  born  in  1982,
    1984, 1986 and 1993.  He made an application  for  entry  clearance  on
    14th March 2018.

 3. His application was refused on the basis  that  he  had  an  option  to
    settle at the time under the Immigration Rules and therefore would  not
    qualify under IDI Chapter 15 Section  2A  Annex  B.  Further,  when  he
    applied for entry clearance,  he  was  over  the  two-year  time  limit
    imposed by paragraph 11(b)(i)  of  the  Appendix  Armed  Forces  and/or
    paragraph 276F(iii) of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer concluded the appellant was not a victim of historic  injustice
    to former Gurkha soldiers and thus the claim did not breach  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 4. The Appendix Armed  Forces  general  eligibility  requirements  are  as
    follows:

         "General eligibility requirements

         11.      The general  eligibility  requirements  to  be  met  as  a
             discharged member of HM Forces are that:

             (a) the applicant:

                  (i)  has completed a least 4 years' reckonable service  in
                      HM Forces; or

                  (ii) meets the medical discharge criteria in paragraph 12;
                      and

             (b) on the date on which the application is made:

                  (i)  the applicant has been discharged from HM Forces  for
                      a period of less than 2 years; or

                  (ii) in  the  case  of  an  applicant  who  was  medically
                      discharged more than 2 years before, new  information
                      regarding his or her prognosis is being considered by
                      the Secretary of State; or

                  (iii)      the applicant has been granted his or her  most
                      recent period of limited leave;

                      (aa)  under paragraph 15 or 19 of this Appendix as  a
                           foreign or  Commonwealth  citizen  who  has  been
                           discharged from HM Forces; or

                      (bb)  under paragraph 276KA or 276QA of these  Rules;
                           or

                      (cc)  under  the  concession  which  existed  outside
                           these  Rules,  whereby  the  Secretary  of  State
                           exercised her discretion to grant leave to  enter
                           or remain to members of HM Forces who  have  been
                           medically discharged; and

             (c) in relation to an application made by a Gurkha, the Gurkha
                  is a citizen or national of Nepal."

 5. Paragraph 276F of the Immigration Rules applies to Indefinite Leave  to
    Remain applications for Gurkhas.  Paragraph 276 (iii), requires that an
    applicant 'was not discharged from the British Army more than  2  years
    prior to the date on which the application is  made'.   That  rule  was
    introduced in October 2004.  The grounds  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stated he was not aware of  the  change  of  policy.   The  appellant's
    witness statement also asserts he did not have the right to settle  and
    could not afford the applications.

 6. The grounds for permission to appeal argued that  the  judge  erred  in
    approach to the treatment of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on
    Human Rights finding, at paragraph 13 of the determination, that it was
    not engaged since the appellant had "no private and family life in  the
    UK".

 7. In the grounds of appeal the appellant advanced that under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  a  person  may  appeal
    against refusal of a human rights claim and the appellant was  applying
    for his entitlement to settle in the United Kingdom  which  was  denied
    him when he was first discharged  in  2002.   This  engaged  his  human
    rights claim.

 8. Further to Bahinga (r. 22; human rights  appeal:  requirements)  Sierra
    Leone [2018] UKUT 90 at paragraph 2 of the headnote:

         "2.      An application for leave or entry clearance may constitute
             a human rights claim, even  if  the  applicant  does  not,  in
             terms, raise human  rights.   In  cases  not  covered  by  the
             respondent's guidance (whereby certain applications under  the
             immigration rules will be treated as human rights claims), the
             application will constitute a human rights claim  if,  on  the
             totality  of  the  information  supplied,  the  applicant   is
             advancing a case which requires  the  caseworker  to  consider
             whether a discretionary decision under the rules needs  to  be
             taken by reference to ECHR issues (eg Article 8)  or  requires
             the caseworker to look beyond the rules and  decide,  if  they
             are not satisfied, whether an Article 8 case  is  nevertheless
             being advanced."

 9. Further in Ahmadi and Anor, R (on the application of)  v  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department)  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1721  the  court
    acknowledged that, "the obligations under Article 8 require a state not
    only to refrain from interference with existing  life,  but  also  from
    inhibiting the development of a real family life in the  future."   The
    court did go on to state, "That is not to say that, ... only  a  future
    intention will be sufficient to engage Article 8. ..." [18].

10. It was argued that in the case of appellant where  the  Appendix  Armed
    Forces Rule was not available to him when he was discharged in 2002 and
    only came into force in 2004. At the time he was discharged  there  was
    no possibility of him being able to apply for  settlement  and  he  was
    unable to apply for any of his children who were over  the  age  of  18
    years old at that time.  It was only in January 2015 that Annex  K  was
    implemented to allow ex-Ghurkhas to apply for  their  children  between
    the ages 18 to 30 years old.  The respondent's decision engaged Article
    8.

11. The appellant was one of the Ghurkhas who retired between 1997 and 2004
    and they were unaware of their entitlement when the law changed and  as
    such the respondent should exercise discretion before  solely  refusing
    on the time limit point.

12. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that insufficient  weight
    had been attached to the factors as identified given  the  totality  of
    the background circumstances.  Insufficient analysis was set out by the
    judge before reaching conclusions as to  the  potential  weight  to  be
    attached to the factors.  It was arguable Article 8 was  engaged  given
    the chronology on the footing that the appellant served the Crown as  a
    soldier and that such service constituted an important  aspect  of  his
    private life.

13. At the hearing before me Mr Balroop argued that the Article 8 had  been
    given short shrift and there was no consideration of private or  family
    life in the UK.  There was a lacuna such that parties between 1997  and
    2004 would fail the relevant criteria introduced in 2004.   Mr  Balroop
    argued that the relevant paragraphs being 17, 27 and 28 of Limbu [2008]
    EWHC 2261 (Admin) were not taken into account.

14. Ms Bassi submitted that the judge had determined at  paragraph  3  that
    the appellant had completed his service on 16th December 2002 and could
    have applied in 2004 because he would have had a  two-month  window  at
    that time and there was a route to settlement.  She  added  that  there
    was no historic injustice and it was only if historic injustice applied
    that Article 8 would be engaged which was not in  these  circumstances.
    The Entry Clearance Manager's review argued that without familial  ties
    Article 8 was not engaged and it was clear that the  appellant  has  no
    family in the United Kingdom.  Indeed, his children all of whom are now
    over the age of 18 were listed as  dependant  on  his  application  and
    living in Nepal.  The judge was correct to conclude,  albeit  summarily
    that there was no family  life  in  order  to  engage  Article  8.  The
    appellant had no family life in the United Kingdom, and it was open  to
    the judge to dismiss the appeal on that basis.  The judge also  swiftly
    dealt with private life finding none was engaged.

    Analysis

15. This being a human rights appeal the question is whether Article 8  was
    engaged.

16. The background the Gurkha litigation has been set out in R  (Gurung)  v
    Secretary of State [2013] EWCA Civ 8 as follows

         '2.       For  many  years,  Gurkha  veterans  were  treated   less
         favourably than other comparable non-British Commonwealth  soldiers
         serving in the British army. Although  Commonwealth  citizens  were
         subject to immigration control, the SSHD had a concessionary policy
         outside the Rules which allowed such citizens who were serving  and
         former members of the British  armed  forces  to  obtain  on  their
         discharge indefinite leave to enter and remain in the  UK.  Gurkhas
         were not included in this policy. They were therefore not  entitled
         to settle in the UK.

         3. In 2004, the British Government agreed to  change  this  policy.
         The SSHD issued a press release in 2004 which paid tribute  to  the
         bravery of the men of the Gurkha Brigade  and  their  unquestioning
         loyalty to Her Majesty the Queen. He said:

             "I am very keen to ensure that we recognise their role in  the
             history of our country  and  the  part  they  have  played  in
             protecting us. That is why  we  have  put  together  the  best
             possible package to enable discharged  Gurkhas  to  apply  for
             settlement and citizenship. I hope that the  decision  I  have
             made today will make our gratitude clear. Those high  military
             standards have been mirrored by their  demeanour  in  civilian
             life. Their families too have shown devotion and commitment by
             travelling across continents to support the Brigade."

         4. Accordingly, in October 2004, Immigration Rules 276E to  K  were
         introduced to  enable  Gurkha  veterans  with  at  least  4  years'
         service, who had been discharged from the armed services within the
         past 2 years, to apply for settlement in the UK. But  only  Gurkhas
         who had been discharged on completion of engagement on or  after  1
         July  1997  were  eligible  to  apply.  The  rationale   for   this
         restriction was that in July 1997 the Brigade of Gurkhas moved  its
         headquarters from Hong Kong to the UK,  so  that  after  that  date
         Gurkhas would have had the opportunity to  develop  close  physical
         ties with the UK.

         5. But at the same time, the SSHD introduced a policy  outside  the
         Rules under which Gurkhas were permitted to settle in the  UK  even
         if they had been discharged before 1 July 1997 and/or more  than  2
         years prior to the  date  of  application,  if  there  were  strong
         reasons why settlement in the UK was appropriate in the  particular
         case by reason of the individual's existing ties with the UK. Entry
         clearance  guidance  was  contained  in  the   Diplomatic   Service
         Procedures Chapter 29 para 14 ("DSP29.14"). This  was  replaced  in
         January 2009 by the Settlement Entry Clearance Guidance, Chapter 12
         para 16 ("SET12.16"). The two paragraphs were  in  identical  terms
         and applied to the dependants of all former members  of  HM  Forces
         (including Gurkhas). SET12.16 remained  in  force  until  September
         2010, since when the only relevant policy  document  has  been  the
         Immigration Directorates' Instructions ("IDI") referred to at  para
         10 below'.

17. Article 8 of the convention provides:

         "Right to respect for private and family life

         1. Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
         life, his home and his correspondence.

         2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."

18.  As, however, as explained in Adjei (visit visas -  Article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 0261 (IAC)

         "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
         grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights  grounds
         are available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
         If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
         has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
         the ECO under the rules and should not  do  so.  If  article  8  is
         engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent to  which  the
         claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         rule because that may inform the proportionality balancing exercise
         that must follow. Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
         UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition.

19. Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 acknowledging  Bensaid  v  United  Kingdom
    (2001) 33 EHRR 205, identified that not every act of  the  state  would
    interfere with Article 8. Article 8 is a broad term  and  protects  the
    right to identity and personal development and, further, if the if  the
    facts were sufficiently strong article 8 may, in principle, be  invoked
    but, even then, the interference  may  not  be  sufficiently  grave  to
    entail a breach and depended on the circumstances.  As held in Bensaid

         "47.     Private life is a broad term not susceptible to exhaustive
         definition. The Court has already held that elements such as gender
         identification, name and sexual orientation  and  sexual  life  are
         important elements of the personal sphere protected by  Article  8.
         Mental health must also be regarded as a crucial  part  of  private
         life associated with the  aspect  of  moral  integrity.  Article  8
         protects a right to identity  and  personal  development,  and  the
         right to establish  and  develop  relationships  with  other  human
         beings and the outside world".

20. At paragraph 9 the Court in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 observed

         'This judgment establishes,  in  my  opinion  quite  clearly,  that
         reliance may in principle be placed  on  article  8  to  resist  an
         expulsion decision, even where the main  emphasis  is  not  on  the
         severance of family and social ties which the applicant has enjoyed
         in the expelling country but on the  consequences  for  his  mental
         health of removal  to  the  receiving  country.  The  threshold  of
         successful reliance is high, but if the  facts  are  strong  enough
         article 8 may in principle be invoked. It is  plain  that  "private
         life" is a broad term,  and  the  Court  has  wisely  eschewed  any
         attempt to define it comprehensively. It is  relevant  for  present
         purposes that the Court saw mental stability  as  an  indispensable
         precondition to effective enjoyment of the  right  to  respect  for
         private life.  In  Pretty  v  United  Kingdom  (2002)  35  EHRR  1,
         paragraph 61, the Court held the expression to cover "the  physical
         and psychological integrity of a person" and  went  on  to  observe
         that

             "Article 8 also protects a right to personal development,  and
             the right to establish and develop  relationships  with  other
             human beings and the outside world."

         Elusive though the concept is, I think one must understand "private
         life" in article  8  as  extending  to  those  features  which  are
         integral to a person's identity or ability to function socially  as
         a person. Professor Feldman, writing in 1997 before the most recent
         decisions, helpfully observed ("The Developing Scope of  Article  8
         of the European Convention on  Human  Rights",  [1997]  EHRLR  265,
         270):

             "Moral integrity in this  sense  demands  that  we  treat  the
             person holistically as morally worthy of  respect,  organising
             the state and society in ways  which  respect  people's  moral
             worth by taking account of their need for security."'

21. The question was whether in this instance Article 8 was engaged bearing
    in mind its broad nature.  In R (Limbu) v  Secretary  of  State  [2008]
    EWHC 2261 (Admin) Blake J held that military service  anywhere  in  the
    world could be deemed to be service  in  the  UK  for  the  purpose  of
    qualifying for residency. Limbu sets out at paragraph 28

         'Since April 2007 discharge has been able  to  take  place  in  the
         United Kingdom with the option of travel back to  Nepal  at  public
         expense. Gurkhas can now also count military  service  anywhere  in
         the world towards the period of qualifying residence deemed  to  be
         in the United Kingdom, for the purposes of naturalisation, although
         citizenship can only be granted once they have left the Brigade  of
         Gurkhas.  These  changes  were  made  without  objection  from  the
         Government of Nepal, just as  earlier  they  had  no  objection  to
         indefinite leave to remain being granted to Gurkhas'

22. I also appreciate the observation of Blake J at paragraph 47  of  Limbu
    where he proceeded to rule on Article 14 on the basis of the engagement
    of Article 8 (without conceding that it had been  infringed)  where  he
    observed

         '... the proposition that a policy on indefinite leave to remain on
         the grounds of close links with the United  Kingdom  was  a  policy
         designed in part to promote the private and family  life  of  those
         eligible for admission just as immigration rules on family  reunion
         promote or  have  impact  on  the  ability  to  enjoy  family  life
         (Abdulaziz and Cabales v United Kingdom (1985) 7 EHRR 471).  It  is
         clear that one does not need an individual right  to  be  infringed
         before Article 14 can come into play; it is sufficient that the law
         or policy complained of is within the  ambit  of  the  Article  and
         reflects the principles and interests protected by the  Article  in
         question.  Although  Mr.  Kovats   opposed   even   this   narrower
         formulation of the ambit of Article 14, I am prepared to assume for
         the purpose of this case that it may be right  and  that  I  should
         accordingly test the legality of the policies  under  challenge  by
         reference to Article 14'.

23. In this case, however, and unlike Limbu, which addressed the rights  of
    those discharged prior to 1997, there was a window of  opportunity  for
    the appellant to apply for Entry Clearance, that being in  2004.    The
    personal choices of the applicant at the  time  is,  in  my  view,  too
    remote to justify the invocation of a  private  life  on  human  rights
    grounds 15 years later.   Limbu was principally considered on the basis
    of an attack on operative policy not on human  rights  grounds;  Gurung
    was not argued on human rights grounds but on the basis of the historic
    injustice and the policy of redressing the historic injustice  whereby,
    but for previous immigration rules, Gurkhas would have  been  permitted
    to settle in this country.  After so many years have elapsed, I am  not
    persuaded that there is any positive obligation on the United  Kingdom,
    even in the case of Gurkhas, to  recognise  the  private  life  of  the
    appellant in Article 8 terms, when there was indeed an opportunity  for
    the appellant to enter the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  asserts  he
    was prevented from applying in 2004 when all his family (because of his
    adult children) were unable to accompany  him  because  of  the  policy
    operated by the British government at the time  but  many  Gurkhas  did
    resettle in the United Kingdom, albeit at the time their children could
    not accompany them, only for  their  children  to  join  them  sometime
    later.

24. The point made with regard Limbu and deemed residence ignores the  fact
    that the Immigration Rules, of which the appellant could  have  availed
    himself, allowed appellants to apply up to two years  after  discharge.
    The immigration rules in relation to  long  residence  under  Paragraph
    276A(a)(v) consider continuous residence to be broken if  an  applicant
    has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from the United Kingdom
    during the period in question.  I realise that  that  rule  applies  to
    276B to 276D and 27ADE and obtaining  leave  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence, is not exactly analogous, but the principle  of  'lapse'  of
    entitlement to leave or rather lapse  of  connection  with  the  United
    Kingdom is illustrated and must be a relevant as  an  important  factor
    when considering whether the appellant's private life  in  relation  to
    the UK for the purposes of Article 8 endures.

25. If this removes the 'Gurkha' element as I find it  does,  it  would  be
    necessary to consider the  matter  on  ordinary  principles.   Although
    Article  8  might  include  physical  and  moral  integrity  and  self-
    development and relations with others, the  'self-development'  of  the
    appellant in this instance and after all this time is in Nepal and  not
    in the United  Kingdom.   His  physical  and  moral  integrity  is  not
    impaired by the United Kingdom refusing entry clearance because he  did
    have that opportunity.  The scope of the term 'home' is generally taken
    to mean where a person lives on a settled basis   and  'the  physically
    defined area where private and family life develops' Murray v UK (1994)
    19 EHRR and   I am not persuaded that personal self-development or home
    can extend to a place where a person has never lived or the development
    of personal identity or autonomy extended to removal to another country
    where there are no familial ties.

26. Lord Justice Burnett in Secretary of State v Abbas [2017] EWCA Civ 1393
    authoritatively held at paragraph 18

         'The Secretary of State has been unable to identify any case, still
         less a settled line of authority, in which the Strasbourg Court has
         held Article 8 in its private life aspect to be engaged in  respect
         of a person outside the  Contracting  State  seeking  to  enter  to
         develop that private life'. [18].

    and at 27

         'There is no obligation on an ECHR state to allow an alien to enter
         its territory to pursue a private life.  Article 8 was not  engaged
         in the respondent's application for entry clearance for his  family
         to visit the United Kingdom. No question of proportionality  arises
         for consideration' [27].

27. The House of Lords in Huang v Secretary of  State  [2007]  UKHL  11  at
    paragraph 18 confirmed

         'The Strasbourg court has repeatedly recognised the  general  right
         of states to control the entry and residence of non-nationals,  and
         repeatedly acknowledged that the Convention  confers  no  right  on
         individuals or families to choose where they  prefer  to  live.  In
         most cases where the applicants complain of a  violation  of  their
         article 8  rights,  in  a  case  where  the  impugned  decision  is
         authorised by law for a legitimate object and the interference  (or
         lack of  respect)  is  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  engage  the
         operation of article 8,  the  crucial  question  is  likely  to  be
         whether the interference (or lack  of  respect)  complained  of  is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  end  sought  to  be   achieved.
         Proportionality is a subject  of  such  importance  as  to  require
         separate treatment'.

28. Again, from Abbas at paragraph 24 it was held:

         'The consistent approach of the Strasbourg Court  to  the  question
         whether someone is within the jurisdiction of a  Contracting  State
         for the purpose of article 1 is to emphasise that it  is  primarily
         territorial. However, in exceptional circumstances  acts  producing
         effects outside the territory of a Contracting State may constitute
         an  exercise  of  jurisdiction:  see  Al-Skeini  v  United  Kingdom
         (55721/07) (2011)  53  EHRR  18  at  paragraph  131.  None  of  the
         exceptions thereafter identified by the Strasbourg  Court  has  any
         bearing on the facts of this case'.

29. Albeit the appellant is a 'Gurkha' I am not persuaded that this is  one
    of the exceptional cases which should engage Article 8 and even  if  it
    were engaged, which I do not accept, the state has a much wider  margin
    of appreciation in determining the conditions to  be  satisfied  in  an
    entry clearance case by contrast with the position for  those  applying
    for leave to remain.   Ahmadi and Anor, R (on the application of)  does
    not apply in this instance because the  state  is  not  inhibiting  the
    family life of this appellant which is constituted in  Nepal  where  he
    and all his children remain.

30. Therefore, although the judge made a brief summation  of  the  position
    with regard the  appellant,  I  find  the  essence  of  his  conclusion
    properly made and the brevity of his decision not material. The  First-
    tier Tribunal decision will stand.

31. The appeal remains dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 28th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

