
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15837/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19th January 2018                       |On 27th February  2018           |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                      ms madinabibi kasambhai dadabhai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Heidar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  26th  March  1935.   The
    Appellant had  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependant
    relative under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   Her  application
    was considered under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of  the  United
    Kingdom Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's application was refused  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer on 27th May 2016.  It is recorded  on  that
    refusal that a previous application made on the  same  basis  had  been
    refused on 11th October 2012.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Swinnerton sitting at Hatton Cross on  28th  March  2017.
    In  a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  12th  April  2017   the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on  9th  May  2017.
    The basis of the challenge was that the Immigration Judge  having  been
    required to take  into  account  all  the  evidence  before  him,  make
    insufficient findings on the facts and evidence and make clear findings
    on all the requirements of the Immigration Rules and had failed to make
    correct findings and apply the appropriate law.

 4. On 20th November 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Osborne considered that  in  an  otherwise
    careful decision and reasons it was nonetheless at least arguable  that
    at paragraph 26 the judge  himself  had  raised  the  adequacy  of  the
    Sponsor's current accommodation for  the  needs  of  the  whole  family
    including the Appellant whereas that was an issue that was  not  raised
    by the Respondent  in  the  refusal.   He  considered  that  the  judge
    arguably erred in taking that non-issue into account and had criticised
    the  Appellant  for  not  providing  adequacy  of   the   evidence   of
    accommodation when that was not an issue.

 5. On 20th December 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  It is on that basis  that  the  appeal  comes
    before me to determine whether or not there is a material error of  law
    in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant
    appears by Ms Heidar, a  legal  representative  with  A  A  Immigration
    Lawyers.  The Respondent appears by her Home Office Presenting  Officer
    Ms Everett.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Ms Heidar advises me that there are two issues  in  this  matter.   The
    first one she turns to is the issue of accommodation and  submits  that
    the Immigration Judge incorrectly assessed  the  accommodation  of  the
    Sponsor and that the judge  addresses  this  at  paragraph  26  of  his
    decision.  She points out that the sufficiency of accommodation was not
    raised by the Respondent in  the  refusal  letter  and  that  this  was
    addressed in a letter from the landlords dating back  to  3rd  December
    2015.  She points out that this letter was not before the judge on  the
    basis that it was not needed and that his decision therefore was wrong.

 7. Secondly she states there is a factual error that the Appellant was  in
    receipt of pension and rental income and that this  was  based  on  the
    2013 application.  However as Ms Everett points out paragraph  13  does
    show quite clearly that whilst the Appellant previously rented property
    which provided rental income that property is not rented at present and
    does not provide any rental income.  Ms  Everett  consequently  submits
    that the judge has made no error of fact at all and that this matter is
    fully explained within the determination.

 8. Ms Heidar then raises another issue relating to the care  available  in
    the UK and submits  that  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 27 relating to recourse to public funds by the  Appellant  is
    not made out on a correct assessment.  Firstly she points out the  test
    relates to one of additional funds and that the Immigration  Rules  was
    required to assess the long term personal care available in India under
    the Immigration  Rules.   She  submits  that  documentary  evidence  in
    support of the fact that care was not available was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and that there  was  oral  submission  made  and  a
    skeleton argument  provided.   She  submits  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    conclude that there would have been a need for additional  recourse  to
    public funds bearing in mind the Sponsor is on benefits.

 9. The final issue refers to the issue of sufficiency of care taking me to
    paragraphs 28 and 31 of the judge's decision.   She  submits  that  the
    judge has only made  findings  at  paragraph  29  with  regard  to  the
    capacity of  the  Appellant's  Sponsor  to  look  after  her  which  is
    speculative.  She asked me to find there are material errors of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to remit  the  matter
    back to the First-tier for rehearing.

10. In response Ms Everett points out  that  so  far  as  accommodation  is
    concerned some of the evidence she accepts was not before the judge and
    therefore there is an error of fact.  However she  submits  it  is  not
    material and that the judge has looked at all issues in the round.  She
    submits that the assessment by the judge at paragraphs 26 to 29 of  the
    decision relating to the financial support available  are  considerably
    more nuanced than is suggested by Ms Heidar.  She reminds me  that  the
    Sponsor has health needs and  cannot  work  nor  does  his  wife.   She
    submits that the  judge  looked  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    concluded that there would be recourse to other public funds  e.g.  the
    provision of a wheelchair etc. and  that  the  judge  had  made  proper
    findings in concluding that it would not be reasonable to conclude that
    the Sponsor had sufficient funds to maintain the Appellant.

11. Finally Ms Everett turns to the issue of care in  particular  the  care
    received by the Appellant in India.  She submits  the  judge  has  made
    clear findings.  Further he has accepted that the  property  which  has
    been the subject of some reference was not rented out and the judge has
    not  misunderstood  the  evidence  and  has  not   come   to   perverse
    conclusions.  She asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that this decision discloses no material errors of  law.
    It is true to say that  at  paragraph  26  the  judge  has  erroneously
    concluded the adequacy of the current accommodation and that  this  was
    not an issue before  the  Tribunal.   That  is  an  error.   However  I
    conclude that it is not material when looked against all other findings
    made by the judge.  The judge is required to look at all issues in  the
    round and he has given cogent reasons at paragraph 29 to why it is  not
    considered the Sponsor can adequately care for  the  Appellant  without
    recourse to public funds or as set out at paragraph  27  maintain  her.
    The judge heard the evidence.

15. It is relevant to point out that the judge has specifically noted  that
    the Appellant is no longer renting out her property and therefore it is
    erroneous to suggest that this was an income that could be  taken  into
    account.  Overall the judge has looked at this matter in the round  and
    has also made findings on each individual section.  The  fact  that  he
    has erred in his conclusions regarding accommodation  does  not  blight
    the remainder of the decision.  The decision is  well  constructed  and
    cogent reasons are provided.  In such circumstances  the  arguments  on
    other  issues  save  for  accommodation  amount  to  little  more  than
    disagreement.  As a result I find that there is no  material  error  of
    law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and   the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 26 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris










