
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15170/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th February 2019                |On 12th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 USMAN ZAHID
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu, of Counsel, instructed by Elaahi & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1991. He arrived in the
       UK in February 2011 as a Tier 4 student migrant and had leave in that
       capacity until 1st October 2014 when he was served with notice  as  a
       person liable to removal. On 2nd  September  2016  he  made  a  human
       rights claim. That claim was refused in a decision  dated  28th  June
       2018. His appeal against the decision was  allowed  on  human  rights
       ground  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Graham  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 7th November 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  on  the
       basis that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law
       in two ways. Firstly, the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  have  erred  in
       finding that the  claimant  had  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of
       application at paragraph 9 of the decision and thus in  not  weighing
       the public interest in his removal when considering  proportionality;
       secondly the First-tier Tribunal may have failed to identify the type
       of leave to remain that the claimant was entitled to within  the  UK.
       Whilst the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to conclude the  claimant
       had not falsely obtained his TOEIC certificate there was a failure to
       show why his removal was a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
       private life.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The Secretary of State's grounds are as  set  out  in  the  grant  of
       leave. Mr  Whitwell  argued,  in  response  to  submissions  from  Ms
       Akinbolu, that it was not clear that Ahsan & Ors v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
       Civ 2009 had been before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  any  argument
       based on this case had not been set out  explicitly  with  sufficient
       reasoning in the decision. He accepted however that what was said  in
       Ahsan could be seen as meaning that the  lack  of  reasoning  in  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal was not a material error.

    5. In a Rule 24 notice Ms Akinbolu accepts that it is wrongly stated  at
       paragraph 9 of the decision that the claimant  had  leave  to  remain
       when he made his human rights application. However, it is argued that
       the findings at paragraph 21 (where it was found that  there  was  no
       public interest in the removal of the claimant despite his not  being
       able to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules) was not based
       on that incorrect factual statement, and was in fact legally  correct
       as it would be disproportionate to remove the claimant given what  is
       said by the Court of Appeal in Ahsan at paragraphs 120  and  121.  As
       the Secretary of State does not challenge the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal that the claimant had not cheated  in  his  TOEIC  test
       that meant that the decision to remove him was not lawfully made, and
       in accordance with Ahsan he was entitled to be  placed  in  the  same
       position he would have been had that decision not been made, and thus
       to a short period of leave to remain to make a new application.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. The claimant's immigration history is set out at paragraph 3  of  the
       decision, and includes the fact that the claimant's leave  was  ended
       on 1st October 2014 by the notice of removal, and that  it  would  in
       any case have ended on 19th December 2014, and that no  human  rights
       claim was made until 2nd September 2016. It was clearly  therefore  a
       factual error to conclude at paragraph 9 of  the  decision  that  the
       claimant had limited leave when the human rights application was made
       in September 2016. I do not find however that this factual error lead
       to a material error of law.

    7. The Secretary of State  accepts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       entitled to conclude that the claimant had not cheated in  his  TOEIC
       examinations for the reasons set out at paragraphs 10 to  20  of  the
       decision. It is also accepted by the  Secretary  of  State,  and  the
       claimant, that the First-tier Tribunal correctly concluded  that  the
       claimant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  private  life
       Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal finds at paragraph 21 of their decision  that
       the error in making the removal  decision  means  that  there  is  no
       public interest in the removal of the claimant as  the  Secretary  of
       State had acted unlawfully in making the removal decision.  It  would
       have been helpful if the First-tier Tribunal had set out or  referred
       to what is said at paragraphs 120 and 121 of Ahsan, which I find  was
       probably before the First-tier Tribunal as a copy was in the file and
       reference is made to the case  in  documents  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, for instance at pages 14 to 15 of the bundle. I  find  that
       it was anticipated by the Court of Appeal in Ahsan  that  a  claimant
       should be placed in the same position as  if  the  s.10  decision  to
       remove had been quashed following a successful human rights appeal in
       this factual context, as is stated at paragraph 120:  "The  starting-
       point is that it seems to me clear that if on a human  rights  appeal
       an appellant were found not to have cheated, which  inevitably  means
       that the section 10 decision had been wrong, the Secretary  of  State
       would be obliged to deal  with  him  or  her  thereafter  so  far  as
       possible as if that error had not been made, i.e. as if  their  leave
       to remain had not been invalidated. In a straight forward  case,  for
       example, she could and should make a fresh grant of leave  to  remain
       equivalent to that which had been invalidated."

    9. It was correct therefore  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  a
       careful finding that it would  be  disproportionate  to  require  the
       claimant to leave the UK, reflecting the unlawfulness of the  removal
       decision, but not to set out the leave to be granted which would have
       to be assessed to the Secretary of State as simply sufficient to  put
       the claimant, in so far as this is possible, in the same position  as
       if the erroneous section 10 removal decision had not been made.

   10. For these reasons I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       does not contain a material error of law as I find that the  decision
       is legally correct in the circumstances of this case.

Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of a material error on a point of law.

    2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal
       on human rights grounds.

Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    11th  February
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
