
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15545/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2018                            |On 4th May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                            MISS GURUNG DIL MAYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 29th March 1987, is a  citizen  of  Nepal.   The
    Appellant was represented by Ms Jaja of Counsel.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Avery, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made  application  for  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom with a view to settlement as the daughter of  a  former  Gurkha
    soldier, namely her father Mr Gurung.  The Respondent had refused  that
    application on 25th May 2016.  The Appellant had appealed that decision
    and her appeal had been heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 21st  July  2017.   He  had  dismissed  that
    appeal.

 3. Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made  by
    solicitors on the Appellant's behalf on 24th August  2017.   Permission
    to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  on  20th
    February 2018.  The judge noted that there were arguable errors of  law
    in  that  the  judge  had  misdirected  himself  by  not  applying  the
    principles in Ghising and Rai relating to his  finding  as  to  whether
    Article 8(1) was engaged.

 4. By letter dated 20th March 2018  the  Respondent  did  not  oppose  the
    Appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to remit the case back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de
    novo hearing.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 5. The Respondent in this case had conceded that an error of law had  been
    made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a  manner  identified  by  the
    judge who had granted permission to appeal.

Decision

 6. It is clear the parties were in agreement that an error of law had been
    made by the judge in this case.  It seems clear from  paragraph  12  of
    the judge's decision that he correctly identified that factually  there
    was little if any challenge to the  evidence  in  the  case.   To  that
    extent it was not necessary or indeed incumbent upon the judge to  make
    findings on fact.  However, it was necessary for the judge to deal with
    the core issue in this case,  namely  whether  there  was  family  life
    existing between the Sponsor and the adult child and  to  consider  the
    extent and depth of any family life found and apply those  findings  to
    the relevant case law.  In cases involving  adult  children  of  former
    serving Gurkha soldiers there are  somewhat  discrete  principles  that
    have been considered carefully by the superior courts, in particular in
    the case of Ghising [2013] UKUT 567 and more recently the case of Rai v
    ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320.  The judge in this case had dealt briefly with
    the core issue and does not appear in the context of dealing with  that
    matter have reminded himself of the case of  Ghising  or  indeed  other
    similar cases.  Whilst  he  made  reference  to  the  case  of  Rai  at
    paragraph 16 that appeared to be no more than referring to the  earlier
    case of Singh [2015] and highlighting the fact that each case is  fact-
    sensitive.

 7. There has not been in this case an adequate examination  of  the  facts
    generally but most particularly when looking through the prism of those
    cases that relate to the important features  and  principles  requiring
    consideration in Gurkha cases.

 8. In those circumstances the lack of factual analysis  and  findings,  in
    particular in the context of the decisions and principles  set  out  by
    the superior courts in such cases, means that a material error  of  law
    was made by the judge in this case such that the decision needs  to  be
    set aside and is one of those cases where  considering  the  Procedures
    Rules it is in the circumstances one that should be  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Notice of Decision

 9. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Given
    the circumstances of the finding this matter should be remitted back to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

    No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
