
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15811/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester CJC                      |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 26 October 2018                           |On 6 November 2018           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     RK
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the appellant.

Introduction


 1. The appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ('FTT') dated 5 April 2018 in which it dismissed her appeal on
    human rights grounds.

 2. In a decision dated 13 August 2018, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Harris
    concluded that the FTT decision contains a material error  of  law  but
    only in so far as it relates to a failure to consider  the  appellant's
    private  life  under  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    In
    directions issued on the same date Judge Harris ordered the decision to
    be remade solely on whether there are very significant obstacles to the
    appellant's integration in India pursuant to 276ADE(1)(vi) but made  it
    clear that "all other factual findings of  fact  are  to  stand".   The
    matter was reserved to Judge Harris but a transfer order was made on 20
    August 2018

Background

 3. The appellant, a citizen of India, is 68 years old.  She resides in the
    United Kingdom ('UK')  with  her  daughter,  a  British  citizen  ('the
    sponsor') and her son-in-law.


 4. On 11 August 2009 the appellant entered the UK as  a  visitor.   During
    the currency of her leave, she made an application on 23 December  2009
    to remain in the UK on the basis  that  in  accordance  with  an  older
    version of the Immigration Rules she would be living alone outside  the
    UK in the most compassionate circumstances.  This was refused  and  her
    appeal to the FTT was dismissed in a  decision  dated  9  October  2010
    ('the 2010 decision').  A further application to remain on the basis of
    Article 8 was refused on 23 May 2011.  The  appellant  remained  as  an
    overstayer.  She was served with notice of her liability to removal  in
    2014 and again in 2017.  On 2 November 2017 she submitted  a  statement
    of additional grounds outlining her claim  that  removal  would  breach
    Article 8.  This claim was refused by the SSHD in a decision  dated  13
    November 2017.  After  considering  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
    detail, the SSHD provided comprehensive reasons for refusing the  claim
    pursuant to 276ADE(1)(iv) and Articles  3  and  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    appellant appealed against this decision to the FTT.

FTT decision

 5. The appellant did not give evidence at the hearing.  The FTT noted that
    there was evidence from her GP and  psychiatrist  which  described  her
    oral skills and memory as severely impaired and that she was in a semi-
    mute state.  The FTT heard evidence from the  sponsor.   The  FTT  then
    made factual findings before concluding the appellant  could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  her  removal  would  not
    lead to a breach of Article 8.

Appeal to the UT

 6. The appellant relied  upon  two  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  FTT
    decision.  Judge Harris accepted  the  submission  made  in  the  first
    ground that the FTT failed to consider whether the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of 276ADE and allowed the appeal  solely  on  that  basis.
    Judge Harris did not accept the submission  in  the  second  ground  of
    appeal that inadequate reasons were provided for rejecting the  medical
    opinion as to the availability of treatment for the appellant in  India
    - see [16] of the UT decision.

Remaking the decision

Hearing

 7. At the beginning of the hearing both representatives  agreed  that  the
    FTT's preserved findings of fact can be summarised as follows:


       i) The appellant is dependent upon the sponsor for her  needs.   Her
          GP has stated that she is unwell suffering from severe  arthritis
          restricting her mobility to a shuffle and type 2  diabetes.   She
          had been seeing a psychiatrist, Dr Bamrah, for  eight  years  for
          severe anxiety and depression and at times was  almost  catatonic
          but has responded well to anti-depressant medication -  see  [14]
          of the FTT decision.


      ii) The appellant needs very  close  care,  most  likely  residential
          either in her own home or in a geriatric care establishment - see
          [15] of the FTT decision.

     iii) The sponsor's evidence is recorded at [16] to [20]  but  the  FTT
          considered that it must be approached with some caution given the
          adverse credibility findings made in the 2010 FTT decision -  see
          [21] to [23] of the FTT decision.  The sponsor's assertions  were
          therefore not accepted in the absence of supporting evidence.

      iv) Although  the  appellant  has  the  illnesses  described  by  her
          doctors, these  are  adequately  managed  by  the  treatment  she
          receives - see [24] of the FTT decision.

       v) The treatment required by the appellant would be available  in  a
          city in India.  This  would  be  affordable  given  the  family's
          assets in India and the support from the sponsor - see  [25]  and
          [26] of the FTT decision.  The requirements of  E-ECDR.2.5  would
          not be met because the appellant is able to obtain  the  required
          level of care in India, it being both available and affordable  -
          see pg 6 of the FTT decision.

      vi) The following facts are relevant to  the  proper  application  of
          section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
          ('the 2002 Act'): the appellant entered the UK as a  visitor  and
          has overstayed for an  extended  period  of  time;  there  is  no
          prospect of the appellant integrating into UK society; she  is  a
          burden on taxpayers given her recourse to NHS treatments;  little
          weight can be afforded to her private life as it was  established
          when her immigration status was either precarious or unlawful.

 8. As Judge Harris found, the FTT did  not  address  whether  or  not  the
    appellant  could  meet  the   requirements   of   276ADE(1)(iv),   when
    considering Article 8 or at all.  Both representatives  agreed  that  I
    should remake the Article 8 decision by applying the  factual  findings
    summarised above, as updated by the evidence before me, albeit  with  a
    particular focus upon 276ADE(1)(iv).  Mr Nicholson made it  clear  that
    he did not wish to rely upon Article 3 of the ECHR.

Evidence

 9. Both representatives agreed there was no need  to  hear  oral  evidence
    given the comprehensive preserved  factual  findings  and  the  limited
    further  evidence.   The  appellant's  GP  provided  updated   evidence
    agreeing with the sponsor that the appellant's short-term memory is  so
    poor that she has been and continues to be  too  unwell  to  provide  a
    statement or evidence.


10. The sponsor provided a second updated witness statement  in  which  she
    asserted that the  appellant's  sister  had  health  problems  and  the
    appellant's brother's attention  was  taken  up  with  his  own  family
    including visits abroad.

11. I have taken into account the evidence contained in the  bundle  before
    the FTT and the supplementary bundle.

Submissions

12. Mr McVeety invited me to find that the appellant comes from a family of
    means, and they are capable of paying for her medical and  social  care
    needs in India.  He submitted that her emotional need for contact  with
    others could be met by family members in India.  They would be able  to
    visit her and the costs of her medical and social care treatment  could
    be met by the sponsor.  In these circumstances, the appellant  did  not
    have very significant obstacles integrating  into  India.   Mr  McVeety
    disagreed with the reasoning set out in an unreported decision  of  the
    Vice-President (PA/08750/2017), relied upon by Mr Nicholson and invited
    me to dismiss the appeal.

13. Mr Nicholson relied upon the reasons contained in the  Vice-President's
    unreported decision.  As an unreported decision Mr  Nicholson  required
    the Tribunal's consent for it to be relied upon.  I gave consent on the
    basis that Mr Nicholson was merely inviting me to follow the  reasoning
    contained in that decision  i.e.  that  appellant's  particular  mental
    state was such that she could not integrate into any  country  and  was
    therefore entitled to succeed under 276ADE(1)(iv).

14. Mr Nicholson acknowledged that some aspects of the evidence  needed  to
    be treated with caution but certain straightforward aspects  should  be
    accepted.  These include the undeniable  fact  that  the  appellant  is
    dependent upon her daughter in the UK in almost every sense, and  lives
    with her.  Her medical, social care and emotional  needs  are  all  met
    living at the sponsor's home.  By contrast the position with the family
    in India is less certain.  At best they will visit  her  from  time  to
    time for short periods.  Mr Nicholson  invited  me  to  find  that  the
    appellant had spent nearly a decade with her daughter in the UK and the
    interruption of this would cause her to face very significant obstacles
    in integrating in India, even if her medical needs are met.

15. At the end of submissions, I reserved my decision,  which  I  now  give
    with reasons.

Discussion

16. This is a case that involves the private life of an elderly  lady,  who
    is not a foreign national offender, but in relation to whom it  is  now
    accepted cannot meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  save
    that  it  has  been  submitted  on  her  behalf  that  she  meets   the
    requirements of  276ADE(1)(iv).   The  burden  is  therefore  upon  the
    appellant to establish that there would be "very significant obstacles"
    to her integration into India.


17. A similar provision (section 117C(4)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and  Asylum  Act  2002)  albeit  in  the  context  of  deportation  was
    considered in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, wherein Sales LJ  said
    this at [14]:

           "In my view, the concept of a foreign  criminal's  "integration"
           into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as
           set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph  399A,  is  a  broad
           one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or  to
           sustain life while living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
           appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject  to  some
           gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or  tribunal
           simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has  chosen
           to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a  broad  evaluative
           judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be  enough
           of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society
           in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity   to
           participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to  be
           accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in
           that society and to build up within a reasonable time a  variety
           of human relationships to give  substance  to  the  individual's
           private or family life."



18. I now turn to updating the preserved factual findings by  reference  to
    all the relevant evidence  available  to  me.   Having  considered  the
    evidence in the round and attached caution to  the  evidence  emanating
    from the sponsor, I make the following findings of fact.

       i) The appellant is almost entirely dependent upon the sponsor  (and
          to a lesser  extent  the  sponsor's  husband)  for  her  medical,
          psychiatric,  social  care  and  emotional  needs.    These   are
          extensive.  The appellant has very little interaction with anyone
          apart from the sponsor and her immediate family.  This  state  of
          affairs has become entrenched with  time  having  commenced  over
          nine years ago.


      ii) The appellant's medical, psychiatric and social care needs  could
          be met in a city in India.  This would be  affordable  given  the
          family's assets in India and the support from the sponsor.

     iii) Although the appellant has family members in India including  her
          brother and sister and other more distant  family  members,  they
          are not in a position to  look  after  her  in  their  respective
          homes.  It is difficult to see how they could meet her  emotional
          needs by merely visiting her given the nature and extent  of  the
          mental health concerns - see Dr Bamrah's letter dated 31  January
          2018 in which he  describes  the  appellant's  severe  depressive
          state and her semi-mute presentation.

      iv) The appellant's mental state is such that she has not  integrated
          into the UK and there is no prospect of this for the  foreseeable
          future.


19. I am satisfied that the nature, extent and duration of the  appellant's
    emotional dependence  upon  the  sponsor  is  deep-rooted  and  closely
    connected to her medical and social care needs.  Her mental  health  is
    such that it is difficult to  appreciate  how  the  sponsor  will  cope
    emotionally if  living  outside  of  the  home  of  the  sponsor.   The
    appellant's presentation  is  such  that  she  has  not  been  able  to
    integrate into the UK in any meaningful manner and she is  unlikely  to
    be able to integrate in India.  The reason for this is not because of a
    lack of medical treatment or facilities in either country.  Rather,  it
    is because even with the benefit of treatment, the  appellant's  severe
    depression means that she finds it impossible to participate  in  wider
    society.  There are significant obstacles to her integration in the  UK
    - these are largely related to  the  consequences  of  the  appellant's
    mental health.  The appellant is  likely  to  be  worse  off  in  India
    because that will inevitably involve separation from her daughter,  the
    settled status quo she has become accustomed to and the daily  constant
    emotional support she  receives  in  the  sponsor's  home.   There  are
    therefore likely to be very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration to India given the combination of her mental health and the
    absence of the emotional support  that  is  available  to  her  through
    living in the sponsor's home.


20. In reaching my findings I have not found it necessary to rely upon  the
    reasoning set out by the  Vice-President  in  the  unreported  decision
    referred to above.  That case involved a different factual  matrix  and
    turned on its particular and very exceptional circumstances.

Final points

21.  This  decision  turns  on   its   own   particular   and   exceptional
    circumstances. That the appellant has become dependent upon the sponsor
    for a very lengthy period is a consequence of both (i) overstaying  her
    visit visa, and (ii) the respondent delaying in removing  her  -  there
    were no barriers to removal from as long ago as June  2011  to  October
    2017.  The current situation has  represented  the  status  quo  for  a
    lengthy period and this has been a  factor  in  my  decision  that  the
    appellant would face very significant  obstacles  in  integrating  into
    India.


22. Mr McVeety made it clear that if I accepted that  the  appellant  meets
    the requirements of 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules,  then  that
    is the end of the matter and no separate public interest considerations
    needed to be factored in, such that he conceded that the  appeal  would
    have to be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Decision

23. I allow the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,  having  found  that  the
    appellant meets the requirements of 267ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 26 October
2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
