

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/15294/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 8 November 2018                   |On 14 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               MANDEEP LATHER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 2 June 2016, refusing the appellant
         leave to remain, based on family life.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Green, promulgated on 6 October 2017.

     iv) The appellant's proposed grounds of appeal to the UT, stated in the
         application for permission to appeal  filed  with  the  FtT  on  20
         October 2017.

      v) The refusal of permission by FtT Judge Pedro, dated 29 March 2018.

     vi) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed with the  UT  on  4  May
         2018 (substantially the same as the previous set of grounds).

    vii) The grant of permission by UT Judge Finch, dated 12 June 2018.

 2. Mr Ndubuisi submitted that the decision was  against  the  overwhelming
    weight  of  the  evidence  showing  cohabitation  and  the   level   of
    interaction between the spouses, e.g. in payment of her  benefits  into
    his bank account.  I did not uphold that submission.  Cohabitation  may
    go a long way towards proof of a genuine and  subsisting  relationship,
    but there can be one without the other, as the judge said at  paragraph
    17.

 3. The grounds identify one clear error on a matter of  fact.   The  judge
    noted at paragraph 16 "... the lack of any  other  supporting  evidence
    such as photographs of the couple together".  At pages 118 - 123 of the
    appellant's FtT bundle there were several  photographs  of  the  couple
    together.

 4. Although perhaps not one of his major reasons,  this  was  a  point  to
    which the judge attached some significance.  The question is whether it
    can safely be said that the decision must have been the  same,  without
    this error.

 5. The error infects the earlier reasoning to some extent, because some of
    the photographs show the couple in wider company,  and  the  judge  was
    suspicious of the paucity of wider  vouching  for  their  relationship.



 6. The focus of the case changed somewhat from the refusal decision to the
    judge's decision.  The respondent founded upon  neither  the  appellant
    nor the sponsor being reliable witnesses, due to  their  past  conduct.
    There was no explaining away the  appellant's  past  conduct,  and  the
    judge founded  heavily  upon  it.   However,  the  judge  accepted  the
    sponsor's explanation  for  the  one  matter  taken  against  her  (her
    misunderstanding whether she was still in her first marriage;  see  the
    end of paragraph 15).  He gave no reason for  finding  her  unreliable,
    and made no express finding, although of course the  outcome  indicates
    that she was unreliable, even although the respondent's reason  for  so
    holding had been discounted.

 7. There were also in the appellant's bundle at pages 351 - 360 copies  of
    the couple's interviews by the respondent about their relationship.  Mr
    Ndubuisi  said  that  no  discrepancies  had  been  suggested  by   the
    respondent, and consistency at this stage was a  significant  point  in
    favour of the appellant (paragraph 5 of the grounds).  He accepted that
    these were items contained within a large bundle, and that they had not
    particularly been drawn to attention of the judge.  He said that was at
    least partly because the focus of the  case  had  been  on  the  issues
    raised by the respondent, based on past behaviour.

 8. I would be slow to find error in not dealing with  items  taking  up  a
    small part of a 742-page bundle,  without  the  judge  having  had  his
    attention drawn to them.

 9. The other criticisms made of the decision, apart from the slip over the
    photographs, would not require it to be  set  aside.   However,  taking
    that slip and those further points together, the point is reached where
    the decision cannot safely stand as a resolution of the case.

10. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

11. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.  However, the nature of  this  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate under section 12 of the 2002 Act and Practice Statement 7.2
    to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

12. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Green.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            8 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




