
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15408/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2018                           |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                        EKUNDAYO OLUSEGUN OLATUNBOSUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson of Counsel instructed by Paul John &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  21  June  1962.   The
    appellant applied for leave to remain under Appendix FM on the basis of
    his family life with his  partner  on  19  July  2016.   The  appellant
    claimed to have entered the UK in March 2007 with entry clearance as  a
    visitor.  However,  the  Secretary  of  State  noted  in  refusing  the
    application on 14 November  2017  that  there  was  no  record  of  the
    appellant having gained valid entry clearance to  the  UK  and  records
    show that he was refused entry clearance as a  visitor  on  5  November
    2004.  The Secretary of State concluded that the appellant did not meet
    the requirements of the Rules.  It was not  accepted  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles which would be faced by the appellant  or  his
    partner in continuing family life together outside the UK  in  Nigeria.
    It was acknowledged that the appellant's partner was a British  citizen
    following naturalisation in 2006 and that she was employed in the UK as
    a nurse.  The appellant's partner was born in  Nigeria  and  spent  her
    formative years  residing  there.   The  couple  had  no  children  and
    accordingly paragraph EX.1.(a) did not apply.  The  appellant  did  not
    meet the residential requirements of the Rules and there  would  be  no
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria if  required
    to leave.  There were no exceptional circumstances.

2.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 7 August 2018.  The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and
    his partner.  The appellant said he  had  married  his  partner  on  18
    August 2016 having met her in 2012.  When he had arrived in the  UK  he
    had not used his own passport and he realised  that  he  did  not  have
    legal status to remain in the country.  He claimed he  was  advised  by
    his lawyer that it was advisable for him to have  returned  to  Nigeria
    and to make a fresh application to come back  into  the  country.   The
    appellant's wife confirmed that the relationship between  her  and  her
    husband was genuine and subsisting and gave evidence about  her  health
    problems and the difficulties she would face if she were to go back  to
    Nigeria.  She had visited Nigeria in 2018 and 2017.  In submissions the
    Presenting Officer pointed out there was no evidence  to  suggest  that
    the appellant's wife had no ties in Nigeria  as  she  had  spent  35/36
    years of her life there.  The appellant had spent 44 years of his  life
    in Nigeria.  The case could be compared with  that  of  Agyarko  [2017]
    UKSC 11 where the facts were similar but the appeal had been dismissed.
     It was in the public interest under Section 117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 for the appellant to be removed because
    he had a precarious immigration status  and  he  had  remained  in  the
    country illegally.

3.   For the appellant it  was  submitted  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to prevent the appellant and his wife  returning  to  Nigeria
    and if not, then there were exceptional circumstances outside the Rules
    given the circumstances and the  age  of  the  appellant's  wife.   The
    financial  issues  had  been  met  alongside   the   English   language
    requirements and if the appeal was not successful under  the  Rules  it
    should be granted outside the Rules on  proportionality  grounds.   The
    judge made the following findings in considering the  appellant's  case
    under the Rules:

         "23. I considered firstly whether the appellant could  satisfy  the
             requirements of the Rules.  The respondent's are of  the  view
             that the appellant could not  satisfy  Paragraph  EX1  of  the
             Rules because there are no insurmountable obstacles that would
             be present if the appellant and his wife  were  to  return  to
             Nigeria.  The appellant has spent 44  years  of  his  life  in
             Nigeria and his 35 years they were  of  course  both  born  in
             Nigeria and are accustomed to the culture and the way of life.
              The question is whether they would both  be  able  to  adjust
             bearing in mind that they have both been out  of  the  country
             for a considerable period of time the appellant 11  years  and
             his wife 27 years.


         24.  The appellant's wife has worked  for  the  NHS  and  is  on  a
             pension and she states that she would not obtain a significant
             pension because her contributions are not significant  I  have
             no evidence before me on  this  point  but  she  is  still  of
             working age at 63.   The  appellant  wife  has  been  recently
             visited Nigeria in the last year and she is familiar with  the
             present conditions in the country.  I am of the view that  she
             would have a find it difficult to adjust but not to the extent
             that she would be faced with  insurmountable  obstacles.   She
             would be able to adjust to the culture having spent so much of
             her  life  in  her  own  country  the  difficulty  of  finding
             employment may be overcome but I have no evidence before me to
             suggest that she could not obtain employment in Nigeria.   The
             appellant in my view would also  be  able  to  adjust  he  has
             always known that his stay in this country was not lawful  and
             hence the possibility that he may have to return.


         25.  I then considered whether  the  appellant  could  satisfy  the
             provisions contained in Paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules.   The
             appellant on his own evidence has been in this country for  11
             years at the time of the  decision  and  he  cannot  therefore
             satisfy the Rules because he has not resided in  this  country
             continuously for  a  minimum  period  of  20  years.   I  also
             considered that he would not face very  significant  obstacles
             if he were to return because he is familiar with  the  culture
             and the language and he has resided in Nigeria  for  a  period
             exceeding 40 years".


    The judge then  considered  matters  outside  the  Rules  applying  the
    guidance in Razgar v Secretary of State  [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  judge
    concluded that Article 8 was engaged.   The  judge  took  into  account
    public interest issues under Section 117B of the 2002 Act and concluded
    his determination as follows:


         "29. In this instance the financial and English requirements is not
             in issue between the parties.  The appellant has entered  into
             a relationship with a qualifying person  or  to  private  life
             when a person has been in the UK illegally and  little  weight
             should be given to time  acquired  and  to  the  relationship.
             This  provision  applies  to  the  appellant  because  he  has
             admitted to the appellant and I have  therefore  given  little
             weight to the fact that he has been  in  this  country  for  a
             period exceeding 11 years and he has formed a private life  in
             this country with his friends and family.   I  have  therefore
             attached little weight to the relationships he has formed with
             his church community.  The appellant also  in  my  view  could
             form similar links with a church in Nigeria.


         30.  The appellant also entered into the relationship with his wife
             whilst his immigration status was  precarious  it  would  have
             been apparent to both of them that the appellant may  have  to
             leave this country if he was encountered by the authorities or
             if he made an application and he was unsuccessful.  It  is  in
             the public interest  that  individuals  who  arrived  in  this
             country illegally and remain here outside of the Rules  should
             be removed.  The appellant knowingly breached the Rules.


         31.  I then considered whether the decision of  the  respondent  is
             proportionate.  The appellant has been in this country for  11
             years having entered as a visitor he claims  in  2007  at  the
             request of his brother.  He admits that he has  remained  here
             unlawfully.   It  is  not  disputed  that  he  has   spent   a
             significant part of his life in  Nigeria.   The  appellant  is
             therefore a person who culturally would be able to  adjust  to
             life in Nigeria.


         32.  The appellant's wife is a British citizen and she is currently
             employed with the NHS and is aged 63.  Her main  concerns  are
             that she has her family and friends in  this  country  and  no
             relatives in Nigeria she like the appellant claims  that  they
             built their lives in this country and at their age it would be
             difficult for them to make a fresh start in Nigeria.  It would
             be difficult for her to obtain employment or  start  again  in
             Nigeria.  It is also argued that she is employed  by  the  NHS
             and that they are short of staff and that it would be  in  the
             public interest for her to remain in  this  country.   She  is
             also concerned about not  being  able  to  build  her  pension
             further.  I am of the view that the  appellant  and  his  wife
             were both aware of the circumstances when they  entered  their
             relationship.  They are both individuals who could  adjust  to
             life in Nigeria and indeed the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
             wife is that she visits Nigeria on a regular basis and she  is
             aware of the culture and the present  conditions  of  life  in
             that country it is a matter for her whether she wishes to join
             her husband in Nigeria.  The appellant and  his  wife  do  not
             have any children and the appellant's wife  evidence  is  that
             she does not have any relatives in Nigeria her  recent  visits
             do suggest that she may have friends if not family.   She  has
             three sisters all of whom she claims are in America  and  both
             her parents are dead.  I have  taken  into  consideration  the
             fact  that  the  respondent  does  not  take  issue  with  the
             genuineness of the relationship of the appellant and his  wife
             but I am of the view  that  after  consideration  of  all  the
             factors   relevant   to   this   appeal   that   it   is   not
             disproportionate for the appellant to  be  removed  from  this
             country because the  appellant's  wife  visits  Nigeria  on  a
             regular basis and she has retained her links in  Nigeria  this
             in combination with the length of time  that  she  resided  in
             Nigeria prior to arriving in this country I  am  of  the  view
             that she would be able to adapt if she decided to return  with
             her husband.


         33.  I have referred myself to the decision of  ZT  2018  EWCA  Civ
             1109 and I do not find  that  the  refusal  of  leave  to  the
             appellant would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  he
             would be separated from his wife but she  has  the  option  of
             visiting him or joining him there  permanently.   I  note  the
             skeleton and oral arguments of the appellant's  representative
             regarding the fact that the appellant and his  wife  at  their
             age would find it difficult to adjust to life in  Nigeria  but
             the appellant's immigration status was  precarious  when  they
             started the relationship and he could have  taken  steps  much
             earlier to legalise his position.  The appellant and his  wife
             do  not  have  children  the  appellant  claims  that  he  has
             relatives in this country but none of them gave oral  evidence
             apart from the letters of support in pages 162-4".

4.   The judge concluded that the respondent's  decision  was  proportionate
    in all the circumstances and dismissed the appeal.

5.   There was an application for permission to appeal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal granted permission on 21 September 2018 as the judge  had  not
    considered an issue raised by the representative who  had  referred  to
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

6.   A response was filed on 5 November  2018  and  it  was  submitted  that
    reference to Chikwamba was not "necessarily relevant or material".  The
    Rules and Appendix FM  showed  there  needed  to  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the couple conducting their family life outside the United
    Kingdom.  The judge had fully considered the links both  the  appellant
    and his wife had to Nigeria and it was open to the judge to  find  that
    they had maintained close links.

7.   Counsel at the hearing before me relied on his  skeleton  argument  and
    referred to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 where the court had  made  it  clear
    that cases could succeed outside the Rules even though  there  were  no
    obstacles to relocation.  Counsel referred to  paragraph  57  where  he
    emphasised the last sentence  (part  of  which  was  missing  from  the
    skeleton argument inadvertently):

         "The critical issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to
         the strength of the public interest in the removal of the person in
         the case before it, the Article 8 claim is sufficiently  strong  to
         outweigh it.  In general, in cases concerned with precarious family
         life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the
         public interest in immigration control".


    Counsel also referred to paragraph 51 in Agyarko where  he  highlighted
    the following words:


         "If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in  the  UK
         unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at
         least if an application were made from outside the UK,  then  there
         might be no public interest in his or her removal".


    The court notes that the  point  is  illustrated  by  the  decision  in
    Chikwamba.  Having referred to what was said in Hesham Ali [2016]  UKSC
    60 Counsel referred to  paragraph  44  of  Chikwamba,  again  helpfully
    highlighting the following words:


         "Rather it seems to me that only comparatively rarely, certainly in
         family cases involving children, should  an  Article  8  appeal  be
         dismissed on the basis that it  would  be  proportionate  and  more
         appropriate for the appellant to apply for leave from abroad".


8.   Counsel pointed out in the skeleton  argument  that  both  the  English
    language requirement and the financial requirement  were  satisfied  in
    the case and there were no concerns about suitability  and  accordingly
    the appeal should have been allowed.  At the very least, the failure to
    consider the arguments was a material error of law.

9.   At the hearing before me Counsel referred to the history of the  matter
    where there had been judicial review  proceedings  and  permission  had
    been granted  on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    considered Chikwamba  arguments.   The  matter  had  been  reconsidered
    resulting in the November 2017 decision.

10.  It was submitted that the  First-tier  Judge  had  not  considered  the
    issues although they had been raised before him.  The judge  had  found
    there were no insurmountable obstacles which was  accepted.   Reference
    was made to paragraph 51 of Agyarko.  It was conceded that this was not
    a case involving children.   There  were  no  suitability  reasons  for
    refusing the application.  It was submitted  the  level  of  disruption
    facing the appellant's wife who worked for the NHS should  be  factored
    into account.

11.  Ms Pal submitted that the First-tier Judge had taken into  account  the
    relevant factors.  He had noted that the couple had  knowingly  entered
    into the relationship while the  appellant  was  not  lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant's status was precarious and  there  were
    public interest issues.   The  judge  had  considered  the  appellant's
    wife's citizenship and circumstances in paragraph 32 of  the  decision.
    He was entitled to have regard to the public interest in the  balancing
    exercise and to find that  there  would  be  no  breach  of  Article  8
    involved in requiring the appellant to return to Nigeria.  This was not
    a case in which children were involved.  It was claimed that there were
    relatives in the country but none had given oral evidence.

12.      In reply, Counsel argued  that  the  weight  given  to  the  public
    interest should be reduced  given  what  was  said  in  Hesham  Ali  at
    paragraph 34.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I can of course  only
    interfere with the judge's decision if it was flawed  by  an  error  of
    law.

14.  Counsel referred to paragraph 57 of Agyarko and the  last  sentence  of
    that paragraph is not without relevance in this case - "In general,  in
    cases  concerned  with  precarious  family  life,  a  very  strong   or
    compelling claim  is  required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control".  Furthermore, in paragraph  51  which  refers  to
    Chikwamba the bar is set quite high.  There it is said -  "If,  on  the
    other hand, an applicant - even if residing in the UK unlawfully -  was
    otherwise certain to  be  granted  leave  to  enter,  at  least  if  an
    application were made from outside the  UK,  then  there  might  be  no
    public interest in his or her removal" (emphasis added).  Although  the
    judge made no express reference to Chikwamba he was referred to Agyarko
    and referred himself in paragraph 33 to TZ (Pakistan)  where  the  case
    law including the Chikwamba point  is  addressed  particularly  in  the
    context of precarious status.  As the judge points out the  appellant's
    immigration status was precarious when the relationship was started and
    "he could have taken steps much earlier to legalise his position".   He
    also noted that the appellant and his wife do not have children  -  all
    this is indicative of  the  fact  that  the  judge  was  alive  to  the
    Chikwamba issue.

15.  I am not satisfied that  the  failure  to  make  express  reference  to
    Chikwamba was a material error of law in the circumstances of this case
    or that the judge would or might have come to a different  decision  in
    the light of the principles in Chikwamba.

16.  For the reasons I have given this appeal is dismissed and the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge stands.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 26 November 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
