
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/15698/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 27 October 2020                         |On 17 November 2020             |


                                   Before

                       MR CMG OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                        MISS JACQUELYN KANG MARTINEZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora, instructed by Sabz Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Sangha promulgated on 22 August 2019  dismissing  her  appeal  made  on
    human rights grounds ("the Decision").

2.   The Appellant  is  a  British  National  (Overseas)  Citizen  ("BN(O)")
    formerly resident in Hong Kong.  She came to the UK in 2007  then  aged
    sixteen years with her brother  and  her  parents.   Her  father  is  a
    Filipino national and her mother is a British citizen.   The  Appellant
    initially had leave to enter as the dependent of her mother valid until
    25 September 2009.  She made an in-time application for  further  leave
    on 24 September 2009 but that was refused.  A further  application  was
    also subsequently refused.  The Appellant  has  overstayed  since  that
    time.  She made another application   on 25 April 2019 which led to the
    Respondent's decision dated 6 August 2019 which is under  challenge  in
    this appeal.

3.   At the heart of the Appellant's application to remain  in  the  UK  and
    her case on appeal is her assertion that she is no longer  entitled  to
    permanent residency in Hong Kong and would not be permitted  to  return
    there.  She says that there would be very significant obstacles to  her
    integration in Hong Kong and that she is entitled to  succeed  applying
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules")  or
    alternatively outside the Rules.  The Judge rejected that case.  It was
    also said on the Appellant's behalf that she has no family left in Hong
    Kong but her case in that regard was rejected by Judge Sangha who found
    on the evidence that the Appellant still has both sets of  grandparents
    living in Hong Kong  ([16]  of  the  Decision).   The  Appellant's  own
    evidence was that she remains in  contact  with  her  grandparents  and
    would be able to live with them if returned.

4.   The Appellant challenges the Decision on two grounds.  First, she  says
    that the Judge ought to have adjourned the hearing before him to permit
    her "to obtain expert legal opinion from the authorities in  Hong  Kong
    and the Philippines in relation to [her] current and [sic]  ability  to
    obtain nationality and immigration status in those countries"  ([4]  of
    the grounds).  She says that, as a result of  the  Judge's  refusal  to
    adjourn, she has been denied a fair hearing.  Second, she says that the
    Judge "has erred by failing to make any  proper  findings  or  properly
    considering paragraph 177B [sic] of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002" ([10] of the grounds).  It  is  said  that  the  Judge
    failed to appreciate the reasons why the Appellant  overstayed,  failed
    to give adequate weight to the Appellant's private life and family ties
    in the UK and wrongly found  that  the  Appellant  is  not  financially
    independent.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Feeney
    on 5 May 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The Judge considered the appellant's  adjournment  request
             but concluded that because the appellant had had ample time to
             instruct an expert the request would be  refused.   The  judge
             did not appear to consider the principles set out  in  Nwaigwe
             and in particular whether the  appellant  could  have  a  fair
             hearing without the adjournment.  It may be that the answer to
             this question is that the appellant could still  have  a  fair
             hearing, but the question was not  asked  the  judge  arguably
             erred in not considering the issue.

         3.   I am less persuaded by the  appellant's  submission  that  the
             judge failed to take into account the  section  117B  factors.
             The Judge clearly did, and the factors cited by the  appellant
             such  as  ability  to  speak  English   and   be   financially
             independent are neutral factors in any event.

         4.   Notwithstanding this I grant permission on all grounds."

6.   The hearing before us was conducted remotely  via  Skype  for  Business
    with  the  agreement  of  both  parties.   There  were   no   technical
    difficulties.  We had before us the  Appellant's  bundle  of  documents
    before the First-tier Tribunal to which we refer  as  [AB/xx]  and  the
    supplementary bundle also for that hearing to which we do not  need  to
    refer.  There was no further evidence produced by the Appellant nor any
    application  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce any.

7.   The issue before us was whether the Decision contains an error of  law.
     Having heard Mr Toora's submission, we concluded that it did  not  and
    indicated that we would provide our  reasons  for  that  conclusion  in
    writing which we now turn to do.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

First Ground

8.   This ground was the main focus  of  Mr  Toora's  oral  submissions  and
    indeed is the main plank of the written grounds.

9.   The basis of the adjournment request is set out at [4] of the  Decision
    as follows:

         "At the start  of  the  proceedings  Mr  Toora  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant applied  for  an  adjournment.   He  indicated  that  the
         Appellant had lived  in  Hong  Kong  but  had  lost  her  right  of
         residence there and referred me to page 69 of the Appellant's  main
         bundle.  He submitted that it  was  necessary  to  obtain  a  legal
         opinion as to whether in law the Appellant could go back to live in
         Hong Kong."

10.  The adjournment request was opposed by the Respondent.    Having  noted
    that, the Judge refused the adjournment in the following terms:

         "[4] ... I refused Mr Toora's adjournment request.  I  informed  Mr
         Toora that the Appellant had had  ample  time  to  obtain  a  legal
         opinion bearing in mind that the Home  Office  refusal  letter  was
         dated 6 September 2019 and therefore the Appellant had  had  enough
         time to take legal advice and the Appellant's solicitors were aware
         of the issue since he had referred me to the extract at page 69  of
         his main bundle."

11.  In order to consider the fairness of the hearing thereafter  (which  we
    accept is the issue for us), it is necessary to set the  reasons  which
    lay behind the adjournment request in their factual context.

12.  As is evident from what is said above about  the  adjournment  request,
    the reason why it was said that an adjournment  was  necessary  was  in
    order to obtain a legal opinion concerning  the  Appellant's  right  to
    return to and live in Hong Kong.  That issue was first  raised  in  the
    covering  letter  to  the  Home  Office  written  by  the   Appellant's
    solicitors on 29 April 2019 as follows ([AB/40]:

         "Please note that the applicant is British national (overseas), she
         is not Hong Kong Special Administrative  Region  as  per  the  link
         below she needs to be a Chinese citizen and she is not  Chinese  or
         of Chinese descent.  The Hong Kong  Special  Administrative  Region
         Passport is a passport issued only to the  permanent  residents  of
         Hong Kong who also hold Chinese citizenship.  Please refer  to  the
         following links for more detail.

         Hong Kong Special Administrative Region passport - Wikipedia

         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hong_Kong_Special_Administrative_Regio
         n_passport

         In addition, please also note that the applicant does  not  have  a
         residence for any country.  She was born in Hong Kong; she has lost
         her residence in Hong Kong as foreign national born  in  Hong  Kong
         cannot be out of the country for more than 3 years."

         [emphasis as per original document]

13.  The Respondent dealt with  this  aspect  of  the  Appellant's  case  as
    follows ([AB/4-5]):

         "You have stated that as you are a British National (Overseas)  and
         not a Hong Kong National you have lost your residence in Hong  Kong
         as you have been outside of Hong Kong for over three years.

         We have reached this decision because you claim that  you  wish  to
         remain in the UK to work; however, you can return to Hong Kong  and
         legally  gain  employment  there.   The  qualifications  and   work
         experience you have gained in the UK will  assist  you  in  finding
         employment.

         Although you state that you are not a Citizen of Hong  Kong,  there
         is no evidence to show that you would be unable to reside  in  Hong
         Kong, despite your British National (Overseas) status."

14.  As the Judge noted at [4]  of  the  Decision,  the  need  for  a  legal
    opinion to establish the Appellant's right to reside in Hong  Kong  was
    said by the Appellant to stem from a document which is at [AB/69].   We
    therefore turn to see what that document is.  It is  a  document  taken
    from the internet, apparently from the Hong  Kong  Government  website.
    Its date is not apparent from the document.   It  is  headed  "Loss  of
    Hong Kong Permanent Resident Status".  The table which appears  in  the
    document is prefaced by the following introduction:

         "A permanent resident  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative
         Region (HKSAR) who is not of  Chinese  nationality  will  lose  the
         status of a permanent resident under the following circumstances"

         [our emphasis]

    The document then contains a table which we replicate below:

|   |Category of persons who      |Circumstances under which the |
|   |acquired permanent resident  |person will lose the status of|
|   |status by virtue of being    |a permanent resident          |
|(1)|A person not of Chinese      |If a person has been absent   |
|   |nationality who has entered  |from                          |
|   |Hong Kong with a valid travel|Hong Kong for a continuous    |
|   |document, has ordinarily     |period of not less than 36    |
|   |resided in Hong Kong for a   |months since he/she ceased to |
|   |continuous period of not less|have ordinarily resided in    |
|   |than 7 years and has taken   |Hong Kong.                    |
|   |Hong Kong as his/her place of|                              |
|   |permanent residence before or|                              |
|   |after the establishment of   |                              |
|   |the HKSAR.                   |                              |
|(2)|A person under 21 years of   |If a person has been absent   |
|   |age born in Hong Kong to a   |from                          |
|   |parent who is a permanent    |Hong Kong for a continuous    |
|   |resident of the HKSAR in     |period of not less than 36    |
|   |category (1) above before or |months since he/she ceased to |
|   |after the establishment of   |have ordinarily resided in    |
|   |the HKSAR if at the time of  |Hong Kong; or                 |
|   |his/her birth or at any later|On attaining the age of 21    |
|   |time before he/she attains 21|years,                        |
|   |years of age, one parent has |a person will cease to be a   |
|   |the right of abode in Hong   |permanent resident of the     |
|   |Kong.                        |HKSAR.  He/she will then have |
|   |                             |to qualify on his/her own     |
|   |                             |merits in accordance with the |
|   |                             |requirements stipulated in    |
|   |                             |category (1) above.  If a     |
|   |                             |person meets all of the       |
|   |                             |requirement, he/she can apply |
|   |                             |for permanent resident status.|


15.  We make a number of preliminary observations about  that  document,  as
    canvassed with Mr Toora during his submissions.  First, as Mr Toora was
    constrained to accept, the document is merely an extract and is not set
    in context.  Second, as Mr Toora also accepted, the document deals only
    with permanent residence and the loss of that status.  It says  nothing
    about a person's right to enter Hong Kong or live there.  In discussion
    with Mr Toora we drew the analogy with the UK immigration  system.   It
    could not be said that an individual coming to the UK, for example,  to
    work or study would need indefinite leave to remain in order to  do  so
    or would be entitled to insist on that status on arrival.   He  or  she
    would have to spend a period legally in the UK in order to qualify.  We
    recognise of course that the position may be different  in  Hong  Kong.
    That is not for us to determine.  The point is  that  the  evidence  on
    which the Appellant relies as showing that she would  not  be  able  to
    enter Hong Kong and  live  and  work  there  does  not  even  begin  to
    establish that case.  As we also pointed out to Mr Toora, on  the  face
    of the document itself, it suggests at  least  that  a  person  in  the
    position of this Appellant  would  need  to  re-establish  a  right  to
    permanent residence not because she has  been  outside  Hong  Kong  for
    three years but because she has now  turned  21  years.   However,  the
    document also suggests that she may be able to qualify for  that  right
    after a continuous period of time spent in Hong Kong  under  the  first
    category.

16.  The other  document  to  which  Mr  Toora  made  reference  during  his
    submissions is the Appellant's own statement where,  at  [3]  she  says
    this:

         "I confirm I was born in Hong Kong and am a  holder  of  a  British
         National (Overseas) passport.  I do not hold a  Hong  Kong  Special
         Administrative  Region  Passport  and  nor  do  I  hold   permanent
         residence rights in Hong Kong.  I have now resided outside of  Hong
         Kong for more than 12  years  and  have  therefore  lost  residency
         rights as a result of  being  out  of  the  country  for  a  period
         exceeding 3 years."

    As Mr Toora accepted, the Appellant is  not  an  expert  in  Hong  Kong
    immigration and nationality laws.  It appears from what is  there  said
    that the Appellant is drawing upon what is  said  in  the  document  at
    [AB/69] which we have set out above.  We also make the observation that
    the Appellant's own case appears to  proceed  on  a  further  confusion
    between nationality and a right to enter and  reside.   Simply  because
    the Appellant is not entitled to be issued a passport showing her to be
    a citizen of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region does not  mean
    that she is not entitled to enter the territory.  Indeed,  we  note  in
    passing that, when the Appellant's BN(O) passport was lost by the  Home
    Office, in 2009, her father and brother returned to Hong Kong in  order
    to obtain a replacement from the British consulate there.

17.  Finally, before returning to the refusal of  the  adjournment  request,
    we  set  out  how  Judge  Sangha  resolved  the  issue  concerning  the
    Appellant's entitlement to return to Hong Kong.   Having  set  out  the
    content of the document at [AB/69] at [15] of the Decision,  the  Judge
    made the following findings:

         "16. The evidence before me is that the Appellant's mother was born
         in Hong Kong but her father  was  born  in  the  Philippines.   The
         Appellant herself was  born  in  Hong  Kong.   The  Appellant  gave
         evidence before me to indicate that both sets of  her  grandparents
         are also living in Hong Kong.   She  indicated  that  her  maternal
         grandfather was a British citizen and that her maternal grandmother
         was an Indian citizen and that her paternal grandparents were  both
         Filipino nationals but both sets of grandparents are and have  been
         living in Hong Kong since before the Appellant was born and  living
         there continuously.  The Appellant also indicated, particularly  in
         answers to questions from me, that she would be able to  live  with
         her grandparents in Hong Kong if she had to return there  and  that
         she has contact with her grandparents by telephone and WhatsApp.

         17.  Mr Toora on behalf of the Appellant submits that  there  would
         be very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant  integrating  into
         Hong Kong if she were to return there.  His position is  that  when
         the Appellant arrived here she was a  permanent  resident  of  Hong
         Kong but in view of the indication in the extract at page 69 of the
         Appellant's main bundle she had now  lost  her  permanent  resident
         status in Hong Kong because she had been absent  from  the  country
         for more than 36  months  and  as  a  British  National  (Overseas)
         citizen nor did she have an automatic right of abode in the UK.  Mr
         Toora indicated that the Appellant was now over the age of  21  and
         would therefore have to apply for permanent resident status in Hong
         Kong on her own merits and that it may not be granted and that that
         was the hurdle and  submitted  that  that  was  an  'insurmountable
         obstacle'.

         18.  However, in my assessment of the evidence, both  sets  of  the
         Appellant's grandparents have been continuously  resident  in  Hong
         Kong since the Appellant was born.  The Appellant's mother was born
         in Hong Kong.  The Appellant herself was born in Hong Kong.  In  my
         assessment no evidence has been put before  me  to  show  that  the
         Appellant would not be able to travel back to  Hong  Kong  for  any
         reason.  If the Appellant were to return  to  Hong  Kong  with  her
         British National (Overseas) passport there is no evidence before me
         that she would not be allowed entry into Hong Kong bearing in  mind
         that she previously  lived  there  and  indeed  both  sets  of  her
         grandparents continue to live there.  In view of the fact that  she
         is now over the age of 21, what the extract at page  69  states  is
         that she would have to qualify on her own merits in accordance with
         the requirements would be able  to  apply  for  permanent  resident
         status.  The extract does not say that the Appellant would  not  be
         able to return to Hong Kong and stay  there.   The  extract  simply
         sets out the basis on which the Appellant would on her  own  merits
         apply  for  permanent  resident  status.  In  the  light  of  those
         circumstances I find that the Appellant has not  shown  that  there
         would be very significant obstacles to her  integration  into  Hong
         Kong."

18.  Much of what is said  in  that  passage  is  consistent  with  our  own
    observations as above.  Mr Toora confirmed that he was unable to  argue
    that the Judge's findings at [18] contain any legal error.  He  did  at
    one point appear to suggest that the issue for the  Judge  was  whether
    the Appellant could "freely" return to Hong  Kong  but,  as  the  Judge
    noted, that was not the issue.  The issue  was  whether  there  was  an
    impediment  to  return  which  would  constitute  a  "very  significant
    obstacle" to the Appellant's integration in that country.

19.  The Appellant's grounds do not challenge the Judge's findings  on  this
    issue save as to lack of reasoning based on what is said to  have  been
    the evidence at [AB/69].  The Appellant's  principal  argument  is  not
    that the Judge has reached a finding which is not open to him but  that
    the Judge should have permitted an adjournment in order  to  allow  the
    Appellant to clarify the legal position in  Hong  Kong.   We  therefore
    return to that issue.

20.  The Appellant's grounds take issue with  the  Judge's  refusal  of  the
    adjournment request on two bases.  First, it is  said  that  the  Judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for the refusal.  Second,  it  is  said
    that the Judge deprived the Appellant of a fair hearing because it  was
    not possible to have one without the legal opinion which she sought  to
    obtain.  In consequence, the Appellant says, the Judge has not acted in
    the interests of justice.

21.  We can deal with the first  of  those  challenges  very  shortly.   The
    Judge gave as his reason for refusing the request  that  the  Appellant
    had ample time to obtain the evidence she sought now to adduce.  As  we
    have already noted, the position on return was an issue which  her  own
    solicitors had raised in April 2019.  They were  therefore  aware  that
    they needed to establish the assertion made.  As a firm of  solicitors,
    one would expect that they would be well aware that, in order to  prove
    a point of foreign law, the Tribunal  would  require  evidence  from  a
    suitable expert.  There is no explanation for their failure  to  gather
    such evidence.  Although we accept that the Appellant  is  not  legally
    qualified, she is now aware that her representatives did not garner the
    evidence which they should have in order to establish her case on  this
    point.  Mr Toora indicated in his submissions that he  had  advised  of
    that need on the morning of the hearing and that  is,  of  course,  the
    basis on which the adjournment  request  was  put  forward.   Mr  Toora
    confirmed that the Appellant had made no complaint about her solicitors
    and indeed she continues to instruct them.

22.  Turning then to the  second  basis  of  challenge  to  the  refusal  to
    adjourn, the Appellant relies on "Presidential Guidance Note  No  1  of
    2014: The Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014" ("the  Guidance  Note")  and  the  guidance
    given in Nwaigwe (adjournment; fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 ("Nwaigwe").

23.  The relevant part of the Guidance Note reads as follows:

         "Adjournments

         6.   Rule 4(3) gives the power to adjourn or  postpone  a  hearing.
         This power must be exercised  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
         objective and having regard to any other  relevant  considerations.
         The  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment;
         fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) emphasises the importance of  the
         test of fairness and the  question  of  whether  a  party  will  be
         deprived of a fair hearing if an adjournment is refused.

         7.   Each application to adjourn must  be  considered  on  its  own
         merits,  examining  all  the  factors  brought  to  the  Tribunal's
         attention. When reaching a decision on  such  an  application,  the
         Tribunal may also have regard to information already held  and  its
         own special expertise (see rule 2(2)(d)).

         8.   Factors weighing in favour of adjourning an appeal, even at  a
         late stage in proceedings, include.

             (a)  Sudden illness or other compelling  reason  preventing  a
             party or a witness attending a hearing. Normally such a reason
             should be supported by medical  or  other  relevant  evidence,
             unless  there  has  been  insufficient  time  to  obtain  such
             evidence. However, where there is no likelihood that the party
             will be able to attend a hearing within a reasonable period, a
             hearing may proceed in absence where  the  tribunal  considers
             that this is in the interests of justice in terms of rule 28.

             (b)  Late changes to the grounds of appeal or the reasons  for
             refusal which change the nature of  the  case.  The  terms  of
             rules 19(7), 23(2)(b) and 24(2) should be taken into  account,
             as appropriate, when considering changes  to  the  grounds  or
             reasons.

             (c)  Where further time  is  needed  because  of  a  delay  in
             obtaining evidence which is outside the party's  control,  for
             example, where an expert witness fails  to  provide  a  report
             within the period expected.

         9.   The following factors, where relevant, may weigh  against  the
         granting of an adjournment.

             (a)  The application to adjourn is not made  at  the  earliest
             opportunity.

             (b)  The application is speculative, such as, for  example,  a
             request for time for lodging further evidence where  there  is
             no reasonable basis to presume that such  evidence  exists  or
             could be produced within a reasonable period.

             (c)  The application does  not  show  that  anything  material
             would  be  achieved  by  the  delay,  for  example,  where  an
             appellant wants more time to instruct a  legal  representative
             but there is no evidence that funds or legal aid is available.



             (d)  The application does  not  explain  how  the  reason  for
             seeking an adjournment is material to the case,  for  example,
             where there is a desire to  seek  further  evidence  but  this
             evidence does not appear to be material to the  issues  to  be
             decided.

             (e)  The application seeks more time  to  prepare  the  appeal
             when  adequate  time  has  already   been   given.   In   such
             circumstances, the Tribunal  may  take  into  consideration  a
             failure to comply  with  directions.  However,  a  failure  to
             comply with directions will not be  sufficient  of  itself  to
             refuse an adjournment."

24.  The guidance given in the headnote and for which  Nwaigwe  is  reported
    reads as follows:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.   Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that
         of fairness:   was  there  any  deprivation   of   the   affected
         party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

25.  We accept of course the proposition that  hearings  must  be  conducted
    fairly and that the essential question is whether  the  affected  party
    was deprived of a right to a fair hearing.  We draw  attention  however
    to the other guiding principle set out in the Guidance Note -  that  of
    the overriding objective which includes the obligation to  avoid  delay
    in the administration of justice, so far as compatible with the  proper
    consideration of the issues.  The exercise of the power to adjourn  has
    to be done fairly but also consistently with the interests of  justice.
    In other words, simply because a party asserts that  he  or  she  would
    like the opportunity to adduce further evidence the need for which  was
    not previously appreciated does not  give  rise  to  an  obligation  to
    adjourn.  So much is clear from  the  examples  given  at  [9]  of  the
    Guidance Note.

26.  We also accept that it would have been preferable if Judge  Sangha  had
    provided reasons why the hearing should not be adjourned  in  terms  of
    the fairness to the Appellant who sought that adjournment.  However, as
    is made clear by the guidance in Nwaigwe,  our  job  when  assessing  a
    challenge to the Judge's refusal to adjourn is  to  ask  ourselves  the
    question whether the affected party has been deprived of the right to a
    fair  hearing  and  not  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  acted
    reasonably when refusing the adjournment.

27.  Returning to the  basis  on  which  the  adjournment  was  sought,  the
    Appellant's position was that she could not prove her case as to return
    to Hong Kong without a legal opinion demonstrating that she was correct
    in her assertion that the authorities there would  not  permit  her  to
    return to live.  However, the Appellant was relying on a  misconception
    as to the position.  As we have already pointed  out,  the  extract  on
    which she relied and which she sought to  bolster  by  expert  evidence
    does not show what she seems to think it does.  It  merely  shows  that
    the Appellant has probably lost  her  permanent  resident  status.   As
    Judge Sangha pointed out at [18] of the Decision there  was  simply  no
    evidence that the Appellant would not be allowed to return to live  and
    work in Hong Kong.

28.  The only other evidence in support of the Appellant's  wish  to  obtain
    expert evidence was her own witness statement.  However, the  Appellant
    is not a lawyer.  Her own lawyers are clearly not expert in  Hong  Kong
    immigration law.  At best, therefore the Appellant was  speculating  on
    the possibility that there might be some law in Hong Kong  which  would
    prevent her, as a person born and brought up  to  the  age  of  sixteen
    years in that country to parents lawfully living  there  at  the  time,
    from returning.

29.  It was also relevant, as Judge Sangha pointed out, that  the  Appellant
    had sought to rely on this issue from the outset.  She had at least six
    months to obtain the evidence to make out  her  case;  probably  longer
    since her solicitors should properly  have  investigated  the  position
    prior to making the assertion in April 2019.

30.  Judge  Sangha  was  therefore  faced  with  a  last-minute  adjournment
    request on the morning of the hearing to delay the  resolution  of  the
    Appellant's case based on a speculative assertion that there  might  be
    evidence which would support an aspect of the  Appellant's  case  which
    she had raised from the start but had done nothing to try to prove.

31.  Moreover, the evidence which the Appellant had  produced  to  date  did
    not assist her.  As Judge Sangha pointed  out,  the  Appellant  appears
    (wrongly) to have thought that the document at [AB/69] showed that  she
    could not return.  But it did not, as Judge Sangha pointed out at  [18]
    of the Decision.

32.  For those reasons, there was simply no evidential basis put forward  by
    the Appellant to support her assertion that there was a need for expert
    opinion on this issue.  Her assertion that such evidence was  necessary
    fairly to dispose of the case was speculative.   We  observe  that  the
    reasons weighing against the adjournment are precisely those set out at
    [9(a)] to [9(d)] of the Guidance Note.   The Appellant's desire for  an
    adjournment had to be weighed against the overriding objective  not  to
    delay hearings unnecessarily.  When that is done, we are firmly of  the
    conclusion that the refusal to adjourn did not deprive the Appellant of
    a fair hearing.  It was not in the interests  of  justice  to  adjourn.
    Whilst Judge Sangha's reasoning might have  been  fuller,  we,  as  he,
    would have refused to adjourn the hearing.

Second ground

33.  We can take this ground more shortly.  Whilst Mr Toora did not  abandon
    the ground, he  made  only  very  limited  submissions  about  it.   In
    essence, the Appellant's case in this regard is that the  Judge  failed
    properly  to  consider  the  factors  in  Section   117B   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117B") when carrying out  the
    balancing exercise which had to  be  conducted  outside  the  Rules  to
    assess the proportionality of the  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    private life.

34.  The Judge carried out that balancing exercise at [20] of  the  Decision
    as follows:

         "The Appellant fails to meet  any  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
         therefore this appeal could in any event only succeed under Article
         8 of the ECHR.  I accept that the Appellant will have established a
         private life in the UK in the time that she  has  been  here  since
         2007.   The  decision  interferes  with  that  private  life.    In
         assessing  proportionality  I  adopt  the  balance  sheet  approach
         commended by Lord Thomas at paragraph  83  of  Hesham  Ali  v  SSHD
         [2016] UKSC 60.  I take into account that the  Appellant  does  not
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain.
          This weighs against her in assessing proportionality.  I take into
         account that the Appellant's private  life  can  continue  in  Hong
         Kong.  That reduces the effect of the interference.   I  take  into
         account those matters which I must have regard by Section  117B  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The  Appellant
         does not speak English and that does not weigh against her  and  is
         of neutral effect.  The Appellant is  not  financially  independent
         and she asserts that she is financially dependent upon her parents.
          It would appear that the Appellant has been a  burden  on  the  UK
         taxpayer if only because she has had access to  education  in  this
         country which she was not entitled to bearing in mind that she  was
         an overstayer since 2009.  The  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  not
         financially  independent  also  weighs  against  her  in  assessing
         proportionality.   Any  private  life  which  the   Appellant   has
         established in the UK has been  established  at  a  time  when  her
         immigration status was precarious and for most of the time unlawful
         especially bearing in mind that  she  became  an  overstayer  since
         2009.  I am required to place little weight on her private life for
         that reason.  The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is
         in the public interest.  The Appellant has been residing in the  UK
         unlawfully as an overstayer since  2009  and  this  weighs  heavily
         against her in assessing proportionality.  Taking all these matters
         into account I find that the public interest in the removal of  the
         Appellant from the UK  far  outweighs  any  interference  with  her
         private life.  Whilst I accept that the  Appellant  has  a  private
         life in the UK which is  interfered  with  by  the  decision  under
         appeal I find that the interference is  legitimate.   I  find  that
         such interference is necessary in a democratic society both for the
         economic wellbeing of the country and for  the  protection  of  the
         rights  and  freedoms  of  others  and  that  the  interference  is
         proportionate to these legitimate public ends on the facts of  this
         appeal.  The Appellant does not succeed under Article  8  ECHR  and
         her appeal is dismissed."

35.  We begin with the challenge as set out  in  the  grounds.   First,  the
    Appellant asserts that the Judge has failed to consider the reasons why
    the Appellant overstayed.  There is nothing to this  point.  The  Judge
    set out the Appellant's immigration history and her case about what had
    gone wrong in 2009 when her brother and father were given further leave
    to remain but she was not (see [8]  and  [9]  of  the  Decision).   The
    failure of her applications in 2009 however has no bearing on the issue
    of  the  Appellant's  overstaying  between  the  rejection   of   those
    applications in 2009 and her next attempt to regularise her  status  in
    April 2019 (as the Judge noted at [14] of the Decision).  The Judge was
    therefore entitled (indeed bound by Section 117B)  to  have  regard  to
    that period of overstaying and to give little weight to the Appellant's
    private life formed in that period.   Even  whilst  her  lawfully,  the
    Appellant's status was always precarious, and her  private  life  would
    similarly command only limited weight.

36.  It is not clear what is meant in the grounds by the assertion that  the
    Appellant's period of residence was "for a sufficiently long period" of
    eight years.  That is  not  sufficient  even  as  a  period  of  lawful
    residence to qualify to remain.  The Appellant does not fall within any
    of the categories of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules based on her  length
    of stay.  There is  no  challenge  to  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant does not meet the Rules.

37.  It is said that  the  Appellant's  ability  to  speak  English  and  be
    financially independent ought to count  in  her  favour.   That  is  of
    course contrary to binding case-law (Rhuppiah v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58 - "Rhuppiah"); those factors are  at
    best neutral.

38.  When we asked Mr Toora to explain in what way the Judge  had  erred  in
    his assessment at [20] of the Decision, the only  submission  made  was
    that the Judge ought not to have  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    financially independent. Whilst we accept that  the  Judge  would  have
    erred if he based  his  finding  in  that  regard  on  the  Appellant's
    dependence on her family (see [55] of the judgment in Rhuppiah), we  do
    not read the Judge's finding in that way.  The finding is based on  the
    Appellant's recourse  to  State  funding  based  on  her  access  to  a
    university  education  to  which  the  she  was  not  entitled  as   an
    overstayer.  The Judge was entitled to take that into account.  We also
    observe that, even if we (or the Judge) are wrong in that analysis,  it
    could not potentially make any difference as the  factor  would  be  at
    best neutral and would not undermine the  main  aspect  of  the  public
    interest relied upon by the Judge based  on  the  Appellant's  unlawful
    stay in the UK.

39.  The final part of the challenge under this heading is  to  the  Judge's
    assessment of the "quality of the private life that the  Appellant  has
    established".  It cannot sensibly be argued that the  Judge  failed  to
    consider the Appellant's integration in the UK and  family  ties  here.
    Her evidence in that  regard  is  set  out  at  [9]  of  the  Decision.
    However, it was also relevant that the Appellant  has  family  in  Hong
    Kong with whom she remains in contact and could live  on  return.   She
    lived in Hong Kong until the age of sixteen.

40.  The Appellant has therefore failed to show that the Judge has erred  in
    his assessment of the proportionality of the  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant to Hong Kong.  The grounds merely disagree  with  the  weight
    attributed to the various factors which is a matter for the  Judge  and
    with the outcome.

Conclusion

41.  For the foregoing reasons, the Appellant has failed  to  make  out  her
    challenge to the Decision.  The Decision does not contain any error  of
    law.



DECISION

We are satisfied that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sangha
promulgated on 22 November 2019 does not  disclose  an  error  of  law.   We
therefore uphold that decision.


Signed:  L K Smith     Dated: 11 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

