
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15993/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Court of Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2018                   |On 01 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                  UMESH [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Nepal, who was  born  on  4
    September 1971.  He claims  to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    February 2002, illegally, with the assistance of an agent.

 2. The appellant was certainly present in this country in 2005, because in
    November of that year he was arrested on suspicion of rape  and  actual
    bodily harm, when he gave a false name.  He was released  on  temporary
    admission, and reported monthly.  He was acquitted of these charges  in
    May 2006 following a trial at Guildford Crown Court.

 3. In August 2012 he married a Ms [R], then a Nepalese  citizen,  who  had
    entered the UK lawfully in December 2006 and had been  granted  ILR  in
    February 2012.  It is the appellant's case (which was not contested  on
    behalf of the respondent) that the appellant and his wife had  met  and
    started a relationship in 2008 and had started to  cohabit  in  January
    2012, some seven months before they married.

 4. The appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of his  marriage
    to Ms [R], and this was eventually  granted  in  September  2014,  that
    leave being valid until 17 March 2017.

 5. Prior to the grant of leave to remain to  the  appellant,  Ms  [R]  had
    applied for naturalisation as a British citizen, which was granted.  On
    27 April 2014 the appellant and his wife had a daughter, [CP], who is a
    British citizen by decent.

 6. On 9 February 2017 the appellant was convicted (following  a  trial  at
    which he had pleaded not guilty, despite what the  judge  regarded,  as
    set out within  the  sentencing  remarks,  as  "the  clearest  possible
    evidence") of fraud by way of false representation.  The appellant  had
    persuaded a victim, a Mr Shrestha, to pay him �15,000 in cash for which
    he had said he would procure valid visas for himself and his wife.   He
    had never intended, as is clear from the sentencing remarks, to procure
    these visas but, as the judge states "this whole episode was a scam  on
    your part from start  to  finish".   What  the  appellant  did  was  he
    obtained documents which were forgeries and these  were  the  documents
    which were handed over to the victim.

 7. The appellant was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment, the  Sentencing
    Judge stating that "in my judgement the only mitigating factors of  any
    weight in your case are your previous good character,  which  you  have
    now of course lost, and the unfortunate effect on your wife and child".
     However, as the judge goes on to remark "You should have thought about
    that unfortunate effect on your wife and child before  you  started  on
    this fraud".

 8. Prior to the expiry of his leave to remain, the appellant  applied  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his relationship with his  wife
    and child, both British citizens, but rather than give consideration to
    this application, on 18 May 2017 the respondent notified the  appellant
    of her (as the respondent then was) intention to deport  him,  pursuant
    to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Following representations
    made on behalf of the appellant, on 10  November  2017  the  respondent
    made a deportation order.

 9. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade, sitting at Hatton Cross on  24
    July 2018.  In a decision and reasons prepared two days  later,  on  26
    July 2018 and promulgated the following day, Judge Oxlade dismissed the
    appellant's appeal.

10. The appellant now appeals to  this  Tribunal,  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Keane on 6 September 2018.

Judge Oxlade's Decision

11. In an extremely thorough and detailed decision, Judge  Oxlade  set  out
    the applicant's case, analysed the tasks she had to perform, considered
    the evidence which had been given, both orally and what  was  contained
    within the file, and then gave reasons for her decision.

12. The appellant's case can be summarised briefly.  It had been  submitted
    on behalf of the appellant that although Section 117C of the  new  Part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  applied,  this
    simply reflected the Immigration Rules and added nothing to them.   The
    substantive submission relied upon by  the  appellant  at  the  hearing
    before  Judge  Oxlade,  as  recorded  when  she  set  out  the  closing
    submissions from paragraph 38 to 47 of her  decision  was  that  having
    regard to paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules, the deportation of
    this appellant would not be proportionate because it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for his 4 year old daughter either to go  with  him  to  live  in
    Nepal or alternatively to  remain  in  the  UK  without  him.   It  was
    accepted that 399(b) would not apply because the  relationship  between
    the appellant and his wife had not been  formed  at  a  time  when  the
    appellant had been in the UK lawfully and his  immigration  status  was
    not  precarious  (as  required   under   paragraph   399(b)(i)).    The
    appellant's Counsel did not before Judge Oxlade seek  to  argue  either
    that the appellant would be entitled to remain under Article 8  outside
    the Rules.  His case was put solely on the basis that the effect on his
    daughter  would  be  "unduly  harsh",  it  being  accepted   that   the
    respondent's obligation to consider the best interests  of  that  child
    pursuant to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 was reflected within paragraph 399(a) of the Rules.

13. Having  considered  all  the  evidence  very  carefully,  Judge  Oxlade
    concluded first that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  appellant's
    daughter to live with the appellant (and her mother) in Nepal  if  that
    is what the family chose to do but, in any  event,  should  the  family
    decide that the appellant's wife and daughter would remain  in  the  UK
    without  the  appellant,  the  effect  of  the   appellant's   daughter
    continuing to live in the UK without her father  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh either (that alternative finding is at paragraph 62).

14. As there was no other basis upon which the deportation order  could  be
    arguably challenged, Judge Oxlade dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Appeal

15. Both limbs of the judge's decision were challenged.  With regard to the
    finding that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's  daughter
    to return with him to Nepal, it was submitted that the judge had failed
    to have sufficient regard to the Nepal Citizenship Act 2006, which,  it
    was asserted, would require the appellant's daughter  to  renounce  her
    British citizenship in  order  to  acquire  Nepalese  citizenship.   At
    paragraph 6 of the grounds it was stated as follows:

         "It is submitted that under section 11,  the  appellant's  daughter
         would have to relinquish her British citizenship if she had to live
         in Nepal".

16. At paragraph 52 of her  decision,  Judge  Oxlade  had  found  that  the
    appellant's daughter was a Nepalese citizen by descent by operation  of
    Section 3 of the 2006 Nepal Act, but had stated  that  it  was  unclear
    whether  or  not  this  would  require  her  to  renounce  her  British
    citizenship.  It was submitted that in order properly to  consider  the
    child's best interests, as the judge was required  to  do  pursuant  to
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  the
    judge needed to make a finding as to whether or not the child would  be
    able to keep her  British  citizenship.   British  citizenship  was  an
    important factor as stated by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
    UKSC 4.  At paragraph 9 of the grounds, with regard to whether  it  was
    in the child's best interests to move to Nepal, it was said that:

         "the judge's failure to attach significant weight to the  following
         factors:- the appellant's daughter's British citizenship, the  fact
         that the appellant's daughter had an unqualified right of abode  in
         the UK, that she has spent all her life in the  UK,  that  she  has
         never been to Nepal, that she is settled in school and  doing  well
         (as evidenced by the school reports in the appellant's bundle which
         were before the judge) amounts to an error of law".

17. With regard to the judge's alternative finding that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for the appellant's daughter to live in the UK without him
    if he was deported to Nepal, the submission is made as follows:

         "It is submitted that the judge failed to take  into  account  that
         the appellant's daughter is 4 years old; that she is an only child;
         that she has [a] deep emotional bond with her father; from the  age
         of 4 to 14 years she will be deprived of her father's presence  and
         influence in her formative years for at least  ten  years.   It  is
         further submitted that the judge failed to consider in relation  to
         this, Christine Fortune's expert report in which she had stated  at
         page 4: 'I also have concerns about the wellbeing of  her  daughter
         if [the appellant's wife] is not to be reunited with her husband in
         the UK.  It was clear from my observations  that  [the  appellant's
         daughter] is well-cared  for  and  loved  by  her  mother  but  the
         negative effect on a child living with  a  depressed  and  stressed
         parent have been well-documented for some time (Downey G, Coyne J C
         1990, A Billings and R Moos 1983).  Young  children  are  adaptable
         and  resilient  in  the  short-term  but  if  the  situation   [the
         appellant's wife and daughter] are in  continues  I  consider  that
         there will be a detrimental effect on [the appellant's  daughter's]
         mental  health  and  wellbeing  as  well  as  on  [the  appellant's
         wife's]".

Judge Keane's Reasons for Granting Permission

18. Judge Keane only dealt in his reasons with the challenge to the judge's
    decision that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's daughter
    to go with him to live in Nepal.  He considered it was arguable (on the
    basis of the grounds advanced) that the appellant's daughter would have
    to renounce her British citizenship upon settling in Nepal and that the
    judge arguably had  not  accorded  adequate  weight  to  that  arguably
    material consideration when considering where the best interests of the
    child lay.  In particular Judge Keane noted that Judge Oxlade  had  not
    anywhere within her decision accorded weight  to  the  child's  British
    citizenship.

19. Judge Keane does not appear to  have  considered  at  all  whether  the
    alternative reason given by Judge  Oxlade  for  dismissing  the  appeal
    (that the effect on the appellant's daughter were she to remain in  the
    country while her father was deported would not be  unduly  harsh)  was
    sustainable.

The Hearing

20. I heard submissions on  behalf  of  both  parties,  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.  Immediately following the  hearing  I  read  the
    file and my notes of the hearing, and reached a provisional view as  to
    what my decision would be.  Regrettably, however,  the  file  was  then
    mislaid and my Decision was not then finalised and communicated to  the
    parties.  However, the file has now been located and  I  now  give  the
    decision I had originally intended  to  give,  but  much  sooner.   The
    Tribunal apologies to the parties for the delay.

21. I shall not set out below everything which was said to  me  during  the
    course  of  the  hearing,  which  is  contained  within  my  Record  of
    Proceedings, but shall refer only to such of  the  submissions  as  are
    material.  However, I have had regard  to  everything  which  was  said
    during the course of the hearing  as  well  as  to  all  the  documents
    contained within the file, whether or not specific reference is made to
    any particular document or submission below.

Submissions

22. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  Layne  relied  on  the  grounds.   When
    finding that it was not unduly harsh to expect the appellant's daughter
    to return with him to  Nepal,  Judge  Oxlade  had  failed  to  consider
    whether under the Nepal Citizenship Act 2006 the child  would  need  to
    renounce her British citizenship.  Although it was accepted  that  that
    point was not argued, nonetheless the judge  should  not  have  assumed
    that she would not.  It was accepted that there would be no bar to  the
    child accompanying her parents on their return to Nepal, and the  judge
    was correct when stating at paragraph 52 that there  was  not  a  legal
    impediment to her living there; nonetheless it would be unduly harsh to
    require a British citizen child to live in Nepal or to require  her  to
    give up her British citizenship.

23. While relying on his grounds,  Mr  Layne  did  not  make  further  oral
    submissions with regard to the alternative basis upon which  the  judge
    had dismissed the appeal, namely that the  effect  on  the  appellant's
    daughter of her father's deportation would not be unduly harsh were she
    to remain in the UK with her mother.

24. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Layne accepted  that  the
    Tribunal was bound by the recent decision of the Supreme Court in KO  &
    Ors [2018] UKSC 53 which had been handed down on 24 October 2018, after
    Judge Oxlade's decision, and also after the grounds  had  been  settled
    and permission had been given in this case to appeal that decision.  It
    was accepted that the test of what was "unduly harsh" was now  a  tough
    test.

25. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Duffy referred first of all to  Section
    10(3) of the 2006 Nepal Act, whereby it was provided that in  the  case
    of a child, a decision had to be taken with regard to nationality (that
    is whether or not to retain Nepalese citizenship and  renounce  foreign
    nationality or retain foreign nationality)  within  two  years  of  the
    child being 16; in other words the child would have until she was 18 to
    make up her mind whether or  not  she  wished  to  retain  her  British
    citizenship.

26. As to whether or not the effect on the child would be  "unduly  harsh",
    the appellant needed to establish not just  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the child to accompany him to Nepal, but also that  the
    effect on her would be unduly harsh were she to remain in the UK  while
    her father was deported.  Following the decision of the  Supreme  Court
    in KO, this was now a  difficult  hurdle  to  overcome,  and  there  is
    nothing identified within the grounds which  amounts  to  more  than  a
    disagreement  with  the  judge's  decision  that  the  effect  on   the
    appellant's daughter of the appellant's removal were she to  remain  in
    the UK would not be unduly harsh.  The judge had taken full account  of
    the arguments which had been put before her  and  the  facts  were  all
    considered.  At paragraph 59 for example the judge had  considered  the
    long-term effect on  the  child  of  an  absent  parent  and  also  the
    possibility of a deterioration  in  the  mother's  mental  health.   At
    paragraph 61 the judge considered the arguments which had been advanced
    with regard to the mother not coping well, but  gave  her  reasons  for
    rejecting these arguments.  In light of the reasons given  the  finding
    at paragraph  62  that  the  effect  on  the  appellant's  daughter  of
    remaining in the UK without her father would not be  unduly  harsh  are
    entirely rational and sustainable.

27. Finally, the appellant had not adduced any expert evidence with  regard
    to the law in Nepal and the judge had perfectly  properly  not  engaged
    with the Nepalese legislation, because there was an absence of material
    before her upon which she could do so.  However, in any event,  as  the
    child would have until she was 18 to make a decision as to  whether  to
    retain British citizenship, it would not be unduly harsh  were  she  to
    accompany her parents to Nepal (if that is what they  chose)  and  make
    her decision then.

Discussion

28. It is useful to set out the relevant Rules, as follows:

         "Deportation and Article 8

         A398.    These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)    ...

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                    whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does
                    not, the public interest in  deportation  will  only  be
                    outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are   very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) ... applies  if
                -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported ...".

29. This appellant falls within the provisions of paragraph 398(b)  because
    he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less  than  four
    years but at least twelve months.  Accordingly, as it is common  ground
    that there are not "very compelling circumstances over and above  those
    described  in  paragraphs  399  and  399A"  the  public   interest   in
    deportation will be sufficiently strong as  to  make  that  deportation
    proportionate unless, on the facts of this case, the appellant is  able
    to establish both that it will be unduly harsh for his daughter to live
    in Nepal and that it would be unduly harsh for her to remain in the  UK
    without him.

30. For present purposes, as is common  ground  between  the  parties,  the
    provisions set out within  section  3C  of  the  2002  Act  mirror  the
    relevant rules.

31. I consider Judge Oxlade's decision to be thorough, detailed  and  well-
    reasoned.  It is also compatible with the guidance  subsequently  given
    (but with retrospective effect) by the Supreme Court in  KO,  in  which
    (at paragraph 27) the  "authorative  guidance  as  to  the  meaning  of
    'unduly harsh' in this context" given by the Upper Tribunal  (McCloskey
    J President and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone)  v  SSHD  [2015]
    UKUT 223, referring to the  "evaluative  assessment"  required  of  the
    Tribunal, was set out with approval:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the advert 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher".

    Later, when referring to the  approach  taken  recently  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in KO itself, at paragraph 35, the  Supreme  Court  stated  as
    follows:

         "35. Miss Giovanetti for the Secretary of State  takes  issue  with
             that alternative reasoning, which she criticises  as  applying
             too low a standard. I agree. The alternative seems  to  me  to
             treat 'unduly harsh' as  meaning  no  more  than  undesirable.
             Contrary to the stated intention it  does  not  in  fact  give
             effect to the much stronger  emphasis  of  the  words  'unduly
             harsh' as approved and applied in both MK and MAB."

32. The Supreme Court in KO at paragraph 43, also referred  approvingly  to
    "the guidance given in MK and later cases as to the high hurdle set  by
    the "unduly harsh" test.  The Supreme Court was also keen to  emphasise
    that it was important to have regard to the real world in which parents
    regularly made decisions to relocate with  their  children  to  another
    part of the world.

33. It is clear in the light of the decision in KO  that  without  more  it
    will not be "unduly harsh" for a child to accompany her parents to what
    is the country of their birth, where, as the judge found, they would be
    perfectly capable of adapting and continuing their family  life  should
    that be what they chose to do.  In the real world, this happens all the
    time, and while in a deportation case, the parties might have chosen to
    remain in this country, as this Tribunal stated in MK  "'unduly  harsh'
    does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely
    difficult ... [but] poses a considerably more elevated threshold".   As
    the Tribunal went on to state  in  that  decision  "Harsh  ...  denotes
    something severe or bleak".  In order therefore to satisfy the  "unduly
    harsh" test, the effect on an applicant's child would have to be beyond
    severe or bleak.  Judge Oxlade's  decision  that  the  effect  on  this
    appellant's daughter of accompanying her parents to Nepal would not  be
    unduly harsh is  accordingly  entirely  compatible  with  jurisprudence
    culminating in the decision of the Supreme Court in KO.

34. Insofar as it is argued that Judge Oxlade ought to  have  had  in  mind
    that it would be unduly harsh to require the  appellant's  daughter  to
    give up her British citizenship on moving to Nepal, which  is  how  the
    case appears to be put within paragraph 6 of the grounds (and  was  the
    main reason why permission to appeal  was  granted)  this  argument  is
    undermined by two factors.  The first is that, as accepted  during  the
    hearing before this Tribunal,  there  will  be  no  impediment  to  the
    appellant's daughter accompanying her parents to Nepal  without  giving
    up her British citizenship and  the  second  is  that  this  is  not  a
    decision in any event which she would have to make until she approached
    her 18th birthday.  On these facts, and having regard  to  the  Supreme
    Court decision in KO, there is no arguable basis upon  which  it  could
    legitimately be said that the consequences for the appellant's daughter
    of accompanying her parents to Nepal would be so far beyond bleak as to
    be unduly harsh.

35. Further and in any event, the judge gave full and adequate reasons  for
    finding that it would not be unduly harsh if the  appellant's  daughter
    were to remain in the UK without her father.  As Sedley LJ stated, when
    referring to the break-up of families caused by deportation in A D  Lee
    [2011] EWCA Cic 348, "that is what deportation does".  For  the  effect
    upon the remaining child to be "unduly harsh" there has to  be  serious
    hardship over and above the distress which will almost always  be  felt
    when a parent is deported.  It is notable that the extract relied  upon
    from within the expert report from Christine  Fortune  is  to  a  large
    extent generic, referring to "the negative effects on  a  child  living
    with a depressed and stressed parent [being] well-documented  for  some
    time".  It is also clear that at paragraph 61 Judge  Oxlade  considered
    carefully that expert's report, noting that "the expert refers  to  the
    mother's depression, anxiety, lack of sleep, reliance on medication and
    concerns for how the mother would  fare  on  a  negative  decision  and
    coping in the long-term".  However, as the judge also noted:

         "the mother has in fact proved herself very capable, in the face of
         leaving Nepal, relocating to two different  countries,  negotiating
         living abroad, with different languages and different systems;  she
         has coped with having a small child, the criminal proceedings,  her
         husband being convicted, and then detained, losing their home,  and
         being rehoused".

    The judge also noted that the expert had given "little weight" to "this
    resourcefulness and resilience".  In addition, the judge did not accept
    that the mother was alone in the UK without family support and gave her
    reasons for not accepting this.

36. The judge also noted as follows, still at paragraph 61:

         "I had the opportunity to hear from the appellant's wife,  and  she
         struck me as a very  determined  person,  well-able  to  fight  her
         corner, and -  though  clearly  upset  -  not  bowed  down  by  the
         challenges.  The expert's report refers to her being close  to  her
         daughter, with deep affection between them.  I find  that  she  has
         managed exceptionally well on her own for the past fifteen  months,
         is very proud of motherhood and despite the challenges is likely to
         continue to do so in the future".

37. It was only after having considered the mother's position  as  she  did
    that the judge then reached her conclusion at paragraph  62  that  "the
    daughter living in the UK without her  father  would  [not]  be  unduly
    harsh".

38. This was a finding which the judge was entitled to make on the basis of
    the evidence before her and, as already noted above, it is very clearly
    and adequately reasoned.  The challenge to the judge's decision on this
    aspect of the case amounts to no more than a disagreement with findings
    which were open to the judge without identifying any arguable error  of
    law.

39. It follows that there being no material error of law in Judge  Oxlade's
    Decision, this appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the Decision of First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Oxlade, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 26 March 2019








