

                                    [pic]
|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: HU/15836/2018     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |      Decision & Reasons         |
|                                 |Promulgated                      |
|On 13 November 2019              |       On 2 January 2020         |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                 najet saadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  Sheffield
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Katambala of Ben Darlington Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Algerian national who was born on 23 November 1979.
     She appeals, with permission  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer, against a decision which  was  issued  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lucas on 4 July  2019.   In  that  decision,  Judge  Lucas  ("the
    judge") dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of her application to enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of
    a British citizen.


 2. The sponsor is Lahcene Chafai, a British citizen who  was  born  on  21
    June 1970.  The appellant and the sponsor  married  in  Algeria  on  29
    August 2013.  They have three British children: S (aged 4), M (aged  3)
    and A (aged 2).  The children live with the appellant in Algeria.

 3. The appellant applied for entry clearance on 13 March 2018.   She  gave
    her details and those of the sponsor and their  children.   She  stated
    that she planned  to  live  permanently  with  the  sponsor  and  their
    children at his address in North London.  The sponsor was said to be in
    receipt of benefits which disapplied  the  Minimum  Income  Requirement
    ("MIR") in Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant  was
    said to be  exempt  from  the  English  Language  Requirement  in  that
    Appendix because she had learning difficulties.

 4. The respondent refused the application on 5 July  2018.   Although  she
    accepted that the appellant was exempt from the MIR because the sponsor
    was in receipt of relevant benefits, she did not accept that there  was
    available to the family a sum which was adequate when compared  to  the
    amount which would be received by a family of comparable size on income
    support.  The  respondent  then   considered   the   English   Language
    requirement.  She noted that the appellant had dyslexia and  dysgraphia
    but she was not satisfied that this diagnosis would have an  impact  on
    the appellant's ability to take an appropriate English  language  test.
    The application was accordingly refused under Appendix FM.  The refusal
    went on to consider, in what can only be described as pro-forma  terms,
    the question of whether the ongoing exclusion of the appellant  was  in
    breach of Article 8 ECHR.  The respondent concluded that it was not.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal to the FtT noted that the respondent  had  failed
    to give adequate consideration to Article 8  ECHR,  particularly  given
    that the appellant had  fallen  short  of  the  sum  considered  to  be
    adequate by only �33 per week.  The grounds asserted that  the  medical
    certificate had not been considered by the  ECO.   These  grounds  were
    reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager on 17 January 2019 but  the  ECM
    was not persuaded to alter or reverse the decision.

 6. The appeal came before the judge, sitting at Taylor House  on  11  June
    2019.  The appellant was represented by a solicitor (not Ms Katambala),
    the respondent was neither present  nor  represented.   The  judge  was
    presented with a bundle of 36  pages  from  the  appellant.   He  heard
    evidence from  the  sponsor,  who  merely  adopted  his  short  witness
    statement.  The appellant's solicitor made  a  brief  submission  after
    which the judge 'reserved the appeal for determination'.  I  am  unable
    to attribute that part of the judge's decision to a specific  paragraph
    because he eschewed  paragraph  numbers  in  favour  of  bullet  points
    throughout his decision.

 7. In his reserved decision, the judge found that the ECO had erred in her
    consideration of the Financial  Requirements  because,  in  calculating
    whether the available funds were adequate, she had taken account of the
    children.  The judge held that this was an error on the part of the ECO
    because the children were 'UK citizens and have the  same  benefits  of
    citizenship as any other citizen'.

 8. Turning to the English Language Requirement, the judge accepted (as had
    the ECO) that the appellant suffers from dyslexia and that she may have
    some difficulty with comprehension when writing or understanding words.
     There was no evidence to show what, if any efforts had  been  made  by
    the appellant to take the test.  Dyslexia, he noted, did not prevent  a
    person from  taking  examinations.   There  was  no  evidence  from  an
    independent third party to show that  she  was  'physically  prevented'
    from taking the test.  Then, above the final sentence of the  decision,
    there is this paragraph:


         It is accepted that  the  Appellant  is  married  to  the  sponsor.
         However, the Appellant lives in Algeria with her three children and
         cannot yet satisfy the Rules with regard to English  Language.   It
         is also accepted that the sponsor has some medical issues but he is
         assisted with them by other family members in the UK.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the judge had  failed
    to give any meaningful consideration to Article 8 ECHR or to  the  best
    interests of the British children involved.  It was submitted that 'the
    entire edifice of the judge is vicious by material  error  of  law  and
    reconsideration is therefore sought'.  (Ms Katambala apologised  before
    me for the substitution of 'vicious'  for  'vitiated'  but  it  remains
    unclear why there is a reference to  the  process  of  reconsideration,
    which was removed from the 2002 Act nearly a decade ago.)  Be  that  as
    it may, permission was ultimately granted  by  Judge  Saffer,  who  was
    satisfied that the failure by the  judge  to  consider  the  article  8
    rights of the British children residing in Algeria  with  their  mother
    was arguably a material error of law.


10. Before me, Mr Tufan accepted that the judge had materially erred in law
    in dismissing the appeal without any consideration of Article 8 ECHR or
    the best interests  of  the  children.   I  considered  that  to  be  a
    concession properly made and indicated  that  I  would  set  aside  the
    judge's decision insofar as it  purportedly  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

11. I asked the advocates whether I  should  remake  the  decision  on  the
    appeal for myself and, if so, whether there  was  a  need  for  another
    hearing on a future date.  Mr Tufan was content for me  to  remake  the
    decision immediately.  Ms Katambala was also content for me to do so.

12. The advocates agreed that there had been no appeal against the  adverse
    findings in relation to the English Language Requirement.  I  suggested
    that it  would  be  my  task  to  consider  the  significance  of  that
    conclusion in light of Bibi [2015] UKSC 68; [2015] 1 WLR  5055  and  to
    balance all  relevant  considerations  weighing  for  and  against  the
    appellant's admission.  Unfortunately, Ms Katambala was unaware of  the
    decision in Bibi and required some time to consider it, which I readily
    gave.  On resuming the hearing, she confirmed that  she  was  ready  to
    proceed.  She wished to adduce no further documentary evidence but  she
    intended to call the sponsor to give evidence.

Oral Evidence

13. The sponsor adopted the brief witness statement which he had  made  for
    the hearing before the FtT.  He said that the appellant had tried to do
    the English test six or seven times but that  she  had  dyslexia.   The
    children were with her in Algeria.  He was unable to  look  after  them
    because of his own disabilities.  The eldest child  was  due  to  start
    school next year.

14. Cross-examined by Mr Tufan, the sponsor stated that he and his wife had
    married in 2013 and had always lived apart.  He stated  that  his  wife
    had difficulty in learning French and could only speak Arabic.  He said
    that she had been to English classes but she was  unable  to  pass  the
    test due to her dyslexia.

15. There  was  no  re-examination.   I  asked  the  sponsor  some  further
    questions in order to understand the position of the children.  He said
    that his wife and children lived in his father's house in Algiers.  His
    father had disappeared in 1995, during the civil war.  His  mother  had
    died in 2001.  He has four sisters, two of whom lived in the house with
    his wife and children.  He had  paid  for  his  wife  to  take  private
    English lessons at a school.  He thought that this was between 2012 and
    2013 and that she had stopped the lessons in 2013.

Submissions

16. Mr Tufan relied on [89] of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387; [2016] 1 All
    ER 706 and submitted that it was entirely proportionate to  expect  the
    appellant to make another application for entry clearance in which  she
    sought to address the English Language  Requirement  ("ELR")  properly.
    The decision in Bibi did not take matters any further; there  might  be
    cases in which it was disproportionate to refuse admission to a  person
    who had failed the ELR but this was not one of those  cases.   The  ELR
    existed  to  further  the  plainly  legitimate  aim  of  ensuring  that
    immigrants were able to integrate into the UK.  The real  question  was
    whether, in  doing  so,  the  ELR  brought  about  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences in this particular case.  Mr Tufan recognised  that  there
    were three British children involved and that the spirit of section  55
    BCIA 2009 applied.  But he submitted that none of them had been to  the
    UK before.  The significance of a child's British citizenship  in  such
    cases was to shortly to be considered by Lane P in a reported decision.
     This was not a case in  which  that  decision  would  be  significant,
    however, since the real solution for the appellant was to take the  ELR
    or to provide proper evidence to show that she could not.


17. Ms Katambala submitted that the appellant had clearly tried to take the
    test and had been unable to do so.  The medical reports should be taken
    into account and it was relevant that she  was  unable  even  to  learn
    French.  It was relevant to recall what had been said by Baroness  Hale
    at [27] of Bibi; there was a range of factors to take into  account  in
    deciding whether the decision  in  this  case  as  proportionate.   The
    respondent had published  guidance  which  stated  that  it  was  never
    reasonable to expect British children to live abroad.  In view  of  the
    appellant's medical condition, it was disproportionate to expect her to
    take the ELR.

18. I reserved my decision on the merits of the appeal.


Discussion

19. As I have recorded above, the starting point for  my  consideration  of
    this appeal are the findings which were made by the FtT  regarding  the
    Financial Requirements and the ELR.  It was accepted by the judge  that
    the amount of money available  to  the  family  was  adequate  for  the
    purposes of Appendix FM.  As a result of the sponsor's disability,  the
    appellant  is  exempt  from  the  Minimum  Income   Requirement   which
    ordinarily applies.  There is no appeal from these findings.


20. Nor is there any appeal against the finding made by the  FtT  that  the
    appellant cannot satisfy the ELR.   Plainly,  she  cannot  satisfy  the
    alternative requirements in paragraph E-ECP 4.1(a)-(c),  which  require
    her to demonstrate competence in the English language in one  of  three
    ways (including taking and passing a test at level A1).  She  seems  to
    have  contended  before  the  FtT  that  she  was  exempted  from  that
    requirement as a result of E-ECP 4.1(d) and E-ECP 4.2 because she has a
    physical or mental condition which prevented her from meeting it.   The
    judge was plainly correct to find that the appellant could not  qualify
    for the exemption.  There were two documents  which  were  said  to  be
    relevant.  The first  is  a  letter  from  a  psychologist  and  speech
    therapist in Algeria, dated  25  April  2019.   This  stated  that  the
    appellant has had speech therapy twice a week since 2009 and  that  she
    experienced difficulty in comprehension when writing.  Then there is  a
    longer letter dated 16 May 2019, which is also from a psychologist  and
    speech therapist.  This states that she has dyslexia.  It continues  by
    explaining that it is a language disorder identified by  a  proven  and
    chronic reading difficulty'.  The remainder of the letter states:


         Hence, the treatment with her would be long and tedious making  the
         results desired by the patient and the  speech  therapist  hard  to
         yield, but reachable by the will of the patient  to  overcome  this
         impediment  which  is  significantly  affecting  her  social  life.
         [There is then a  missing  section  of  the  letter,  in  both  the
         original French and the English  translation.]   that  consists  of
         presenting a significant impairment in the acquisition and  use  of
         the reading and written language , expressed  through  a  permanent
         impairment in the  reading  strategies  linked  with  the  auditory
         perception at the decoding of the auditory information and  with  a
         sensory-visual perception at the perception  and  decoding  of  the
         visual information; in other works [sic], the phonetic  and  visual
         confusion of some  graphically  and  phonetically  specific  nearby
         letters and sounds (p/q,  d/b,  v/f,  s/z,  etc).   This  confusion
         causes  her  a  difficulty  in  the  pronunciation  of  words   and
         sentences.

21. As the judge in the FtT held, these letters  fall  some  way  short  of
    showing that the appellant is prevented from  meeting  the  very  basic
    level of  English  language  required  by  EECP  4.1(b)  (speaking  and
    listening at level A1 of the CEFR): [9] and [21] of Bibi refer.


22. I heard  further  evidence  from  the  sponsor  about  the  appellant's
    attempts to learn English.   He  stated  that  she  had  taken  English
    classes from 2012 to 2013 and that she had attempted to take the  level
    A1 test six or seven times.  There is no mention of any of this in  his
    witness  statement,  or  elsewhere  in  the  documents.   There  is  no
    documentary evidence of any classes or of any failed  examinations.   I
    am not prepared to accept these new  assertions  without  any  form  of
    documentary evidence in support.  The point has been squarely in  issue
    since the ECO's decision, which was made more  than  a  year  ago.   It
    remains the case that there is no proper basis upon which  to  conclude
    that the appellant's dyslexia prevents her from meeting the ELR.


23. I proceed, therefore, to undertake the task which the judge in the  FtT
    failed to undertake.  Article 8 ECHR is obviously engaged in its family
    life aspect in a case such as the present.  It does not suffice  simply
    to state that the ECO's decision does  not  represent  an  interference
    with the status quo.  As the Upper Tribunal explained  at  [57]  of  TY
    (Jamaica) [2018] UKUT 197 (IAC):

         "the obligation to respect family life requires  not  only  that  a
         State refrains from interfering with existing family life  but  may
         also  entail  a  positive  obligation  to  permit  family  life  to
         develop."

24. In Bibi, during her consideration of Abdulaziz, Cabales & Balkandali  v
    the UK (1985) 7 EHRR  471,  Baroness  Hale  made  similar  observations
    regarding the scope of Article 8 in entry  clearance  cases,  at  [26].
    The question, therefore, is whether the appellant's  ongoing  exclusion
    from the UK is disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR or whether, as  it
    is expressed at GEN 3.2(2) of Appendix FM, the refusal  gives  rise  to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.


25. In considering that question, the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal
    have emphasised the benefit of adopting  a  'balance  sheet'  approach,
    setting out the factors which militate for and against the appellant on
    the scales of proportionality.  As a result of Hesham Ali  [2016]  UKSC
    60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799, at [41], the starting point is  the  appellant's
    inability to meet the Immigration Rules for the reasons I have  already
    set out.  An inability to meet the Immigration Rules is a matter  which
    militates against an individual under Article 8(2).  In Agyarko  [2017]
    UKSC 11; [2017] 1 WLR 823, Lord Reed stated  that  considerable  weight
    was to be given, at a general level, to  those  statements  of  policy:
    [47].

26. I must have regard to the fact that Parliament has stated  in  s117B(1)
    NIAA 2002 that the maintenance of effective immigration control  is  in
    the public interest.  In a case such as the  present,  however,  it  is
    both s117B(1) and s117B(2) which militate against the appellant because
    it is expressly stated to be in the public  interest  that  people  who
    seek to enter the United Kingdom are able to speak English.   In  Bibi,
    Lady Hale stated that the aim pursued by E-ECP 4.1 was  undoubtedly  an
    important one: [40].  That statement must apply  equally  to  s117B(2).
    The appellant's failure to  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  therefore
    militates against her in these ways when considering  the  respondent's
    side of the balance sheet.

27. In considering the matters on  the  appellant's  side  of  the  balance
    sheet, it is appropriate to turn first to the  best  interests  of  the
    three British children in this case.  Their  interests  are  a  primary
    consideration, which means a consideration of  substantial  importance.
    Their interests may be outweighed by the  cumulative  impact  of  other
    considerations.  In considering their best interests, their nationality
    is a not  a  trump  card  but  it  is  a  consideration  of  particular
    importance, as Lady Hale explained at [30]-[32] of ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
    UKSC 4; [2011] 2 AC 166.

28. On the particular  facts  of  this  case,  I  consider  the  children's
    nationality to militate cogently in favour of their mother's admission.
     I reach that conclusion  because  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
    children could take advantage of their British citizenship unless  they
    enter with their mother.  I have thus far  described  their  father  as
    being disabled but it is necessary to descend into a little more detail
    in this connection.  The sponsor suffers from a  range  of  mental  and
    physical health conditions.  He has severely restricted mobility, as is
    clear from the letter from his GP dated 28 May 2019  and  the  Personal
    Independence Payment Statement of Entitlement dated 23 April 2018.   He
    also suffers from PTSD, chronic depression with psychotic features  and
    anxiety disorder.  He is in no  position  to  look  after  three  young
    children on his own.  In fact, as the PIP assessment  makes  clear,  he
    has difficulty in looking after himself and receives limited assistance
    from his family in the UK.


29. It is generally in the best interests of a child to be raised  by  both
    parents.  Given the sponsor's physical and mental health problems, I do
    not consider that he is able to move to Algeria to raise  his  children
    with the appellant.  He is clearly in receipt of a  structured  package
    of benefits and regular care from his GP (Dr Ho) and it would cause him
    very serious  hardship  to  transfer  to  Algeria  with  the  resultant
    disruption   to   (and   potential   severance   of)   this    support.
    Realistically, therefore, the only way in  which  these  young  British
    children can be raised by both parents is  if  they  enter  the  United
    Kingdom with their mother.

30. Despite  those  considerations  weighing  cogently  in  favour  of  the
    mother's admission, I do not see this as  a  case  in  which  the  best
    interests of the children point emphatically or overwhelmingly to  that
    course.  The children are separated from their father and  the  country
    of  their  nationality  whilst  they  remain  in  Algeria.   Both   are
    significant considerations, but they are not determinative of the  best
    interests assessment.  It is necessary to take a holistic view, as  has
    been emphasised in  numerous  authorities  including  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The children are not said to have unmet needs  in
    Algeria.  They live in the family home in Algiers with their mother and
    other relatives.  There is no suggestion  that  they  are  inadequately
    cared for in any way and they are in a familiar environment, surrounded
    by family.  Their circumstances in the UK would, on any realistic view,
    be rather more precarious.  Although they  would  be  living  with  two
    parents, their father's capacity to provide care is greatly reduced for
    reasons beyond his control.  Their mother speaks no English  and  would
    be unable - at least initially - to  communicate  with  local  services
    including schools and healthcare providers.  Given  their  ages,  these
    are not children who would themselves learn English  rapidly,  as  Lady
    Hale considered at [38] of her judgment in Bibi.   They  are,  instead,
    children who would be dependent upon their parent's ability to interact
    with those responsible for  their  health  and  wellbeing.   Lady  Hale
    emphasised the importance of that ability (in  the  context  of  adults
    themselves) at [41] of her judgment.  Whilst the children would be able
    to live  with  both  parents  in  the  country  of  their  nationality,
    therefore, there would  potentially  be  wider  concerns  as  to  their
    wellbeing in the event that they entered the UK  as  matters  presently
    stand.  Adopting the holistic approach required, therefore, I  consider
    that the best interests of the  children  militate  in  favour  of  the
    appellant's admission but not emphatically so.  That is not a  decisive
    consideration but it is one to which  I  give  significant  weight,  in
    accordance with [109] of Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17.


31. The severity of the consequences for the appellant and the  sponsor  is
    also a matter which militates in favour of admission.  There has  never
    been any suggestion that this is anything other than a close and loving
    marriage and the births of three children underlines  the  strength  of
    the relationship.  There is no statement from the appellant  before  me
    but the sponsor's upset at the ongoing separation  from  his  wife  was
    obvious at  the  hearing.   The  importance  attached  to  such  family
    relationships in international human rights law was  stressed  by  Lady
    Hale at [31] of her judgment in Bibi.  Although the Convention does not
    provide a general obligation to respect  a  couple's  choice  of  their
    country of matrimonial residence, this is a case in which  the  sponsor
    cannot feasibly relocate to Algeria, for the  reasons  I  have  already
    explained.  For the time being, therefore, the family is  fundamentally
    ruptured, in that they are required to live apart, with all  the  human
    consequences that entails for adults and children alike.

32. Drawing these threads together, it  is  clear  that  there  are  cogent
    matters weighing on each side of the scales of proportionality.  On the
    respondent's side is the appellant's failure to meet the ELR, which  in
    turn engages the statutory considerations  in  s117B(1)  and  (2)  NIAA
    2002.  On the appellant's side is the best interests  of  the  children
    and the severity of the consequences for the adults and children whilst
    they  are  required  to  carry  on  their  family  life  on   different
    continents.

33.  Ultimately,  I  come  to  the  clear  conclusion  that   it   is   the
    considerations on the respondent's side which are altogether weightier.
     I do  so  for  essentially  the  reason  given  by  Mr  Tufan  in  his
    submissions.  The appellant can proportionately  be  expected  to  make
    another application for entry clearance, supported by proper  evidence.
    It has not currently been shown that the appellant is unable to satisfy
    the  pre-entry  ELR.   I  have  accepted  that  she  has  dyslexia  and
    dysgraphia but the test is very basic;  it  is  only  in  speaking  and
    listening; and there is simply no proper evidential basis upon which  I
    could conclude that she is unable to prepare for it or to take it.

34. This cannot properly be seen as a case  in  which  a  young  family  is
    permanently kept apart by an Immigration Rule they cannot hope to meet.
     The only  proper  way  to  view  it,  on  the  very  limited  evidence
    presented, is a case in which the family is kept apart because of their
    failure to come to grips with what is required by the  Rules.   If  the
    appellant is able to apply herself and to pass the test, she will  (all
    else being equal) be permitted to enter the UK, bringing  the  children
    with her.  If she is not  able  to  apply  herself,  she  must  present
    evidence which establishes that to  be  the  case.   Her  diagnosis  of
    dyslexia and dysgraphia will not suffice on its own,  for  the  reasons
    which have been explained in the FtT and in my own  decision.   If  she
    presents evidence in support of what I have been told by  the  sponsor,
    however, it is not difficult to see there being  a  good  case  for  an
    exemption.  If it can be shown by proper evidence that  she  has  taken
    the A1 test six or seven times; that she tried to learn English  for  a
    year and made no progress whatsoever; and that she is not even able  to
    learn any French as a result of her disability, I find it difficult  to
    imagine how an ECO could refuse to find that the exemption applied.


35. In the circumstances, I do not consider that the respondent's  decision
    has  currently  been  shown  to  give  rise  to   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences.  On the contrary, it pursues a legitimate  and  important
    aim and it has not been shown  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  the
    pursuit of that aim results in a disproportionate interference with the
    family life at issue.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT contained a legal error and  is  set  aside  to  the
extent described above.  I remake the decision on  the  appeal  and  dismiss
the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.
                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
                              31 December 2019



















