
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/16242/2017
                                                               hu/16252/2017
                                                               hu/16258/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            O P (first appellant)
                           Y P (second appellant)
                           G P p (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Swain, Counsel, instructed by Synthesis Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are challenges by the three Appellants to the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Zahed (the  judge),  promulgated  on  11  September
    2018, in which he dismissed  their  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
    combined decision of 16 November 2017, which in turn had refused  their
    human rights claims.

 2. The first and second Appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  third
    Appellant is their son, G, born in November 2015.  The first and second
    Appellants had, when their claims were made, been in the United Kingdom
    for a considerable period of time, albeit on an  unlawful  basis.   The
    main focus of their cases related to the fact that G was  born  with  a
    congenital condition  called  congenital  diaphragmatic  hernia  (CDH),
    which required an emergency operation soon after his birth and  ongoing
    monitoring as to his lung functioning as he gets older.   He  had  been
    receiving treatment under the NHS in this country.  It  was  said  that
    the health service in Ukraine is particularly  poor  and  that  it  was
    unlikely that relevant treatment would be available for the CDH.




The judge's decision

 3. Having cited case law at some length,  the  judge  considers  G's  best
    interests and  goes  through  the  medical  evidence  relating  to  his
    treatment in the United Kingdom.  In summary the judge found that  this
    indicated that G was doing well after the operation and indeed was said
    to be "thriving".

 4. At [20] the judge states as follows:

         "I have looked at all the evidence that  has  been  submitted  with
         regard to the poor health  service  that  exists  in  the  Ukraine.
         However I note that the public have put health reform at the top of
         the agenda and politicians  are  motivated  to  have  a  systematic
         reform of the health sector in the Ukraine."

 5. In the following paragraph he goes on to say:

         "I find that [G] is thriving and that he can have a  lung  function
         test in 2/3 years time in Ukraine.  I find that his  condition  has
         been repaired and the annual monitoring is just to confirm that  he
         is continuing  to  thrive.   However  I  find  that  [G's]  medical
         situation as at the date of  hearing  is  substantially  below  the
         threshold of the cases of  N  and  D  and  the  judgment  given  in
         GS(India) to engage Article 3 or Article 8 of the ECHR."

 6. The judge concludes that it would be in the  best  interests  of  G  to
    remain with his parents and for that family unit to return to  Ukraine.
    All three appeals were duly dismissed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds assert that the judge failed to take relevant evidence into
    account, in particular that contained in  the  Appellants'  bundle  and
    relating to the poor state of  the  health  service  in  Ukraine.   The
    skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal  is  attached
    to the grounds.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Chamberlain
    on 12 December 2018.  She states that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for his finding that G would be able to
    have a lung function test in Ukraine.



The hearing before me

 9. Mr Swain relied on the grounds of appeal and referred me to the country
    information on medical care in Ukraine, which  he  described  as  being
    particularly poor.  He acknowledged that there was no specific evidence
    on treatment related to CDH in Ukraine. It was submitted that the judge
    had simply failed to look at the country information  as  a  whole  and
    that there had been no proper analysis of G's  best  interests  in  the
    context of the issue of medical treatment.  In this regard he  referred
    me to paragraph 35 of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

10. It was submitted that the high threshold set out in GS  (India)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40 was ameliorated in cases concerning  children.   The  point
    here  was  that,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  specific  evidence
    relating to CDH, there was a reasonable inference to be drawn from  the
    country information as a whole that appropriate treatment would  simply
    not be available in Ukraine.

11. For his part, Mr Bramble submitted that there were no material  errors.
    The judge had had G's best interests well in mind throughout,  had  had
    regard to the medical evidence from the United Kingdom and  had  looked
    at everything in the round.  It  was  significant  that  there  was  no
    specific evidence on the possibility of treatment for CDH in Ukraine.

12. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.




Decision on error of law

13. This has not been an easy case to decide.  It may well have  been  that
    if I had heard this case at first instance I  would  have  decided  the
    case differently from the judge.

14. However, my task now is to decide whether or not  the  judge  made  any
    material errors of law, reading his decision holistically and sensibly.
     On this basis, I conclude that there are no such errors.  I  say  this
    for the following reasons.

15. First, the  judge  did  have  relevant  case  law  and  the  principles
    contained therein in mind, as is clear throughout his decision.

16. Second, it is also clear enough that he has addressed his mind  to  the
    best interests of G.  Although Mr Swain's argument  was  certainly  not
    without merit, it is tolerably clear in my  view  that  the  judge  had
    assessed the best interests in light of relevant factors set out in  EV
    (Philippines) and the evidence before him.

17. Third, the judge's assessment of the medical evidence from  the  United
    Kingdom is sound.  This showed that  the  initial  operation  had  been
    successful, that G was thriving (a word used  in  one  of  the  medical
    reports), and that what was required thereafter was monitoring and lung
    functioning tests in due course.

18. Fourth, I appreciate that the reference to the public's view of  health
    reform and the motivation of  politicians  in  [20]  does  not  form  a
    particularly strong basis for reasons.  However, the judge  has  stated
    that he had taken all of  the  evidence  into  account  and  that  that
    evidence was relevant to the poor health service existing in Ukraine.

19. A real problem for the Appellant throughout has been the absence of any
    specific evidence relating to possible treatment for  CDH  in  Ukraine.
    By "treatment" I mean the annual review and lung function tests  to  be
    carried out at the five year stage.  I appreciate Mr Swain's point that
    the judge was being asked to draw an inference from the general country
    information relating to the poor state of the health  service  in  that
    country to the extent that any treatment for this particular  condition
    would be non-existent.  However, the judge was not bound to  draw  such
    an inference (there is certainly no  perversity  challenge  here)  and,
    despite the somewhat thin reasoning in [20], the finding  that  a  lung
    functioning test would be possible at the appropriate point in time was
    open to the judge.  I so saying, I of course must bear in mind the fact
    that the burden of proof rested with the Appellants.

20. Fifth, it is right that the judge has cited GS (India) in [21]. Yet  as
    I have mentioned already he had also set out relevant extracts from  EV
    (Philippines) at some length earlier on in his decision.  I  must  read
    his decision as a whole.  This being the case, I see no misdirection in
    law.

21. Sixth, in light of the judge's findings, he did not in my view have  to
    conclude that it was in G's best interests  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, in addition being with his mother and father.  Therefore,  his
    failure to state such a conclusion does not constitute an error.

22. Seventh, finally, the factors considered by the judge in [22] and  [23]
    were all relevant.

23. I appreciate that my decision will come as a real disappointment to G's
    parents but I conclude that there is no proper basis  on  which  I  can
    interfere with the judge's decision.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law and it shall stand.

The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.

Signed        [pic]             Date: 16 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed        [pic]             Date: 16 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

