
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16591/2017
     HU/16584/2017
     HU/16595/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 December 2018                             |On 23 January 2019             |
|                                                |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Dilshod [S]
                               Gulchekhra [N]
                                    [D S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr B Hawkin, of Counsel, instructed by Arlington
                    Crown Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision of
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wright, who in a determination promulgated
on 29 August 2018 allowed the appeals of the appellants against a decision
of the Secretary of State made on 21 November 2018 to refuse to grant leave
to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I will for
ease of reference refer to him as the respondent as he was the respondent
in the First-tier.  Similarly, I will refer to Dilshod [S], Gulchekhra [N],
his wife, and [DS], their son, as the appellants.

3.    The first appellant, who is a citizen of Uzbekistan and who was born
on 21 May 1980, arrived in Britain in 2002 as a student.  He had leave to
remain in that capacity until November 2009.  His wife, the second
appellant, who is also a citizen of Uzbekistan, arrived in Britain in
January 2005 as a student and also had leave to remain until 2009.  In
November that year her application was refused and since 2009 the first and
second appellant have overstayed.  They had a child who was stillborn who
was buried in Britain in 2011. The third appellant, their son [D], was born
in April 2015.  A daughter of the second appellant entered Britain in 2015
as a visitor and was later refused an extension of stay on human rights
grounds.  Her appeal was heard by Judge Wright with those of the appellants
before me and dismissed but she has not appealed.

4.   The appellants made their human rights claims in August 2016.  These
were refused in November 2017.  In the letter of refusal the Secretary of
State referred to the fact that the appellants had no basis of stay here
and considered that they could return to Uzbekistan.  It was pointed out
that they would be returning to Uzbekistan as a family and that the first
appellant had spent most of his life in Uzbekistan, as indeed had the
second appellant, who is five years older than the first appellant.  It was
considered that although they might have some initial difficulty upon
return to Uzbekistan there was no reason to believe that they would not be
able to establish contact with their family and resume family life with
them in Uzbekistan and in any event, they were healthy adults who would be
able to work in Uzbekistan.

5.    In making the decision the Secretary of State took into account their
immigration history and also the exceptional circumstances put forward,
which included the fact that they had a child who was buried in London and
that the third appellant had been diagnosed with brainstem encephalitis and
required ongoing medical care. It was considered in that regard that
Uzbekistan had a health service that would be able to provide treatment for
the third appellant and that as he would be with his parents they would be
able to support him, especially with his "moderate learning, behavioural,
and mobility difficulties".

6.   The judge heard evidence from the appellants and in paragraphs 34
onwards, having set out the submissions made and, having correctly referred
to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ
813, he commented that integration was:

"not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life whilst
living in the other country. ...  The idea of 'integration' calls for a
broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be
enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the society in
that other country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as
to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to
operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up within a
reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give substance to the
individual's private or family life."

7.   In paragraphs 42 onwards the judge set out what appear to be his
reasons for concluding that the appeal should be allowed.  He pointed to
the length of time that the appellants had been in Britain - the first
appellant for over fourteen years and the second for just under twelve
years - and said that it did not appear to be the case that the respondent
had ever tried to remove the first and second appellants after their leave
expired in November 2009.  The judge noted that the appellants had had a
stillborn child who had been buried in Essex. The judge then referred to
the diagnosis of brainstem encephalitis and other medical conditions from
which the third appellant suffered and stated that it was not disputed that
he had special educational needs. He took into account various reports
relating to the third appellant's medical history and prognosis.  He noted
that the third appellant had a package of care in place in Britain.

8.   In paragraph 51 the judge wrote:-

"Whilst the RFRL states that 'it is considered that Uzbekistan does have a
health service that will be able to provide treatment of your child [D]',
it is not stated (nor at all clear) what this 'consideration' is based upon
and there is no supporting evidence referred to (even as at the DOH Mr
Allen, HOPO, could do no more than produce a simple list of the names
[without more] of ten children's hospitals in Uzbekistan from 'Yellow
Pages')."

The judge, in the following paragraph, wrote:-

"Whilst the Reasons for Refusal Letter also states that 'it is noted that
there are [sic] provisions for education and employment in your home
country [Uzbekistan]', it is not stated (or at all clear) where this is
'noted' from or what the provisions actually are, and there is no
supporting evidence referred to."

9.   He then stated that, applying the test of very significant obstacles,
he was satisfied that, as understood in light of the words of Sales LJ in
Kamara, the appellants would have such very significant obstacles because
of the length of time they had been in Britain or absent from Uzbekistan,
not only because their stillborn child is buried here but also because of
the seriousness of the third appellant's condition.  He therefore
considered that the refusal of the human rights claim was unlawful.
Following on from that, he concluded that the third appellant should be
granted a period of leave in line with that of his father and mother as was
in his best interests to remain in Britain with his parents.

10.  The judge therefore allowed the appeals of the appellants although
with regard to the second appellant's daughter he dismissed her appeal.

11.  The Secretary of State argued in the grounds of appeal that the judge
had found that the appellants would face insurmountable obstacles on return
to Uzbekistan because of their length of residence and medical needs of
their son.  He argued that the judge had misinterpreted the judgment in
Kamara and, in effect, that the judge had reversed the burden of proof
which rested on the appellants to establish their case that relevant
facilities for the third appellant did not exist in Uzbekistan. Furthermore
that it had not been shown that the family could not re-establish links
there.  Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne
on 25 October 2018. Ms Everett relied on the grounds, arguing that there
had been no adequate consideration of the issue of integration.

12.  In reply, Mr Hawkin argued that the determination was careful and
thorough.  He had prepared a detailed reply to the grounds which he went
through the various points raised by the judge and argued that cumulatively
those showed that the judge had properly assessed all relevant factors and
had correctly taken into account these when reaching a conclusion that was
fully open to him. He pointed to the fact that there was no evidence of any
enforcement attempt made to move the appellants and referred to the length
of time they had been in Britain and that the appellants had claimed that
they were estranged from their family.  The judge, he argued, made a broad
evaluative judgment and was entitled to place weight on the medical
requirements of the third appellant.    He referred to the medical evidence
and to a letter written on 10 August 2018 by a Dr Nodira Nasritdinova, who
had been working here as an associate specialist in psychiatry in NHS
hospitals but who had been born and brought up in Bukhara. She had come to
Britain because her child was disabled as he was being profoundly deaf, and
although that child had gone to a specialist school in Uzbekistan she had
felt it appropriate to home-school that child. She had emphasised that she
had felt that coming to Britain would be best for her child.

13.  He asked me not to set aside the decision on the basis that I would
have reached a different conclusion.

Discussion

14.  I consider that there are material errors of law in the determination
of the judge.  Indeed, I consider that he misunderstood the judgment of
Sales LJ in Kamara.  When looking at the factors set out by Sales LJ the
reality is that there is nothing to show that the appellants would not be
considered as insiders in terms of understanding how life in in Uzbekistan
society is carried on or that they would not have the capacity to
participate in it, including working or not have a reasonable opportunity
to be accepted there and to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in
that society and to build up a variety of human relationships.

15.  As was pointed out by the respondent in the letter of refusal, that
the first two appellants lived in Uzbekistan for their entire lives before
coming to Britain - they had spent all their childhood and early adulthood
there.  They speak the language and there is simply nothing to indicate
that they would be unable to integrate in that country.  They would be
entitled not only to work but also would surely be able to form
relationships with their fellow countrymen.  The fact that the Secretary of
State had not made attempts to remove the appellants after 2009 is not a
positive factor to be taking into account and does not affect their ability
to integrate nor indeed assist them in any application outside the Rules.
It is clear from Section 117B(4) that little weight should be given to
their private life formed when their immigration status was precarious.
Not only was it always precarious, as they were here as students and did
not have any form of leave that would have led to the expectation of leave
to remain. The reality, moreover, is that since 2009 they have remained
without authority.  While it might well be relevant that private life is
strengthened the longer a person remains in Britain because of intervening
events such as the birth of a child, mere remaining without authority is
not a relevant factor.

16.  Secondly, the reality is that the judge has reversed the burden of
proof.  It is for the appellants to show that they would not be able to
integrate into life in Uzbekistan.  For the reasons which I have set out
above, there is absolutely nothing to show that they could not do so and
the appellants themselves have said nothing to indicate that they would be
excluded from society or from the workplace there.  Similarly, with regard
to the consideration of the third appellant's health, it is for the
appellants to show that his health would stop them from integrating into
life in Uzbekistan and, moreover, that he would have such a lack of
effective proper treatment that it would be life-threatening - there has
been no indication that the third appellant's illness would mean that he
would meet the threshold for treatment under Article 3 of the ECHR.  I
note, moreover, from the letter of Dr Nasritdinova that she states that
basic healthcare is free in Uzbekistan, although she argues that for
further treatment payment would have to be made.

17.  Those facts do not assist the appellants.  I have also considered the
fact that the appellants have a stillborn child who was born here but that
is not a factor that indicates that they could not be able to integrate
into life in Uzbekistan.  I therefore find that there are material errors
of law in the determination of the First-tier Judge and I set aside that
decision.

18.  Mr Hawkin has asked that should I consider that the decision should be
set aside that the appeal would be remitted before the First-tier Tribunal,
and this I now do.

Decision

The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error
of law.

Direction

The appeal will proceed to hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at IAC Hatton
Cross, time estimate two hours, no interpreter required.

No anonymity directions made.


Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 5 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
