
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16638/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 15th April 2019                   |On 23rd April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 TANVEER [H]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni
For the Respondent:    Mr R Martin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mr [H], a Pakistani citizen, arrived in  the  UK  in  2011  with  a
         student visa. He was granted variations in his leave until  26  May
         2016 as a spouse. On 5th May 2016 he sought further leave to remain
         as a spouse and referred to the birth of his child, 10th June 2014.



      2. The SSHD refused Mr [H]'s human rights claim for reasons set out in
         a decision dated 20th June 2016: it was not  accepted  he  met  the
         eligibility requirements because of insufficient  income.;  it  was
         not  accepted  he  met  the  suitability  requirements  because  of
         information received from ETS that he had fraudulently obtained  an
         English language test certificate in 2012 using a proxy  test-taker
         and he had not provided evidence that he  was  the  father  of  his
         claimed child.

      3. By a decision promulgated on 16th  February  2018,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge did not make a finding on financial eligibility.  He
         did find that Mr [H] had  fraudulently  obtained  a  language  test
         certificate and did not meet the suitability  requirements  of  the
         Rules. He did seek permission to appeal  that  finding.  The  judge
         went on to allow the appeal in the following terms:

             "13. However similar considerations apply when  his  situation
             is assessed outwith the immigration rules on article 8 grounds
             because in considering the appeal on this basis, the  Tribunal
             must have regard to the factors set out at section 117B of the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002...

             14. The DNA test has established that Mr [H] is the father  of
             a British citizen child. The respondent did  not  provide  any
             reasons, either in the refusal letter or at the hearing as  to
             why it was reasonable to expect the appellant's child to leave
             the UK. The respondents own published  guidance,  set  out  at
             paragraph  14  of  the  appellant's  skeleton   argument   and
             considered by the Upper Tribunal in  SF  shows  that  it  will
             always be unreasonable to expect a British  citizen  child  to
             leave the EU with that parent. The fact that Mr  Hussein  used
             deception in his application  in  2012  is  not  a  reason  to
             conclude that it is reasonable for his son to  leave  the  UK.
             Section 117B(6) is a complete answer to the balancing exercise
             between the right to a family life and the public interest  in
             maintaining effective immigration control ..."

      4. It is not and cannot be correct that will always be unreasonable to
         expect a British citizen child to leave the  UK  with  a  departing
         parent. The issue of whether it is or is not reasonable for a child
         to leave the UK is an issue to be determined on the evidence. If it
         is not reasonable for the child to leave, that is the  end  of  the
         matter. The judge appears to have  taken  into  account  extraneous
         matters and failed to take into  account  the  possibility  of  any
         separation being only  temporary.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         erred in law and I set aside the decision to be remade.

      5. Mr Martin submitted that the hearing should be  adjourned  so  that
         further and up-to-date evidence could be obtained. There  had  been
         no application for further evidence to be  filed.  The  matter  had
         been adjourned since January; if further evidence was  required  it
         is reasonable to assume that the relevant  application  would  have
         been made.

      6. I heard oral submissions from Ms Aboni and Mr Martin.

      7. In the absence of a child, Mr [H] would not be able to avoid  being
         removed because, inter alia: he has obtained a fraudulent  language
         certificate; his marriage took place  whilst  his  immigration  was
         precarious; it was not submitted that his language ability was such
         that he met s117B (he gave evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
         through an interpreter although I note that in his application form
         he states he and his wife speak English and Urdu); he did not  meet
         the financial eligibility requirement; he has a brother in Pakistan
         and my attention was not drawn to evidence that he would be  unable
         to assist the Mr [H] on his return. In his favour, his  wife  is  a
         British Citizen of Pakistani origin who came to the UK in 2006 as a
         spouse, subsequently obtained settlement and then citizenship.  She
         divorced  her  first  husband  following  domestic  violence.   The
         deception practiced by Mr [H] is of such gravity that he could not,
         despite his relationship, expect to be able to remain in the UK.

      8. Nevertheless, the couple have a British Citizen child  who  is  now
         nearly five years old. He has started school.

      9. Ms Aboni did not submit that Mr [H] did  not  have  a  genuine  and
         subsisting  relationship  with  his  son.  The  only  question  for
         determination by me is therefore whether it is reasonable to expect
         the child to leave the UK. Ms  Aboni  submitted  that  it  was  not
         expected that the child would leave but that  he  could  and  would
         remain in the UK with his mother; it was a matter of choice whether
         she left the UK with their child  to  be  with  her  husband.  This
         submission does not take into consideration  the  recent  Court  of
         Appeal decision in AB and AO [2019]  EWCA  Civ  661  or  the  Upper
         tribunal decision of JG  (s  117B(6):  "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)
         Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC). It is  not  in  issue  whether  the
         child could remain with his mother in  the  UK  and  it  becomes  a
         matter of choice whether the family is split between two countries.



     10. In this case, in the 'real world', although Mr [H] has no right  to
         be in the UK and would not, on the evidence before me, succeed in a
         human rights appeal absent his child, the evidence here is that  it
         would not be reasonable for this child to leave the  UK:  he  is  a
         British Citizen (an important factor but not determinative), he has
         started school, his mother is a British Citizen  and  my  attention
         was not drawn to  evidence  that  she  had  travelled  to  Pakistan
         regularly or at all since she came to the UK  over  10  years  ago.
         Even though it is possible for the child to travel to Pakistan on a
         temporary basis, with his mother and father, whilst Mr [H]  obtains
         entry clearance, such travel and time away  from  school  would  be
         disruptive to his education. Such serious disruption is  recognised
         by the imposition of fines upon parents who take their children out
         of school even a short holiday.

     11. In the context of the evidence regarding  this  British  child,  it
         would be unreasonable for him to leave the UK.

     12. It follows that Mr [H]'s appeal against the SSHD's  decision  falls
         to be allowed.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remake it allowing Mr [H]'s appeal against
    the decision of the SSHD to refuse his human rights claim.

     Date 15th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
