
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16353/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2018                  |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               MUNIRA GJERLEK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bahja
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Kosovo who was born on 2 September
    1971. She first arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2004. The  claim
    for asylum was refused on  28  April  2005  when  the  respondent  also
    decided to remove the appellant. The  appellant  appealed  against  the
    decision but her appeal was dismissed  and  she  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 16 August 2005. On 22 June 2017,  the  appellant  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  that  she  had
    resided lawfully in the United Kingdom continuously for 10 years. By  a
    decision dated 9 July 2017, the appellant's application  was  rejected.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 27 February 2018, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At [19], the judge wrote:

         "... there is no issue in this case  about  any  absence  from  the
         United Kingdom stop neither was any issue raised as to  the  public
         interest, general  grounds  for  refusal,  or  an  English-language
         qualification stop sole reason for refusal set out in the  [refusal
         letter] was that  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  immigration
         history, she has not completed 10 years continuous lawful leave  in
         the United Kingdom and it is on the sole issue of continuous lawful
         residents that the appeal turns."

 3. Before the Upper Tribunal, both representatives agreed  that  the  only
    issue concerns the length of continuous lawful residents in the  United
    Kingdom, as described by the judge at [19].

 4. The judge held [25] that 'it is only where there is  continuous  period
    of lawful presence (including continuing  temporary  admission)  status
    prior to the consecutive grant  of  lawful  leave  that  the  temporary
    admission can, exceptionally, count  towards  the  necessary  10  years
    requirement.' The judge rejected the appellant's  submission  that  the
    grant of  temporary  admission  to  the  appellant  constituted  lawful
    presence in the United Kingdom. He rejected the appellant's  submission
    that the decision in Szoma [2005] UKHL  64  supported  the  appellant's
    submission that temporary admission amounted to lawful  residence.  The
    judge referred to the judgement of the Supreme Court in T  [2012]  UKSC
    12 which 'held that the wording of section 11(1) of the Immigration Act
    1971 meant that a person granted temporary admission was  not  lawfully
    present in the UK for immigration purposes. It is a 'fiction'  intended
    to deny certain benefits of presence or residence in the  UK.'[24].  In
    essence, the grounds of appeal argue that the judge's interpretation of
    'temporary admission' is wrong in law.

 5. I find that the judge did not err in law. I find that  the  appellant's
    reliance on  the  judgement  in  Szoma  is  misguided.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct to rely on T; the judge was correct to  find  that
    the appellant's temporary admission did not amount to  lawful  presence
    in the UK for immigration purposes.  The  Supreme  Court  distinguished
    between the judgement in Szoma and T concluding that the  judgement  in
    the former was relevant only to  social  security  provisions  and  not
    immigration status. At [39-40], the Supreme Court observed:

         "As Stanley Burnton LJ said in the Court of Appeal, Lord Brown  was
         not deciding any question of irremovability under the 1971  Act  in
         Szoma's case: [2010] 1 WLR 2858, para 45.  He  was  concerned  with
         quite different legislation: see para 5. I am  confident  that,  if
         his mind had been directed to the issue which arises under the 1971
         Act, he would have been less ready than he was, in the  context  of
         that case, to hold that Lord Bridge's analysis in Bugdacay  of  the
         effect of section 11(1) of the 1971 Act was wrong. For my  part,  I
         think that Lord Bridge's analysis was right and it is  directly  in
         point in this case: see para 14, above. I would endorse Sedley LJ's
         way of reconciling the decision in Szoma with what Lord Bridge said
         in Bugdacay in JA (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2010] Imm AR 381, para 20, where he said:

             "Illegal entrants who are  temporarily  admitted  rather  than
             detained may thus be lawfully present here in  the  restricted
             sense material to the  decision  in  Szoma's  case,  but  they
             remain without an entitlement to be here."

         For these reasons  I  would  hold,  provisionally,  that  the  word
         "lawfully" in article 32(1) must be taken to refer to what is to be
         treated as lawful according to the domestic laws of the contracting
         state."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal judge observed [27] that the appellant did  not
    rely on any other provisions of the Immigration Rules outside the  long
    residence requirements under paragraph 276B nor did the appellant  rely
    on Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.

 7. I wholly agree with the First-tier Tribunal judge  that  the  appellant
    has failed to show that she had achieved lawful residence in the United
    Kingdom and I find also that the judge's analysis contains an  accurate
    application of the relevant jurisprudence. In  the  circumstances,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

