
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16524/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 27 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 Prerna [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jones, counsel instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on  23  December  1977.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom with a two year student visa on 20  March
    2010.  Her husband Mr [AA] and her children PA (DOB 30 June  2002)  and
    AA (DOB 6 September 2005) joined her  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  her
    dependants on 11  August  2011.   The  Appellant's  visa  was  extended
    subsequently on two occasions until 3  March  2015.   The  family  then
    became overstayers and made an out of time  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of their private and family life on 18  June  2015,
    which was refused without the right of appeal on  18  August  2015.   A
    subsequent application was made on 28 August 2015 which was refused  in
    a decision dated 6 October 2016 again with the right of appeal.  On  15
    March 2016 the extant application was made which was refused on 22 June
    2016 with the right of appeal.  The Appellant exercised that  right  of
    appeal, raising human rights grounds only and her  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox for hearing on 25 July 2017.

 2. In a statement by the Appellant's husband dated 19  July  2017,  a  new
    issue was raised, which was the risk of persecution to the family as  a
    consequence of their Christian religion.  This was considered by  Judge
    Fox to be a new matter.  The Respondent objected to it being raised and
    thus the hearing was adjourned in order for the Appellant  to  consider
    whether she wished to claim asylum.

 3. The hearing next came before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  7  September
    2017, when it came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Row.   The
    Appellant had not applied for asylum in the intervening period but  her
    husband had made a claim and had had his initial  screening  interview.
    An application for an adjournment  was  made  on  the  basis  that  all
    matters could be heard together once a decision  had  been  reached  in
    respect of the Appellant's husband's asylum claim.  The Respondent  did
    not support this request and the judge decided  to  continue  with  the
    appeal.

 4. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 15 September 2017,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal having rejected the credibility of the evidence of
    the Appellant, her  husband  and  two  witnesses  as  to  the  risk  of
    persecution in India and he gave reasons for that decision.  In respect
    of Article 8, the judge went on to find that if the Appellant  and  her
    husband were removed to India, it would be reasonable for the  children
    to go with them.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred materially in law in proceeding with the appeal,  during  the
    course of which he considered the risk of persecution on the  basis  of
    the  family's  Christian  religious  beliefs,  in  that  that  involved
    consideration of the children's position which was  necessarily  linked
    to their father's asylum claim and that absent  consideration  of  that
    claim by the Respondent the judge had fallen  into  error,  the  proper
    course being arguably for him to have adjourned the matter and to  have
    considered both Article  8  and  the  risk  to  persecution  after  the
    Secretary of State had considered the father's claim.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro  in
    a decision dated 16 March 2018 in the following terms:

         "The judge refused to adjourn the hearing of this appeal  which  in
         itself does not appear to have been in error.   However  the  judge
         also correctly observed that the Respondent had objected to the new
         matter of a fear of persecution being  considered  in  this  appeal
         [5].  By virtue of Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act a judge  must  not
         consider a new matter unless  the  Secretary  of  State  has  given
         consent to the Tribunal to do so.  The meaning of a new matter  was
         considered in Mahmud [2017]  UKUT  488  (IAC)  and  the  judge  has
         explained why the alleged fear of persecution  amounted  to  a  new
         matter.  Whilst the judge decided to proceed with  the  hearing  of
         this appeal and referred to the Respondent having objected  to  the
         new matter being considered, he nonetheless went on to consider the
         new matter and make findings thereon [19 to 32 inclusive].   It  is
         an arguable error of law for him to have done  so  although  it  is
         questionable whether or not the outcome of the  appeal  would  have
         been affected even if he had followed the restriction under Section
         85(5) and not considered the new matter at all.  Nonetheless he has
         made findings on the new matter  and  the  question  arises  as  to
         whether or not his decision which includes such findings should  be
         allowed to stand or is fatally flawed by an arguably material error
         of law."

    Hearing

 7. No Rule 24 response was  supplied  by  the  Respondent,  but  Mr  Mills
    indicated that he opposed the appeal.

 8. In submissions on behalf of the Appellant, Mr Jones submitted that  the
    grounds of appeal hinge on the risk of persecution to the Appellant  if
    returned back to India, that there  had  been  no  statement  from  the
    Appellant herself as to risk on return and there was no evidence before
    the judge as to the impact or potential impact on the children.

 9. In his submissions, Mr Mills submitted that  this  was  essentially  an
    Article 8 human rights appeal based on the length of residence  by  the
    Appellant  and  in  particular,  her  children.  He  submitted  it  was
    perfectly proper that the judge refused an  adjournment  and  that  the
    Home Office  Presenting  Officer  had  objected  to  the  appeal  being
    adjourned.  He submitted that the judge had directed the  Appellant  to
    consider withdrawing her appeal but she had chosen not  to  do  so  and
    decided to proceed and thus was in  essence  attempting  to  have  "two
    bites of the cherry".  Mr Mills submitted the thrust of  the  challenge
    was essentially a procedural complaint, i.e. that the judge should  not
    have considered the asylum aspect at  all  as  it  was  a  new  matter.
    However the problem with this is that if  the  judge  had  artificially
    ignored the issues raised in the Appellant's husband's statement,  this
    was also material to a consideration  of  very  significant  obstacles,
    which required  consideration  as  part  of  the  human  rights  appeal
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules.  Mr Mills submitted that
    the judge was bound to consider the evidence that was before  him.   Mr
    Mills submitted that the judge had acted fairly, he had heard  evidence
    from the witnesses and it was hard to know  what  else  he  could  have
    done.

10. In reply, Mr Jones submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  that  his
    approach was a piecemeal approach rather  than  dealing  with  all  the
    evidence and the evidence on the issue of asylum.

     Decision and reasons

11. I reserved my decision which I now give with  my  reasons.   With  some
    reluctance, I have concluded that the judge erred materially in law  in
    proceeding with the appeal, which involved consideration of  an  asylum
    claim  made  by  the  Appellant's  husband,   prior   to   any   proper
    consideration or determination of that claim by  the  Respondent.   The
    reason for my reluctance  is  that  I  consider  that  the  Appellant's
    representatives have to take some responsibility for failing to seek an
    adjournment of her appeal prior to the  day  of  the  hearing,  i.e.  7
    September 2017, on the basis  that  the  Appellant's  husband's  asylum
    claim, which impacted not only  on  his  wife  and  children  but  also
    consideration of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules had  not  yet  taken
    place and that it would be appropriate,  in  light  of  the  overriding
    objective, for all matters to be heard together by the  same  judge  if
    necessary in linked appeals.  Whilst the judge was put in  a  difficult
    position, the hearing having previously  been  adjourned  precisely  in
    order for consideration to be given by the Appellant to making her  own
    asylum claim, there was only a delay of about  six  weeks  between  the
    hearing on 25 July and that on  7  September,  which  would  have  been
    insufficient time for the Respondent to  have  reached  a  decision  in
    respect of the asylum claim in any event. I find  that  the  overriding
    objective to act fairly  was  infringed  by  the  judge's  decision  to
    proceed, bearing in mind also that there  was  no  statement  from  the
    Appellant as to any risk of persecution to  her  in  an  individualised
    sense, only the second statement of her husband dated 17 July 2017.

12. I have concluded that, given that the judge, in effect, dealt with  the
    new matter contrary to the Respondent's objections as set  out  at  the
    hearing on 25 July 2017,  the  decision  to  proceed  was  procedurally
    unfair.

     Notice of decision

13. I set aside the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Row and remit the
    appeal for a hearing de novo before a different Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal.  In light of the fact that the issue  is  one  of  procedural
    fairness, the findings made by the judge on the basis of  the  evidence
    before him cannot properly stand.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date: 21 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

