
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16860/2019
                                                               HU/16862/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2021                     |On 9 April 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Sabina [S]
                                 Mijjal [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


  These appeals have been decided without a hearing, pursuant to rule 34 of
             the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellants, citizens of Nepal and husband  and  wife,  appeal  with
    permission against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shiner
    ("the judge"), promulgated on 22 December 2020, by which  he  dismissed
    their appeals against the Respondent's refusal of  their  human  rights
    claim. That claim and the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal focused in
    large part on the second Appellant's mental health.  It was  said  that
    he suffered from significant problems and that it would be contrary  to
    Articles 3 and/or 8 ECHR to require a return to Nepal.



Discussion and decision on error of law

 2. At the outset of the hearing before the judge, an application was  made
    to adjourn in order to obtain further medical evidence  on  the  second
    Appellant's mental health circumstances.  It was  said  that  this  was
    necessary because as a result of the  Covid-19  pandemic  he  had  been
    unable to engage with relevant services for  a  significant  period  of
    time.  The application was refused (see [23] and [24] of the decision).
     The judge went on to consider the evidence that  was  before  him  and
    concluded that the appeals should be dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The grounds of appeal  covered  both  the  procedural  and  substantive
    aspects of the judge's decision.

 4. Following the grant of permission, the Respondent provided  a  rule  24
    response in which it was stated that the Respondent did not oppose  the
    Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal.  It was accepted that in the
    particular circumstances of this case the judge should  have  adjourned
    the hearing to enable  the  Appellants  to  obtain  up-to-date  medical
    evidence.  The Tribunal was invited to set  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision aside and to re-make the decision  in  the  case  following  a
    resumed hearing.

 5. In  further  correspondence  between  the  Respondent  and  Appellants'
    representatives prior to the error of law hearing, the concession  made
    in the rule 24 response was confirmed with an  amendment,  namely  that
    the appeals should in fact be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    complete rehearing with no preserved findings of fact.   This  approach
    was agreed to by the Appellants' representatives, as  confirmed  in  an
    email dated 25 March 2021.

 6.  In  light  of  the  correspondence  and  having  concluded  that   the
    Respondent's concession was properly made, I informed the parties  that
    the hearing listed for 26 March 2021 need not go ahead and that I would
    issue a decision without a hearing pursuant to rule  34  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's Procedure Rules.

 7. I conclude that the judge did err in law by refusing  the  adjournment,
    as recognised by the Respondent in her  rule  24  response.   In  short
    terms, the decision not to  adjourn  was,  in  all  the  circumstances,
    unfair.

 8. I agree that I should exercise my discretion under section 12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  and  set  the  judge's
    decision aside.

 9. In the particular circumstances, I also agree that these appeals should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete  rehearing  and
    with no preserved findings  of  fact.   I  note  that  the  Appellants'
    representatives have submitted up-to-date medical evidence on behalf of
    the  second  Appellant  in  particular.   This  is   contained   in   a
    supplementary bundle indexed and paginated 1-22.  I make no comment  on
    this evidence, but I do admit it in evidence at this stage.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I exercise my discretion under section 12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
and Enforcement Act 2007 and  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

I remit these appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) These appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House
         hearing centre);

      2) The remitted appeals shall be conducted by a judge other than First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Shiner;

      3) No findings of fact are preserved.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                     Date: 30 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


