
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16050/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2021                      |On 21 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            oneil orlando channer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Williams, instructed by Genga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 19
    September 2019 to refuse him further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of Mrs Hopelyn Carter-Wynter, a British  citizen,
    and to refuse his human rights application.  His  appeal  against  that
    decision was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 February 2020.  For the reasons set out in my decision
    of 29 September 2020, that decision was set  aside.   A  copy  of  that
    decision is annexed to this decision.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who entered  the  United  Kingdom
    with entry clearance on 24 November 2016  as  a  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen.  That leave was valid until 24 August 2019.  On 26 July  2019,
    he applied for further leave to remain as a spouse but that application
    was refused on 19 September 2019 on the basis that  he  had  failed  to
    disclose a police caution administered to him on 5 November 2017.  That
    caution was administered to him by the metropolitan  police  subsequent
    to him being arrested from  the  family  home  after  an  incidence  of
    domestic violence between him and his wife.   It  is  not  in  dispute,
    however,  that  the  relationship  is  still  subsisting  despite  that
    incident.

 3. Subsequent to the appellant  submitting  his  application  for  further
    leave to remain, with the assistance of his then  solicitors,  Genga  &
    Co, the Secretary of State contacted his solicitors to query whether he
    had answered the declaration section on the application form correctly.
     They replied to the Secretary of State on 18  September  2019  to  say
    that the answer of "no" was correct.

 4. The respondent concluded as a result that the applicant  did  not  meet
    the suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules,  S-LTR.2.2.  (b)
    of Appendix FM and refused to grant further leave on  that  basis.   In
    doing so the respondent considered that the appellant had not  met  the
    requirements of EX.1 noting an absence  of  evidence  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles that the appellant or his wife would  face  on
    continuing their family life together outside the United Kingdom  which
    could not be overcome nor did the Secretary of State consider that  the
    appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph   276ADE(1)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  She also considered that there  were  not  in  this
    case  exceptional  circumstances  pursuant  to  paragraph  GEN.3.2   of
    Appendix FM such that the appellant should be granted leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

The Law

 5. The issue in this appeal is narrow; it is accepted  by  the  respondent
    that the sole basis of which the appellant's application for  leave  to
    remain falls to be dismissed is the failure to  disclose  the  caution.
    It is not argued that  no  caution  was  administered  but  it  is  the
    appellant's case that neither he nor his wife were aware that a caution
    had been administered.

 6. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules provide as follows:

         S-LTR.2.1. The applicant will normally be refused on grounds of
         suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2. to 2.5. apply.


         S-LTR.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -


         (a)  false information, representations or documents have been
         submitted in relation to the application (including false
         information submitted to any person to obtain a document used in
         support of the application); or


         (b)  there has been a failure to disclose material facts in
         relation to the application.


 7. I heard evidence from the appellant and his wife; I also had before  me
    witness statements from them, bundles  produced  by  both  parties  and
    copies of the Ministry of Justice's guidance entitled "simple  cautions
    for adult offenders" effective from 13 March 2015, simple  caution  for
    adult offenders, effective from 13 April 2015 and guidance from the CPS
    entitled "cautioning and diversion".

 8. The appellant adopted his witness statement and was cross-examined.  He
    confirmed that as at September 2019 he had no  recollection  of  having
    been cautioned in the previous November 2017 and that the request  from
    the Home Office  had  not  triggered  any  recollection  of  that.   He
    confirmed that he had not discussed with his  wife  what  had  happened
    after his release.  He said that he had never been detained or arrested
    or charged previously and despite that,  that  what  had  happened  had
    escaped his mind.  He confirmed that he had not read  the  document  he
    was given to sign but was given a copy of it.

 9. It was put to him that under the guidance of cautions, at paragraph 80,
    that the police were to ensure that he understood  the  effect  of  the
    caution and the implications for accepting it, that  he  understood  it
    and that he was to have made a clear and reliable admission  of  guilt.
    He said he did not do so that he had not confessed.  He  said  that  he
    had put the copy of the document he had signed in the bin when he  left
    the police station.  He said he had signed so that he could go home.  I
    asked if the police explained to him that there  would  be  no  further
    investigation, he said no nor did he say that they had  told  him  they
    had dropped the charges.  He said that they only told him  there  would
    be no further action and he believed this is what he had signed.

10. I asked if he had made a complaint to the police or  try  to  have  the
    caution removed, he said he did not know the process and  he  confirmed
    again that he had not taken any steps despite what had  happened  since
    to have the caution set aside nor had he asked his solicitors to  press
    enquiries.  He said he had not made a complaint against  the  solicitor
    who had attended the police station as he did not know how to  proceed.
    He denied when it was put to him that he knew full  well  that  he  had
    been cautioned and had not told the truth before.

11. The appellant said he had met his wife in  Jamaica;  that  she  had  no
    family ties there and they had met at a funeral of a family member.  He
    said he was not sure if she had ever lived there.   He  said  that  his
    mother lived there and they continue to  live  in  Jamaica  as  do  his
    children who are 13 and 11 and they live with their mother.  He said he
    had worked as a baker in Jamaica and that he was not aware if his  wife
    had made any enquiries as to whether she  would  be  able  to  work  in
    Jamaica.  Asked why he would not be able to  live  in  Jamaica  if  his
    appeal was dismissed he said that the crime rate was too  high  and  he
    would be scared to go back.

12. I then heard evidence from the appellant's wife who adopted her witness
    statement.  She added that the Home Office had contacted her solicitors
    then she was told that the Home Office were asking  about  whether  the
    husband had been cautioned.  She said that she told them  he  had  not.
    In cross-examination Mrs Carter-Wynter said  she  recalled  the  police
    calling her after her husband  had  been  arrested  but  they  had  not
    discussed with her if they were going to charge him and that  they  had
    not told her what was going to happen.  She said she had not  asked  if
    they were going to charge him.   Asked  why,  if  she  had  called  the
    police, she did not discuss with them what was  going  to  happen,  she
    said that they had asked her if she wanted to press charges and she had
    said no as she did not want to go to court.  They  had  told  her  that
    they were going to release him.  She said that he then called  her  and
    she arranged for a cab to pick him up.

13. She confirmed that she had not discussed the incident after her husband
    had returned home and that she had no idea what the  police  wanted  to
    do.  I asked her if she was worried that he might  then  be  prosecuted
    she said she was not sure.  It was put to her that she would  not  just
    have forgotten that  her  husband  might  be  prosecuted  for  domestic
    violence she said that this was so.

14. Mrs Carter-Wynter said that she had lived in Jamaica for about  fifteen
    years from when she was a child before going to live overseas.  She had
    come to the United Kingdom in 1996 and currently  works  as  a  nursing
    assistant.  Asked if she had Jamaican citizenship she said that she had
    become a British citizen.  She said that all her family had  now  moved
    abroad and she had no relatives left in Jamaica.

15. It was put to her that she knew full well that  her  husband  had  been
    cautioned and  she  said  that  that  was  not  so.   She  also  denied
    discussing with police about the caution.

16. I asked why she could not settle in Jamaica with the appellant  if  the
    appeal were dismissed; she said, "I don't know".

Submissions

17. Mr Clarke submitted that the Secretary of State's prima facie case  had
    been  made  out.   He  submitted  that  there  had  been  a   dishonest
    concealment of the caution and that this was  a  sufficiently  material
    matter such that S-LTR1.6 applied.   He  accepted  that  there  was  no
    direct policy guidance as to what would happen if a person  admitted  a
    caution.

18. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant and his wife's account  of  what
    had happened with respect to the caution  was  wholly  unreliable.   He
    submitted that it was wholly incredible that the appellant  would  not,
    having received the email have not thought back to what had happened 22
    months earlier and it was wholly improbable that  the  catalogue  of  a
    failure to comply with any of the procedure would have occurred and  it
    was telling that there had been no complaint against the solicitor  who
    had attended the police station or  an  attempt  to  have  the  caution
    overturned.  He submitted it was not credible that the appellant's wife
    would not have known about the caution it was clear that the  appellant
    had deliberately withheld the information about the caution.

19. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant had not shown  that  there  were
    unjustifiably harsh consequences if the appellant and his wife would go
    back to Jamaica they had a public interest in  maintaining  immigration
    control was not outweighed.

20. Miss Williams relied on  the  skeleton  argument  submitting  that  the
    guidance relating to the administrative cautions was  simply  that;  it
    could be that maybe the case it had not been followed nor was  there  a
    requirement that it be followed.  She submitted  that  the  appellant's
    innocent explanation had been made out and the Secretary of  State  had
    not made her case.  She submitted that given  that  the  appellant  had
    thought that there would be no further action to take that he would not
    have been worried and this would not have given cause  for  concern  on
    his part or that of his wife to make enquiries further.  She  submitted
    it was plausible that twenty  months  after  the  event  they  had  not
    recalled exactly what had happened and it had not been brought to mind.

    Discussion

21. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State was, prima  facie,  entitled
    to conclude that the appellant  had  been  dishonest.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that a caution had been administered nor that he had  completed
    the application form stating that he had never received one.   Further,
    it is accepted that the solicitors were contacted and  the  information
    was given to them confirming that the  appellant  had  not  received  a
    caution.

22. The innocent explanation is that the appellant had not  been  aware  of
    the caution being administered and thus had not had it dishonestly.

23. I have only the appellant's word for it that  the  police  ignored  the
    guidance set out in paragraph  80  of  the  MOJ's  Guidance  on  Simple
    Cautions for Adult Offenders, in force from April 2015.  That  guidance
    provides at paragraph 80:

         '80. At the point the simple caution is administered the police
             officer must:


           . Ensure that the offender understands that they do not have to
             make an immediate decision on whether to accept the simple
             caution but can consider the matter and, if need be, take
             independent legal advice;


           . Ensure the offender understands that they have the right to
             legal advice at any time during the process;


           . Ensure that the offender understands the effect of the simple
             caution and the implications of accepting it as set out in
             paragraphs 65-76 above;


           . Ensure that the offender has made a clear and reliable
             admission of guilt in respect of the offence or offences for
             which the simple caution is being administered;


           . Confirm that the offender consents to receiving a simple
             caution;


           . Ask the offender to sign a form setting out the implications
             of the simple caution ("the simple caution form");


           . Sign the simple caution form themselves and provide the
             offender with a copy to take away.'


24. I bear in mind also  that  at  the  material  time  the  appellant  was
    assisted by a duty solicitor  in  the  police  station.   If  what  the
    appellant says is true then not only was there a wholesale  failure  to
    follow the relevant guidance but equally that  his  solicitor  did  not
    advise him of what was happening or make sure that he  understood  what
    was happening.  This again would have been a wholesale failure  on  the
    part of a duty solicitor.  The appellant's  evidence  is  not  that  he
    forgot advice that he was given but that he was  not  given  advice  or
    told by the police what was happening.  Yet there is  no  material  put
    before me from the duty solicitor who is not named, and there has  been
    apparently no attempt to make any complaint about what  would,  in  the
    circumstances, have been a serious professional negligence.

25. Further, I note that the police did not tell the appellant's wife,  who
    was after all the victim, that the appellant  had  been  cautioned.   I
    accept that that telephone conversation may have taken place before the
    caution and that she had said that she did not want any further  action
    to be taken and did not wish to press  charges  in  which  case  it  is
    unclear  why  the  appellant  would  admit  the  offence  and  then  be
    cautioned.

26. In summary, if the appellant's unsupported evidence is to be  believed,
    then the police ignored almost wholesale the relevant guidance, and the
    duty solicitor took no action to remedy that; and, failed in  his  duty
    to advise his client of what was  happening  and  the  consequences  of
    accepting a caution.

27. I am not satisfied by their evidence that the couple would not  at  any
    time have discussed what had happened to the police  station  after  he
    returned given that on his own evidence he had never been arrested  and
    detained before.  And, this had come about because of a telephone  call
    the appellant's wife had made about his behaviour.

28. Further, given that the appellant had never been arrested  or  detained
    before, I did not find it credible that, when asked  about  whether  he
    had been cautioned before,  neither  he  nor  his  wife  recalled  this
    incident in 2017 or could have by then forgotten  a  caution.   I  find
    that the appellant could not have remembered being arrested or detained
    and it is equally difficult to consider that the question about whether
    he had been cautioned or not did not cause him to  think  that  perhaps
    something had occurred that he had not understood.

29. I bear in mind also that no complaint has been made to  the  police  or
    any attempt made to overturn the caution if, if what the appellant says
    is true, then it was not properly  administered  and  he  had  made  no
    admission of guilt.

30. I noted the evidence that the appellant says he encountered no problems
    when applying for jobs and not disclosing his caution.  Again,  I  have
    only his word for that; he has not provided copies of any applications.
    Further,  under  the  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act  1974,  simple
    cautions become "spent" as soon as they are administered and  so  there
    would have been no requirement to disclose them if asked.

31. Taking all these factors into account I consider that the Secretary  of
    State has  disproved  the  appellant's  innocent  explanation  and  has
    demonstrated that the  appellant  misled  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    stating that he had not received a caution when he had done so.

32. I am satisfied also that the  deception  or  failure  to  disclose  the
    caution was a failure to disclose a material matter.  That  is  because
    although there is no guidance  of  Rule  relevant  to  whether  or  not
    somebody has a caution should be refused leave, it is clearly a  matter
    which the Secretary of State would wish to  bear  in  mind,  given  the
    circumstances of any caution  in  considering  whether  the  person  in
    question was a fit person to be granted further leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was clearly a  factor  that  would  be  taken  into
    account.

33. The respondent did, I accept, have a discretion within the  Immigration
    Rules as to whether to refuse on  the  basis  of  this  non-disclosure.
    Looking at all the factors in this case, I  am  not  satisfied  by  the
    explanation for the non-disclosure, nor am I satisfied that  discretion
    ought on the facts of this case to  be  exercised  in  the  appellant's
    favour.

34. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision with  regard  to  the  Immigration  Rules  suitability
    requirements was correct.

35. Given the finding that the appellant does not meet the requirements  of
    the suitability Rules, he cannot meet the requirements of EX.1  in  any
    event.

36. Turning then as to whether, despite not meeting the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules, removal of the appellant would be  disproportionate,
    I have regard to paragraph GEN 3.2.  I also bear in mind that in  In  R
    (on the application of Agyarko and others v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 the Supreme Court held

37. "The critical issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to the
    strength of the public interest in the removal of  the  person  in  the
    case before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to  outweigh
    it.  In general, in cases concerned with precarious family life, a very
    strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the public  interest
    in immigration control."

38. In considering Article 8, I am required by section 117A of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, when considering the
    issue of proportionality, to have regard to those factors set out at
    section 117B. Section 117A (3) confirms that the Tribunal is required
    to carry out a balancing exercise setting the gravity of the
    interference against the requirements of the public aims sought to be
    achieved.

39. The starting point is that the Secretary of State is entitled to
    control the entry of foreign nationals into the territory and that
    significant weight is to be attached to the maintenance of effective
    immigration control.

40. I adopt a balance sheet approach to Article 8 ECHR in accordance with
    Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60. I must strike a fair balance between
    competing public and private interests in accordance with the
    principles in Agyarko.

41. In this case, significant weight has to be attached to the public
    interest in removing those who do not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.

42. I accept that the appellant speaks English and is, through his wife's
    earnings, financially self supporting but those factors are neutral

43. In favour of the appellant is the family life he has established here
    while with leave to remain but equally the appellant is from Jamaica,
    has family there, and lived there until relatively recently. His wife
    when asked could not say why she could not go there to live with him.

44. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied on the facts of this case that
    the effect of removal would be unjustifiably harsh.

45. Taking all of these factors into account, I conclude that on the  facts
    of this case, removal would not, bearing in mind the significant weight
    to be attached to the public interest, be disproportionate.

46. I therefore dismiss the appeal as removal would not be in breach of the
    appellant's article 8 rights.


Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

2.   I remake the appeal by dismissing the appeal on all grounds

3.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 19 March 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16050/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 29 September 2020                 |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            oneil orlando channer
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge D A Baker promulgated on 6 February 2020.   I  have
    removed the anonymity direction recorded as being made in the title  of
    that decision. That appears, as the appellant acknowledged,  to  be  an
    error and contrary to the judge's decision at [1].

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who entered  the  United  Kingdom
    with entry clearance on 24 November 2016  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    spouse. That leave was valid until 24 August 2019. On 26 July  2019  he
    applied for further leave to remain as a spouse. That  application  was
    refused on 19 September 2019  on  the  basis  that  he  had  failed  to
    disclose a police caution administered to him in 2017and so,  he  could
    not meet the suitability requirements set out in the immigration rules.

 3. The appellant's case is that he was not aware that a caution  had  been
    administered when he had been arrested on 5 November 2017  and  so  had
    not been dishonest when he had failed to declare it.

 4. The judge heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  his  wife.  In  her
    decision she set out at from [36] onwards what was in dispute,  setting
    out three relevant issues:

      a)  Is  the  PNC  evidence  reliable  evidence  that  a  caution   was
         administered to the appellant in 2017 by the Metropolitan police

      b) If it was, was the appellant aware of it

      c) The appellant says that he did not know of the caution.

 5. The judge concluded that the PNC was sufficient  to  establish  that  a
    caution had been administered.   She  then  went  on  to  consider  the
    submission from the respondent [40] that the police would have  advised
    him of it; the duty solicitor would have explained it to him;  that  he
    would have read it before he signed it and she had telephoned the  reps
    to check the answer whether the appellant had  a  caution  or  not  was
    correct, and that they had confirmed it was correct.

 6. The judge then summarised at [41] the appellant and his wife's evidence
    as to what had occurred, noting that  the  appellant  accepted  he  had
    signed something but had not known what it was and had not  signed  it,
    nor had he been  advised  that  the  had  been  cautioned.   The  judge
    rejected the appellant's explanations and at [49]  concluded  that  the
    respondent had shown that the appellant  did  know  that  he  had  been
    cautioned and that his failure to reveal it was dishonest.

 7. The judge also concluded, in respect of  suitability,  that  discretion
    ought not to  be  exercised  in  the  appellant's  favour  has  he  had
    compounded the original deceit [60] in maintaining at the  hearing  the
    lie as to his knowledge of the caution.

 8. The judge concluded that removing the appellant would not amount  to  a
    breach of his article 8 rights, finding [53] that the  appellant  would
    not face problems in Jamaica and that his wife could go there  to  live
    with him permanently [54]; and, that he could go back  to  Jamaica  and
    make an application for Entry Clearance [55].  She also concluded  [62]
    that the appellant's deception was too grave to allow him to remain.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 4 grounds:

      i) In mistakenly considering  the  appellant's  case  to  be  that  no
         caution had been administered;


     ii) In rejecting on the sole basis of  implausibility  the  appellant's
         account that he had not been advised by the duty solicitor  or  the
         police that he was signing and receiving a caution,  yet  rejecting
         the clear and consistent evidence of the appellant and his wife  to
         the contrary,  this  assessment  being  insufficient  to  meet  the
         balance of probabilities, it being possible that the appellant  had
         not been aware of the consequences of signing a document, the point
         taken against the wife at [46] not being put to her;


    iii)  In  conflating  the  exercise  of   discretion   in   making   the
         proportionality assessment under Article 8 with whether or not  the
         appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules;


     iv) In failing to give adequate reasons for the findings at [61] as  to
         proportionality, the failure to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  not
         being sufficiently serious to render the decision proportionate.


10. On 15 May 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro granted permission  to
    appeal.

11. Subsequent to the grant of permission, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
    also made directions in this case stating:

          1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the  light  of  the
             present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
             19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
             Rules[1], I have reached the provisional view,  that it  would
             in  this  case  be  appropriate  to  determine  the  following
             questions without a hearing:


               a) whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
                  involved the making of an error of law, and, if so


               b) whether that decision should be set aside.


          2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:


               i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of
                  the assertion of an error of  law,  and  on  the  question
                  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
                  aside if error of law is found, to be filed and served  on
                  all other parties no later than 14 days after this  notice
                  is sent out (the date of sending is on the covering letter
                  or covering email);


              ii)  Any  other  party  may  file  and  serve  submissions  in
                  response, no later than 21 days after this notice is  sent
                  out;


             iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph  (ii)
                  above the party who sought permission to appeal  may  file
                  and serve a reply no later than 28 days after this  notice
                  is sent out.


              iv) All submissions that rely on any document  not  previously
                  provided to all other parties in electronic form  must  be
                  accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.


          3. Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
             a hearing is necessary to consider the questions  set  out  in
             paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for
             that view no later than 21 days after this notice is sent  out
             and they will be taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The
             directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with in every
             case.


          4. If this Tribunal decides to set  aside  the  decision  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal for error of law, further directions  will
             accompany the notice of that decision.


          5.  Documents  and  submissions  filed  in  response   to   these
             directions may be sent by, or attached to, an email to [email]
             using the Tribunal's reference number (found  at  the  top  of
             these directions) as the subject line.  Attachments  must  not
             exceed 15 MB.  This address is not generally available for the
             filing of documents.  Service on the Secretary of State may be
             to [email] and to the original appellant, in  the  absence  of
             any contrary instruction, by use of any address apparent  from
             the service of these directions.


12. The appellant made submissions to the Upper Tribunal on 12 August  2020
    but these contain no objection to the matter being dealt with without a
    hearing.  The respondent replied under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  19
    August 2020 expressed to be a response to grounds pursuant to  Rule  24
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

13. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Given that no objection to this course of
    action has been raised, and bearing in mind the overriding objective in
    Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,  I
    am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this case where no
    objection to a decision being made in the absence of a hearing that  it
    would be right to do so.

14. Grounds (i) and (ii) fall to be considered together.  For  the  reasons
    set out below it is not necessary to address grounds (iii) or (iv).

15. As averred in the grounds, the judge's approach at [37] does appear  to
    proceed on the basis that the appellant's case was that no caution  had
    been received. That is an error, as it is  evident  from  the  skeleton
    argument in particular at [11]and  the  appellant's  witness  statement
    that it was not suggested that no caution had been administered, rather
    that he did not recall it being made. The observation that no copy  had
    been seen is simply that; not a submission that  the  caution  did  not
    exist.

16. Given it was accepted it exists and that it had not been declared,  the
    issue was properly, was there an innocent explanation for that.

17. In considering this issue, I bear in mind what was said in Muhandiramge
    (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 (IAC)

         "10. One of the more recent reported decisions  belonging  to  this
             stable is that of Shen  (Paper  Appeals:  Proving  Dishonesty)
             [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC). This decision is  illustrative  of  the
             moderately complex exercise required of tribunals from time to
             time.  Here  the  Upper  Tribunal  held,   in   harmony   with
             established principle, that in certain contexts the evidential
             pendulum swings three times and in three different directions:




             (a)  First, where the  Secretary  of  State  alleges  that  an
                  applicant has practised  dishonesty  or  deception  in  an
                  application for leave to remain, there  is  an  evidential
                  burden on the  Secretary  of  State.  This  requires  that
                  sufficient evidence be adduced to raise an issue as to the
                  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  fact  in  issue:  for
                  example, by producing the completed application  which  is
                  prima facie deceitful in some material fashion.


             (b)  The spotlight thereby switches to the  applicant.  If  he
                  discharges the burden - again,  an  evidential  one  -  of
                  raising an innocent explanation, namely an  account  which
                  satisfies the minimum level  of  plausibility,  a  further
                  transfer of the burden of proof occurs.


             (c)  Where (b) is satisfied, the burden rests on the Secretary
                  of State to establish, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
                  that the Appellant's prima facie innocent  explanation  is
                  to be rejected."


18. The judge, although not expressly following  the  three-stage  process,
    proceeded to consider the "innocent explanation" offered and to  reject
    it. But the basis of that rejection is on the basis of evidence  as  to
    what would be expected to  happen  and  the  rejection  of  the  wife's
    evidence at [45] and is, I consider, flawed  in  that  the  point  held
    against her was not put to her and again, the  rejection  is  based  on
    what ought to have happened. Similarly, the rejection of  the  evidence
    at [46] does not take into account the context of how the appellant was
    on his return. Equally, it follows  that  the  wife  did  know  of  the
    caution, it begs the question of why she would as  appears  to  be  the
    case, not have told  the  truth  when  the  point  was  raised  by  the
    respondent - see the decision also at [59].

19. I observe that it is unclear whether the points as to the  plausibility
    of the accounts given by the appellant and his wife were  put  to  them
    for them to answer.

20. Contrary to what the respondent submits, I do  not  consider  that  the
    grounds of challenge are simply a disagreement. What the judge has done
    is to make assumptions about  what  would  have  been  done,  what  the
    appellant in a fraught situation would have thought was going  on,  and
    what he understood had happened.

21. I conclude that, for the reasons set out above, the core finding as  to
    dishonesty is not sustainable. Given that the entirety of the  decision
    is predicated on that finding, it is material, and it follows that  the
    decision must for that reason be set aside. In the circumstances, it is
    unnecessary for me to consider grounds (iii) and (iv) as  the  findings
    as to proportionality and discretion were predicated on the  dishonesty
    findings.

22. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law as  claimed.
    I therefore set it aside to be remade in the Upper  Tribunal.  None  of
    the findings of the First-tier are preserved save  as  to  the  matters
    which are not in dispute.



Notice of Decision

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I direct that the decision be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a
         date to be fixed.

      3.  Any  party  wishing  to  adduce  further  evidence  must  make  an
         application pursuant to rule 15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 at least 10  working  days  before  the
         hearing.




         Signed   Date: 29 September 2020
         Jeremy K H Rintoul
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





DIRECTIONS

 1. In the circumstances, and having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction
    and the UTIAC Guidance Note  No  1  of  2020,  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    provisionally of the view that the forthcoming hearing in  this  appeal
    can and should be held remotely, by Skype for Business on a date to  be
    fixed within the period 10 October to 20 December 2020.

 2. No later than 7 days after these  directions  are  sent  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal:

      a. the parties shall file and serve by  email  any  objection  to  the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by  the  proposed  means;  in
         either case giving reasons; and,

      b. without prejudice to  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  any  such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

         (i)  contact/join-in details, were the hearing  is  to  take  place
         remotely by the means currently proposed; and

         (ii) in that event, dates to avoid in the period specified.

 3. The Tribunal will then give further directions, which will either be:

      a. to list the date and time of the  remote  hearing,  confirming  the
         join-in details etc and directing the electronic filing and service
         of documents in connection with the hearing; or

      b.  to give directions with respect to a face-to-face hearing.




         Signed   Date: 29 September 2020
         Jeremy K H Rintoul
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

