

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16195/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 1 March 2019                    |On 7 March 2019                         |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                MOHAMMAD [J]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Griffiths, Counsel instructed by RAMFEL
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Peter-John S White promulgated  on  14  September  2018  ("the
       Decision") dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary
       of State's decision dated 12 November 2017 refusing a  human  rights
       claim made in the context of  the  refusal  of  an  application  for
       indefinite leave to  remain  ("ILR")  based  on  ten  years'  lawful
       residence.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He entered the UK on  15
       August 2006 with leave as a student which was extended to  12  April
       2013.  His wife was his dependent and  was  granted  leave  in  line
       although her leave expired in December 2012.  On 22 August 2012, she
       made an application for asylum with the Appellant as her  dependent.
       According  to  the  Decision,  that  was  initially  refused  on  20
       September 2012 with a right of appeal but when the Appellant and his
       wife lodged notices of appeal, those decisions were withdrawn and on
       10 October 2012 the Respondent refused the claim with  no  right  of
       appeal.  I will need to say more  about  this  aspect  of  the  case
       later.

    3. The couple have two children, but I do  not  need  to  say  anything
       further about them as the Decision so  far  as  their  situation  is
       concerned is not challenged.  The grounds challenging  the  Decision
       turn  on  one  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  of  ILR  namely   the
       Respondent's application of general grounds of refusal.  That  basis
       of refusal turns on an allegation that the Appellant  used  a  proxy
       test taker when taking two English language tests in June  and  July
       2012.  This is a so-called "ETS" allegation.  The Appellant did  not
       use the ETS certificates when making any application  for  leave  to
       remain.  He claims to have since lost the certificates.

    4. The Judge refused  an  application  for  an  adjournment  which  was
       premised on late service  by  the  Respondent  of  his  evidence  in
       relation  to  the  ETS  allegation.   He  went  on  to  uphold   the
       Respondent's decision on the general ground relied  upon.   He  also
       concluded that the Appellant did not have leave to remain  after  12
       April  2013  and  accordingly  could  not  satisfy   the   residence
       requirement for ILR.

    5. The Appellant  has  raised  three  grounds  of  appeal  against  the
       Decision.  The first two were the subject  of  the  pleaded  grounds
       leading to the grant of permission to appeal.   The  third  was  not
       raised until late on the day before the hearing when the Appellant's
       representatives sent a  document  entitled  "additional  grounds  of
       appeal" with no covering letter explaining the basis on which  those
       were submitted (including why the ground was not raised earlier) but
       including a statement within the additional grounds that "..there is
       an essential public interest in  the  decisions  of  the  first-tier
       tribunal being made on the correct legal basis".  In  spite  of  the
       lack of any application or prior notice to the  Respondent  I  heard
       submissions from  Ms  Griffiths  on  this  aspect.   Mr  Melvin  was
       understandably unable to assist with submissions in reply.

    6. The three grounds raised are as follows:


                  a) Ground one: procedural unfairness arising from the
                     Judge's refusal to adjourn.


                  b) Ground two: the Decision in relation to the ETS
                     allegation was irrational and/or inadequately
                     reasoned.
                  c) Ground three: the Appellant had continuing leave under
                     Section 3C Immigration Act 1971 ("Section 3C leave")
                     due to the Respondent's failure properly to determine
                     the asylum claim in 2012/2013.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J  M
       Hollingworth on 5 December 2018 in the following terms:


            "1.  The application for permission was out of time.  I  extend
           time in the light of the totality of the factors  including  the
           explanation put forward and the circumstances related.  I  grant
           the application.  It is arguable that an adjournment should have
           been granted by the Judge given the late service of evidence  by
           the Respondent.  The Judge referred to  this  being  regrettably
           not uncommon in ETS appeals.  It is arguable that unfairness has
           been seen to arise.  At paragraph 6  the  Judge  refers  to  the
           evidence comprised in  the  Respondent's  supplementary  bundle.
           This included  evidence  at  Annex  A  to  a  witness  statement
           apparently identifying the Appellant as someone  who  had  taken
           two ETS speaking tests in June and July 2012.  The basis of  the
           application was that the Appellant wished  to  request  the  ETS
           audio tapes relating to those tests and instruct his own  expert
           witness.  It is arguable that definitive reliance upon  evidence
           served late is to be distinguished from being put on  notice  of
           an allegation."


    8. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and if so to either remit the  appeal  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal or to re-make the decision.  The Respondent  has
       filed a Rule 24 Notice on 28 February 2019  seeking  to  uphold  the
       Decision.


    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


    Ground Three: Permission to Appeal


    9. Although the grant of permission does not  refer  in  terms  to  the
       second ground, I accept that the grant is not limited to  the  first
       ground.  However, before I turn to deal with those two  grounds,  it
       is appropriate to deal with the issue of permission to appeal on the
       third ground which, as I indicate above, was raised late on the  day
       before the hearing in front of me.   The  Appellant  does  not  have
       permission to appeal on this ground and I therefore  determine  that
       issue first not least because the substance of this ground may  have
       some impact on the remainder of the appeal.


   10. I begin with the factual underpinning of this  ground.   As  I  have
       already noted, the Appellant's wife  made  an  asylum  claim  on  22
       August 2012 with the Appellant  as  her  dependent.   It  is  common
       ground that at  the  time  both  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had
       continuing leave to remain since the Appellant still  had  leave  to
       remain as a student.  That led to the making of a decision dated  10
       October 2012 which is headed "Determination of Asylum Claim" and  is
       addressed to Cornerstone Solicitors  Ltd  who,  I  infer,  were  the
       solicitors instructed in that regard.  No  issue  is  taken  by  the
       Appellant that he and his wife did not  receive  that  notice.   The
       letter refers to an earlier letter dated 24 September 2012 which  is
       not in the bundle before me and to the lodging of  appeals  by  both
       the Appellant and his wife.  The letter goes on to observe that  the
       Appellant had not been served with notice of decision (and therefore
       had no right of appeal) and that the Tribunal had been so  informed.
       It then refers to the claim having been "reconsidered"  and  to  the
       reasons for refusal letter "a copy of which  is  attached  for  your
       records".  It goes on to record that both the Appellant and his wife
       had continuing leave - she until 13 December 2012 and  he  until  12
       April 2013. It records that therefore both have continuing leave and
       are not entitled to appeal the decision.


   11. At  that  time,  rights  of  appeal  were  limited  to  "immigration
       decisions" which were listed in Section 82  Nationality  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  As the Respondent's  decision
       letter rightly recorded, a decision refusing to vary leave to remain
       did not give rise to a right of appeal  unless  the  effect  of  the
       variation was that no leave remained.   The  decision  also  rightly
       indicated that there was no right of appeal under Section 83 of  the
       2002 Act against refusal of the  asylum  claim  itself  because  the
       couple did not have more  than  12  months'  leave  remaining.   The
       couple were therefore informed that  if  they  made  an  application
       after expiry of their  leave,  they  would  be  given  a  notice  of
       decision pursuant to  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003
       ("the Notices Regulations") which would confer a right of appeal.  I
       observe  as  an  aside  that,  under  the  appeals  provisions  then
       pertaining, the notice of decision which the couple would have  been
       given in that event would be a notice of removal  under  section  10
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as they would be overstayers.   That
       notice would generate a right of appeal.  There was no obligation on
       the Respondent to serve such a decision at any particular time  save
       that it had to be served before actual removal (see Patel and others
       v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 at  [25]
       to [31]).  The notice of decision would generate an out  of  country
       right of appeal unless a protection or human rights claim  was  made
       which was not certified as clearly unfounded.


   12. A  further  letter  was  sent  by  the  Respondent  to  Cornerstones
       Solicitors Ltd on 8 January 2013 referring back to  the  10  October
       2012 letter and recording that the solicitors wrote  on  7  December
       2012 stating that the Appellant's wife did not intend  to  make  any
       further applications before or after 13 December 2012 and  that  the
       Appellant did not intend to do so either.  The letter  reminded  the
       solicitors however that the Appellant's  leave  continued  until  12
       April 2013 and the solicitors were asked to  confirm  at  that  time
       whether he intended to make a further application.  If he  did  not,
       the letter recorded that the couple would  be  served  a  notice  of
       decision and appeal papers.


   13. The factual basis of the Appellant's third ground is straightforward
       - he says that neither he nor his wife was ever served with a letter
       providing reasons for refusing  the  asylum  claim.   He  says  that
       although this is referred to in the 10 October 2012 letter, no  such
       letter accompanied that notice.  Accordingly, he says, as  a  matter
       of law, the asylum claim was not properly determined  in  accordance
       with rule 333 of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").   That  means,
       he says, that he continued to have Section 3C leave after  12  April
       2013 because the application made by his wife with him as  dependent
       was not determined.


   14. As I pointed out to Ms Griffiths, there  is  a  lack  of  evidential
       underpinning  to  the  Appellant's  case  in   this   regard.    The
       Appellant's witness statement in this regard says only this:


            "[9] In October 2012 and again in January 2013, the Home Office
           (specifically a caseworker called Kate Fleming) wrote to us  and
           said that a fresh asylum decision, with a right of appeal, would
           be served upon us after my leave  to  remain  expired  in  April
           2013.  Consequently, we  believed  that  we  had  made  a  valid
           application to extend our stay in the UK.
            [10] After April 2013 passed, we heard nothing  from  the  Home
           Office.  However, I was  working  at  Waitrose  on  a  part-time
           basis, as my student visa permitted, and every six  months  they
           contacted the Home Office to confirm that I retained  permission
           to  undertake  employment.   Obviously,  I  could  not   provide
           documentary proof that I was lawfully in the UK as my  visa  had
           by this point expired so Waitrose had to conduct these checks to
           establish my eligibility to work.
            [11] Successive employment checks with  the  Home  Office  were
           positively verified and they confirmed that I was  permitted  to
           work as per the terms of my student visa i.e. my  conditions  of
           leave had  been  extended  upon  expiry  of  my  last  visa.   I
           therefore inevitably believed that I was  lawfully  in  the  UK.
           This was especially so as the Home Office had also issued me  an
           ARC card that  stated  I  could  not  undertake  employment.   I
           understand that asylum seekers generally are  not  permitted  to
           engage in employment, but my ARC card expressly  stated  that  I
           could.
            [12] At no point have  I  knowingly  been  in  the  UK  without
           status,  nor  have  I  ever  worked  without  believing  I   had
           permission to do so.  As detailed,  the  Home  Office  expressly
           stated to me (on my ARC card) and to  my  employer  that  I  was
           permitted to work.
            [13] In October 2016, over ten years after my arrival in the UK
           I lodged an application for ILR based on my length of  residence
           in the country.  It was only upon this application being refused
           that I was finally advised by the Home Office that  I  had  been
           unlawfully in the UK since my last visa expired in  April  2013.
           Considering their position until this point, I maintain  that  I
           was entitled to think that I was not here without status."


   15. As appears from the above, there is nothing said  by  the  Appellant
       which amounts to an assertion that  he  did  not  receive  a  letter
       providing reasons  for  refusing  his  asylum  claim.  There  is  no
       evidence whatsoever from Cornerstone Solicitors to that effect.   It
       is they who received the correspondence.  It also appears  from  the
       above chronology (and as recited in the Decision)  that  the  asylum
       claim was first refused on 20 September 2012 and that an appeal  was
       lodged against that decision.  That letter does not  appear  in  the
       bundle and it is not said whether a "reasons for refusal letter" was
       supplied at that stage.  I infer that it was since the Appellant and
       his wife were able to appeal the decision and would  no  doubt  have
       objected if they did not know the reasons why the asylum  claim  was
       refused.  I accept that the September decision was  later  withdrawn
       but it appears from the October decision that a copy of the  reasons
       for refusal letter was supplied from which it can also  be  inferred
       that this was simply a  copy  of  the  earlier  refusal  (since  the
       difference was only as to the content of the notice for the purposes
       of appeal).


   16. Ms Griffiths pointed out that the  Respondent  had  not  produced  a
       "reasons for refusal" letter in his bundle  for  this  appeal.   She
       submitted that it must follow that none had been issued.   I  cannot
       infer that from this omission.  This was not an appeal  against  the
       refusal of the protection claim which was not reiterated  after  the
       couple's leave ended.  As such, there would be  no  reason  for  the
       Respondent to include that letter.  Further, it is  clear  from  the
       Respondent's letter that the assertion now made as to  the  omission
       was not understood in this way.   The  Respondent's  decision  under
       appeal on this aspect reads as follows:


           "Your legal representative submits that the asylum  application,
           on which you were included as a dependant, is still  outstanding
           and so your leave is deemed to have been  continuing  under  the
           provisions of Section 3C leave of the 1971 Immigration Act.  You
           were included as a dependant on your spouse's asylum application
           which was refused on 10 October 2012.  Your legal representative
           has provided a copy of a letter from UKBA dated 10 October  2012
           which advises that as you and your spouse both had extant leave,
           the refusal of the asylum application  does  not  amount  to  an
           immigration decision for the  purposes  of  Section  82  of  the
           Nationality and Immigration Act.  The letter also states that if
           you and your spouse did not make any  further  applications  for
           leave once your leave expires, you will be served  a  Notice  of
           Decision and appeal papers.
           It does not look like any  Notice  of  Decision  was  served  to
           either you or your spouse, but this  does  not  mean  that  your
           leave is deemed to be continuing under section 3C.   Your  legal
           representative submits  that  the  asylum  claim  had  not  been
           determined but this is not  the  case.   The  asylum  claim  was
           refused on 10 October 2012 and  is  not  ongoing.    Your  legal
           representative has provided evidence to show that  on  14  March
           2016 Waitrose requested an Employer Checking Service (ECS) check
           for you and Waitrose were advised that  you  had  the  right  to
           work.  This is an error, but this  error  does  not  confer  any
           leave on you.
           Your legal representative has provided a letter from UKBA  dated
           8 January 2013 addressed to your previous  legal  representative
           advising that your application as a dependant on  your  spouse's
           asylum claim was refused with no ROA.  This letter  states  that
           if you do not intend to lodge any  application  for  leave  once
           your leave expires then you should write to inform us  of  this,
           and you would then be served a notice  of  decision  and  appeal
           papers.  There is no trace of any correspondence from  you  once
           your leave expired on 12 April 2013 until October 2016 when  you
           submitted this application for indefinite leave to remain.  Your
           legal representative does not claim that you wrote  to  us  when
           your leave expired in April 2013 to advise that you would not be
           submitting a further application.  Your lawful leave expired  on
           12 April 2013 and has not been extended  by  the  provisions  of
           Section 3C"


   17. In spite of the lack of evidential underpinning to  the  Appellant's
       legal submission, the Judge as I permitted the legal submissions  to
       be developed.  He also permitted written submissions on the issue to
       be submitted after the  hearing  and  before  the  Decision.   Those
       submissions read as follows so far as relevant to the factual issue:


           "[3]  At the hearing, it was accepted by  both  parties  that  A
           received  correspondence  in  October  2012  and  January   2013
           informing A and his wife that their  asylum  decision  had  been
           refused and stating that a Notice  of  Decision  would  be  sent
           after A's remaining leave to remain (on a student visa) expired.
            It is agreed that the Notice of Decision was never  served  and
           nor was one produced at the hearing itself."


   18. If that statement is intended to convey the  factual  basis  of  the
       submission now made that the Respondent did not serve a "reasons for
       refusal letter" with  the  two  decision  letters,  it  is  at  best
       ambiguous and at worst conveys a fundamental misunderstanding by the
       representatives as to terminology.  What the Respondent  was  saying
       in his decision under appeal (and in the earlier letters)  was  that
       there was no right of appeal in 2012/13 because the decision was not
       one which generated that right of appeal.  However, if the Appellant
       and his wife did make any  further  applications  once  their  leave
       expired, they would be served with a  "Notice  of  Decision"  ie  an
       immigration decision which  did  confer  a  right  of  appeal  under
       Section 82 of the 2002 Act which, as I observed, would be a decision
       to remove them as overstayers.  The decision could  be  appealed  on
       the ground, inter  alia,  that  removal  would  breach  the  Refugee
       Convention.  In turn, that would be a determination  of  the  asylum
       claim and the opportunity  to  appeal  the  refusal  of  the  claim.
       However, the "Notice of Decision" is not to be equated with a letter
       providing reasons for rejecting the  substance  of  the  claim.   No
       "Notice of Decision" was given, however, because the  Appellant  did
       not confirm after his leave ended that he was not making any further
       applications.


   19. Of course, I am considering  at  this  stage  whether  there  is  an
       arguable error of law made by the Judge  in  the  Decision  on  this
       aspect.  The Judge dealt with the issue  at  [27]  to  [32]  of  the
       Decision.  Paragraph [27] sets out the Appellant's factual case  and
       I do not need to repeat this.  The Judge continued as follows:


           "[28] I have no doubt that the appellant's submission is  wrong.
           Section 3C provides that when an in-time application is made and
           leave as originally limited expires before a decision that leave
           is  extended  while  the  application  is  neither  decided  nor
           withdrawn, and while an in-time appeal under section 82  of  the
           2002 Act could be brought.  Section 105 of  the  2002  Act  gave
           power to make regulations about the  service  of  notice  of  an
           "immigration decision", a term defined for the purposes of  that
           part of the Act, and Regulation 4 of the  Immigration  (Notices)
           Regulations 2003  requires  a  decision-maker  to  give  written
           notice to a person of any decision taken in respect of him which
           is appealable under section 82, although it permits notice to be
           given to the representative rather than directly to the  person.
           Paragraph 333 of the Immigration  Rules  provides  that  written
           notice of decisions on applications for asylum shall be given in
           reasonable time, to the  person  or  legal  representative,  and
           further that where the person is unrepresented he or she must be
           informed of the decision, and if  it  is  a  rejection,  how  to
           challenge that, in a language he may be expected to  understand.
           Finally, I was referred to the decision in R (Anufrejeva) v SSHD
           [2003] UKHL 36, for the proposition that notice  of  a  decision
           must  be  given  before  it  can  have  the   character   of   a
           determination with legal effect because the individual  must  be
           in a position to challenge it in the courts if he wishes.
           [29]  What I am satisfied has been overlooked is that this was a
           decision made under the appellate structure in place before  the
           changes made by the Immigration Act 2014.  Prior to that appeals
           lay against appealable "immigration decisions",  as  defined  in
           section 82 of  the  2002  Act.   Refusals  of  asylum  were  not
           appealable  immigration  decisions.   They  were   in   practice
           accompanied by decisions to  remove  the  applicant  by  way  of
           directions, usually under section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 1999,  which  were  appealable,  and  the  subsequent
           appeals were technically against those removal decisions.  Here,
           no removal decisions could properly have been made because  both
           the appellant and his wife still had leave.   That  was  plainly
           what lay behind the references to later service of a  Notice  of
           Decision  (capitalised  in  the  original  letters)  and  appeal
           papers.
           [30]  The appellant and his wife were undoubtedly  sent  written
           notice of a decision to refuse her asylum claim, as required  by
           paragraph 333 and Anufrijeva.  That notice was sent to the legal
           representative, and the last sentence of  Paragraph  333,  about
           providing information on how to challenge the refusal,  did  not
           apply. Nor did Regulations 4 of the  2003  Regulations,  because
           this was not an appealable decision.  The absence  of  a  formal
           notice of appealable immigration decision, in a case  where  the
           decision is not an appealable immigration  decision,  cannot  of
           itself mean that no decision has been  made  or  notified.   The
           letter of 10th October 2012 is quite  unequivocal.   The  asylum
           claim has been decided and refused.  If no application  is  made
           before current leave ends a further and appealable decision will
           be made.  In the event it was not,  but  that  does  not  in  my
           judgment  later  the  fact  that  the  asylum  claim  had   been
           determined and written notice of that  fact  given,  before  the
           expiry of current leave, and thus section  3C  never  came  into
           operation here.
           [31]  That the respondent subsequently and incorrectly said that
           the appellant had a right to work cannot  affect  the  position.
           Leave either was or was not extended by  the  operation  of  the
           statute, and no error made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  could
           override that statute.  Nor am I persuaded  that  the  appellant
           somehow derived a reasonable or legitimate expectation that  the
           asylum  claim  was  still   live,   having   been   told   quite
           unequivocally that it was not.
           [32]  Accordingly I am satisfied that the appellant has  had  no
           leave  since  April  2013,  and  has  not  completed  10  years'
           continuous lawful residence, and on that account also his  claim
           under paragraph 276B fails."


   20. This statement of the  way  in  which  the  law  and  appeal  rights
       operated at the relevant  time  is  admirably  clear.   As  will  be
       observed, it  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  way  in  which  I
       explained the rights of appeal in the context of the facts  of  this
       case above.  I wish simply to add a few observations of my own.


   21. First, this ground of  appeal  conflates  two  separate  concepts  -
       determination of an application for leave to remain and refusal of a
       claim that removal will breach the Refugee Convention.  In terms  of
       current rights of appeal a refusal of the latter claim is what gives
       rise to the right of appeal but, per  the  Notices  Regulations,  it
       remains the "Notice of Decision" which  determines  the  application
       and generates the right of  appeal  (see  regulation  4).   That  is
       incidentally the answer to the exchange of e mails which  post-dated
       the Respondent's decision where the representatives raised an  issue
       about whether the appeal was also against the refusal of ILR.   That
       too confuses concepts.  The appeal in this case is only against  the
       refusal of a human rights claim but one which  needs  to  take  into
       account  whether  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  ILR   just   as,
       previously, an appeal was only against a decision refusing leave  or
       giving notice of removal, but which appeal included the ground  that
       the decision breached the Refugee Convention.

   22. Second, that the application for leave based on the asylum claim  is
       determined by the notice of decision and  not  to  the  reasons  for
       refusing the claim is also supported by Section 77(2)  of  the  2002
       Act which provides that "a person's claim is  pending  until  he  is
       given notice of the Secretary of State's decision on it".


   23. Third, the section of the Rules relating to asylum claims deals with
       the requirements of determination of the latter  claims.   They  say
       nothing about the way in which the application of leave to enter  or
       remain is determined.  Those requirements derive  largely  from  the
       Convention itself and EU law instruments concerning asylum.  As  the
       Judge pointed out, the  argument  that  the  asylum  claim  was  not
       determined because it was not accompanied by  a  refusal  letter  is
       misconceived even applying paragraph 333 of the Rules.   It  may  be
       that the Appellant intended to rely on an  earlier  version  of  the
       Rules although paragraph 333 as appears in the Annex to the skeleton
       argument before me is in the same form as considered by  the  Judge.
       Paragraph 336 of the current Rules provides for reasons to be  given
       in the decision as to the refusal  of  the  asylum  claim.  However,
       other paragraphs within  Part  11  of  the  Rules  make  clear  that
       consideration of an application for leave  to  enter  or  remain  is
       separate to consideration  of  the  asylum  claim  (or  application)
       itself.  Such an application is in effect either an application  for
       leave to enter or remain or an application not to be removed but  is
       separate from it (see for example  paragraphs  330  to  332  of  the
       Rules).


   24. Fourth, conversely, Section 3C relates to the application for  leave
       to enter or remain. It provides as follows:





           "3CContinuation of leave pending variation decision

           (1) This section applies if-
           (a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in the
           United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for variation
           of the leave,
           (b) the application for variation is made before the leave
      expires, and
           (c) the leave expires without the application for variation
      having been decided.
           (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
      period when-
           (a) the application for variation is neither decided nor
      withdrawn,
           (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum and
           Immigration Act 2002 could be brought , while the appellant is
           in the United Kingdom against the decision on the application
           for variation (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of time
           with permission),.
           (c) an appeal under that section against that decision, brought
           while the appellant is in the United Kingdom, is pending (within
           the meaning of section 104 of that Act)."
       In this case, the application to remain on  protection  grounds  was
       determined by the notice of decision dated 10 October 2012,  whether
       or not reasons for refusing  the  asylum  claim  were  or  were  not
       included with that notice.  Accordingly, there  was  no  application
       outstanding as at 12 April 2013 when the Appellant's leave  expired.
       There was therefore nothing  which  could  extend  his  leave  under
       Section 3C.


   25. Fifth and finally, the point made  by  the  Judge  about  section  4
       Immigration Act 1971 finds support in the  guidance  given  in  Syed
       (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT 144 IAC as follows:


           "(2) There is no statutory instrument under the 1971 Act dealing
           with the means of giving notice for the purposes of section 4(1)
           of a decision under  that  Act,  which  is  not  an  immigration
           decision.
           (3)  Accordingly, the Secretary of State has to be able to prove
           that notice of such a decision was communicated  to  the  person
           concerned, in order for it to be effective. Communication  will
           be effective if made to a person authorised  to  receive  it  on
           that person's behalf: see Hosier v Goodall [1962] 1 All E.R. 30;
           but the Secretary  of  State  cannot  rely  upon  deemed  postal
           service."


   26. The decision in Anufrijeva does not avail the Appellant.  That was a
       case where the decision refusing the asylum claim was  not  notified
       to the appellant at all.  The reference at [55] to rule 333 which at
       that time apparently included a requirement to inform of the reasons
       for refusal (now included in paragraph 336) is only  in  support  of
       the proposition within that paragraph  that  the  decision  must  be
       communicated and not that the reasons need to be included  in  order
       for the decision to be legally effective.  As is said at the end  of
       that paragraph, "[t]he Immigration Rules require a refusal and  that
       refusal is to be communicated by a "notice of  refusal"".   That  is
       consistent with what is said in Syed  and  the  Respondent  complied
       with that obligation in this case.


   27. The application to remain on the basis that removal would breach the
       Refugee Convention was therefore properly determined by the decision
       dated 10 October 2012 whether or  not  that  was  accompanied  by  a
       letter  providing  reasons  for  refusing  the  asylum  claim.   The
       Appellant's leave expired thereafter on 12 April 2013 at which  time
       there was no application outstanding  and  therefore  nothing  which
       could serve to extend his leave under Section 3C.


   28. It follows from the above that I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  no
       arguable error of law in the Decision in relation to this aspect and
       I therefore refuse permission to appeal on this ground.


    Ground one


   29. Although, based on  the  upholding  of  the  Judge's  conclusion  in
       relation to the Appellant's lawful residence,  the  Appellant  could
       not succeed in his application for ILR, that  does  not  necessarily
       determine the appeal because  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  depends
       whether removal would  breach  the  human  rights  of  him  and  his
       dependents. As Ms Griffiths pointed out, the two  grounds  on  which
       the Appellant has been given permission have material impact because
       the finding that the Appellant has cheated in his  English  language
       test  would  affect  his  suitability  in  not  just  this  but  any
       subsequent applications and is also relevant to the  proportionality
       balance inherent in Article 8 ECHR.  Further,  the  first  of  those
       grounds raises the issue of procedural fairness  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing.  I therefore turn to deal with that ground  first.
       If the  Appellant  succeeds  on  this  ground,  ground  two  becomes
       immaterial and I accept that the  appeal  would  need  to  be  heard
       afresh (although for the reasons given above I  would  preserve  the
       Judge's findings and reasoning in relation  to  the  period  of  the
       Appellant's lawful residence).


   30. I begin by reminding myself what is said in the headnote of  Nwaigwe
       (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) as follows:


           "...In practice, in most cases the question will be whether  the
           refusal deprived the affected party  of  his  right  to  a  fair
           hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness
           grounds, it is important to recognise that the question for  the
           Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather,
           the test to be applied  is  that  of  fairness:  was  there  any
           deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?"


   31. In this case, the unfairness is said to be the Respondent's reliance
       on and the  Judge's  acceptance  of  evidence  produced  late.   The
       Respondent's supplementary bundle is dated 2  August  2018  and  was
       apparently provided to the First-tier Tribunal  on  that  day.   The
       Respondent's bundle was sent to the Appellant's representative on  6
       August 2018.  The Appellant's representative says that this was  not
       received  until  after  the  hearing  on  9  August  2018  and   the
       supplementary bundle was not served at all.  The date of the hearing
       was on a Thursday and the bundle was sent on the Monday prior to the
       hearing.  It is not clear why it would not have been received before
       the hearing but that it was not is not disputed by  the  Respondent.
       No evidence has been provided of service of the supplementary bundle
       dated 2 August 2018 and it therefore appears to be accepted that  it
       was not received until the day of the hearing.


   32. Ms Griffiths argued that the material supplied late  was  extensive.
       I reject that submission.  The  supplementary  bundle  includes  the
       "generic" ETS evidence relied upon by the Respondent in  such  cases
       being the statements of Rebecca Collings and  Peter  Millington  and
       the expert report of Professor French.  The witness  statements  are
       included also in the  Respondent's  bundle.   There  has  been  much
       litigation surrounding ETS cases which includes consideration of all
       this material.  Although  Ms  Griffiths  said  that  the  report  of
       Professor French is now historic being dated 20 April 2016, it  must
       be remembered that the ETS cases are also  historic  and  it  cannot
       therefore sensibly be suggested that Professor  French's  report  is
       out of date.


   33. Insofar as  Ms  Griffiths  sought  to  suggest  therefore  that  the
       Appellant might wish to instruct an expert to opine on  the  generic
       aspects of the case, that is highly unlikely to be  the  case.   The
       report of Dr Harrison which formed the basis  of  challenge  in  ETS
       cases in the initial  stages  is  overtaken  by  Professor  French's
       report which was considered for example by the Administrative  Court
       in Abbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWHC 78
       (Admin).  In later cases such as MA (ETS  -  TOEIC  testing)  [2016]
       UKUT 00450 (IAC), the Tribunal has heard from different experts  who
       "demonstrated a substantial measure of agreement among them" ([11]).
        Accordingly, as Mr Melvin pointed out, it should  be  evident  from
       reported cases in this area what the Respondent  would  rely  on  in
       terms of generic evidence.  Moreover, the Respondent could, if he so
       wished, simply rely on reported cases on the subject to  the  effect
       that the generic evidence was sufficient to discharge his evidential
       burden of proof and to shift the burden on to the Appellant (see  in
       particular the guidance in the reported  case  of  SM  and  Qadir  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence -  Burden
       of Proof) [2016] UKUT  00229  (IAC)  which  guidance  is  of  course
       binding on a First-tier Tribunal Judge).


   34. I accept that, as noted  in  MA,  thereafter  the  exercise  becomes
       "intrinsically fact sensitive" and therefore what was  important  to
       the Appellant was to know the  evidence  against  him  individually.
       But, once again, the judgments in this area make clear the nature of
       the evidence and the  sorts  of  evidence  available  to  rebut  the
       generic evidence (see in particular [23] to [25]  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal's judgment in Ahsan and others v Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 including at [25] reference  to
       the obtaining of the voice recording tapes  and  instruction  of  an
       expert in that regard).

   35. The evidence relating to this Appellant  is  a  statement  of  Reema
       Bassi, a Home Office caseworker, which deals in the  main  with  the
       generic evidence, but which annexes the excerpt from the spreadsheet
       showing the scores relating to the tests of the  Appellant  and  the
       spreadsheet in relation to tests taken on the two relevant dates (19
       June 2012 and 17 July 2012) at the test centre in  question.   There
       is also evidence relating to the criminal investigations  into  that
       test centre, Premier Language Training Centre, Barking.  All in all,
       including the witness statement, that material runs to nine pages.


   36. The Judge set out the basis of the application for  the  adjournment
       and his refusal as follows:


           "[6]...Ms  Walker,  however,  made   an   application   for   an
           adjournment.  This followed the late service of the respondent's
           supplementary bundle, including  evidence,  at  annex  A1  to  a
           witness statement of Reema  Bassi,  apparently  identifying  the
           appellant as someone who had taken two  ETS  speaking  tests  in
           June and July 2012.  The basis of the application was  that  the
           appellant wished to request the  ETS  audio  tapes  relating  to
           these tests and instruct his own expert witness.
           [7]    Ms  Javed  opposed  the  application,  saying  that   the
           appellant had been on notice of the allegation made about  these
           tests and could have instructed his own expert much earlier.
           [8]   Ms Walker in  reply  said  that  there  had  been  limited
           information before today, and the information now produced  gave
           rise to concerns, because  in  relation  to  one  of  the  tests
           apparently identified the writing score was missing.
           [9]   I refused the adjournment.  I was satisfied  that  it  was
           not in the interests of  justice  now  to  adjourn  the  matter.
           Although the respondent's evidence had been served late (as  is,
           regrettably, not uncommon in ETS  appeals)  the  allegation  had
           been known since the refusal, and the appellant  had  had  ample
           time to address it, as fully or as sparingly as he chose.  There
           was no basis for allowing him now to take a step which he  could
           have taken months ago."


   37. I observe that the Appellant has not taken any steps since the First-
       tier Tribunal hearing or the Decision to  obtain  the  tapes  or  to
       instruct his own expert.  Ms Griffiths  appeared  to  be  under  the
       misapprehension  that  the  Tribunal  ought  to  have  ordered   the
       Respondent to produce them.  That is not the  position.   The  tapes
       are the property of ETS and have to be sought from those acting  for
       that provider.  So much is clear from what is said at  [25]  of  the
       judgment in Ahsan as follows:


           " One other development that I should mention is that it in due
           course  became  known  that  ETS  has  retained  copies  of  the
           individual voice recordings which it has identified  as  showing
           the use of a proxy, and that a copy  can  be  obtained  (without
           charge) on application.  This will allow the person concerned to
           listen for themselves to check if the recorded  voice  is  their
           own.  If they believe it is, they can seek confirmation from  an
           independent expert: the Secretary  of  State's  practice  is  to
           agree in such a case to  the  instruction  of  a  joint  expert.
           However, even where the voice appears to be someone else's  that
           is  not  necessarily  accepted   by   applicants/appellants   as
           conclusive.  There have been challenges to the accuracy  of  the
           system for storing and retrieving the relevant file; and it  has
           been argued that even if a test  centre  submitted  a  batch  of
           recordings made by a proxy that was done in  its  own  interests
           and without the knowledge of the person taking the test."


   38. As Mr Melvin submitted, it  is  inconceivable  that  representatives
       preparing an ETS case would not familiarise themselves with the case
       law in this area and consider the options open  to  them  to  obtain
       evidence. I accept that the fact that the Appellant  has  not  taken
       steps to obtain the tapes after the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  is
       not itself relevant to the fairness of the previous hearing  but  is
       some indication whether he  thought  it  necessary  to  obtain  that
       evidence to make out his case.  Of course, such evidence  could  not
       assist at this stage in relation to whether the Decision contains an
       error of law, but the Appellant could have made  an  application  to
       adduce it if an error of law was found.  He has not done so.


   39. The Appellant was on notice as to the dates of the tests  and  venue
       if he had forgotten when and where he took them.  Those details  are
       included in the Respondent's decision letter (which refers  also  to
       the witness evidence of Mr Millington and  Ms  Collings).   In  this
       case, the Appellant was also interviewed about the tests on 17 March
       2017.  The interview record is in the Respondent's bundle.  I am not
       clear whether that was provided to the Appellant at the time (it  is
       not in the Appellant's bundle) but those representing him could have
       asked for it at any time and apparently did not.


   40. I accept that there may be a difference between being on  notice  as
       to a point to be taken  and  having  the  evidence  supporting  that
       point.   I accept also what is said in Macharia v  IAT  [1999]  EWCA
       Civ 3001 that an adjournment is a safeguard where evidence which  is
       necessary to determine an issue is admitted late.  However, that  is
       not to say that an adjournment is  necessary  in  every  such  case.
       Whether that is the position depends on the nature and extent of the
       material and why the adjournment is needed.  The balance is  between
       avoiding the delay caused by an adjournment (to ensure that  justice
       is dispensed promptly and efficiently) against the  need  to  ensure
       that the party affected by the late production is not  disadvantaged
       and can participate fully in the proceedings.


   41. Ms Griffiths made the valid point  that  the  Appellant  might  have
       taken the view that he did not need to  prepare  his  case  on  this
       aspect because the Respondent had not produced the evidence on which
       he relied.  If that had been the  position,  I  may  have  had  more
       sympathy for his submissions on  fairness.   However,  although  the
       grounds of appeal  before  Judge  White  make  the  point  that  the
       Applicant has not seen the evidence on  which  reliance  is  placed,
       those go on to make submissions why he would not need to  cheat.   A
       third of  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  is  devoted  to  the
       allegation.  He could not know when  his  case  was  being  prepared
       whether  the  Respondent  would  provide  the  evidence  before  the
       hearing.  He had to prepare his case  on  the  assumption  that  the
       Respondent would produce the evidence and he would  have  to  answer
       it.

   42. Moreover, it is clear from the interview record that  the  Appellant
       knew full well which tests were in issue  and  provided  information
       about them on that occasion; indeed, Ms Griffiths relied on what  he
       said during that interview as evidence that  the  Appellant  himself
       sat the test.  The Appellant was present  at  the  hearing  to  give
       instructions about any aspects arising from the evidence and to give
       oral evidence in relation to what the  spreadsheet  evidence  showed
       about his own test.  I do not accept therefore  that  the  Appellant
       prepared on the basis that he would not need to rebut the allegation
       because the Respondent had not produced his  evidence.  Even  though
       the late production of the evidence  by  the  Respondent  is  to  be
       deprecated, I am satisfied that the Appellant could and should  have
       been able to deal with  it.   I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the
       hearing was not unfair.

   43. I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the Judge's  refusal
       of the adjournment.  For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied  that
       the Appellant knew the nature of  the  evidence  on  which  reliance
       would be placed and ample opportunity to obtain whatever evidence he
       wanted to in  order  to  rebut  it  (as  the  Judge  observed).   He
       therefore had the opportunity to deal with the late evidence and was
       in fact able to deal with the points which he says  emerge  from  it
       (save for the obtaining of the tapes which he could have done before
       or since but has not).  Ground one is not made out. I therefore turn
       to ground two which concerns the way in which the Judge  dealt  with
       the competing evidence on the ETS issue.


    Ground two


   44. There are a number of matters which it is said that the Judge either
       failed to take into  account  or  provided  inadequate  reasons  for
       rejecting as follows:


                  a) The Judge found at  [23]  of  the  Decision  that  the
                     Appellant may have used a proxy notwithstanding  being
                     able to speak English because he  may  have  found  it
                     convenient to do so; he did not  provide  reasons  for
                     that finding.


                  b) The Judge  also  found  in  that  paragraph  that  the
                     Appellant's use of a proxy test taker may  indicate  a
                     contempt for immigration control when his evidence was
                     that he was (or thought he was)  in  the  UK  lawfully
                     throughout his stay.


                  c) It is also asserted that the Judge found that the fact
                     of the Appellant's good spoken English might be due to
                     an improvement in his  skills  since  the  test  which
                     failed  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that   the
                     Appellant had  passed  an  upper,  intermediate  level
                     English language course some five years prior  to  the
                     test.

                  d) The Judge also implicitly rejected without reasons the
                     Appellant's evidence as  contained  in  the  interview
                     record about the detail of the test which he sat.


                  e) Ms Griffiths points out that there is either a gap  or
                     omission in the second of the  tests  relied  upon  in
                     relation to the writing score.  No score is given  and
                     that is unexplained.  She also pointed out  that  both
                     the speaking and writing scores were low in the  first
                     test which was indicative of the Appellant not  having
                     used a proxy test taker.


   45. As I understand the Appellant's grounds it is not disputed, save  in
       relation to procedural fairness, that the Respondent's evidence  was
       sufficient to establish the evidential  burden  and  to  shift  that
       burden to the Appellant.  I therefore  focus  on  the  part  of  the
       Decision dealing with  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  the  Judge's
       findings on that evidence:


           "[20]  I  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant.   His   witness
           statement says that he took the speaking tests himself, that  he
           took a second one because he failed the first, that he then  re-
           sat and passed, and  that  he  subsequently  completed  an  MBA,
           showing that his English was good.  He made the  point  that  it
           would be illogical to use a proxy who failed the test, and  also
           said  that  he  never  used  the  certificates,  so  they   were
           irrelevant.
           [21]  In his oral evidence he gave a  little  more  detail.   He
           said that it was the writing that he failed -  I  note  that  he
           also said this when interviewed by the respondent prior  to  the
           decision.  He said that the test centre was  close  to  him  and
           that he wanted to see his English level for himself, and also to
           take the test in case he needed it.  He thought there were about
           25-30 people taking the test each time -  I  note  that  in  his
           interview he said there were 2-15.  He repeated that he had  not
           used a proxy.
           [22]  In his interview he had given a brief description  of  how
           the tests were conducted, and said that  he  paid  cash  at  the
           centre, and could not recall what he had paid.  He no longer had
           the certificates, having lost them when he moved house.
           [23]  He gave his evidence  in  English,  and  had  no  apparent
           difficulty in doing that,  but  that  is  of  relatively  little
           assistance, because that was in August 2018, and the tests  with
           which I am concerned were in June and July 2012.   I  note  that
           his score on  the  first  speaking  test  was  140  out  of  200
           according to the spreadsheet produced, and a month later  was  a
           much improved 190.  I accept that he subsequently  completed  an
           MBA and that his English may well have been at a reasonably good
           level.  That a person may be good at English is not, however, in
           itself a guarantee that they may not have  decided  to  minimise
           any risk of failure by employing a proxy taker whose English was
           even better.  There may be a variety of  reasons,  ranging  from
           lack of confidence through inconvenience of the date or place to
           contempt  for  immigration  control,  why  a  person  who  would
           probably have been able to pass the test, might nonetheless have
           decided to guarantee the result by using a proxy.  I  note  that
           the appellant says that it was the writing,  not  the  speaking,
           which  he  failed  first  time  which  would  entail  that   the
           documentary evidence was wrong.  The appellant has not been able
           to produce his certificates,  which  would  have  confirmed  the
           results, and has not described any attempts to obtain duplicates
           once the issue arose.  I also note that it would  be  surprising
           to engage a proxy speaker who then failed the test, although  it
           is no doubt possible that  something  went  wrong  on  the  day.
           Finally I note the observation that the certificates were  never
           used, but, as the  appellant  accepted,  were  he  to  make  any
           application, his leave being due to expire  in  early  2013,  he
           would have needed such certificates.  That he did not  make  any
           application is explained, at least in part, by the  decision  to
           join in his wife's asylum claim shortly afterwards.
           [24]   I  have  reminded  myself  of  the  seriousness  of   the
           allegation.  I have also considered the guidance of the House of
           Lords, that there is  only  one  civil  standard  of  proof  but
           decision makers will bear in mind, to  the  extent  appropriate,
           that serious allegations may be inherently less probable and  in
           consequence require more cogent evidence.  The background  here,
           as noted above, is that there  is  evidence  of  cheating  on  a
           substantial scale in these tests, and I cannot therefore  regard
           the allegation as inherently improbable.  On the one hand I have
           the evidence from the  respondent  which  indicates  that  by  a
           process of testing ETS  have  concluded  that  this  appellant's
           results were procured by deception, and further  indicates  that
           the test centre where the appellant said he took the  tests  was
           one with a very high level of cheating, both  generally  and  on
           the day of his claimed tests.  Against that I have the  evidence
           of the appellant himself that she  [sic]  took  the  test,  with
           limited detail provided in oral evidence at the hearing  and  in
           any interview, which in  respect  of  the  numbers  present  was
           inconsistent, and arguably inconsistent with the evidence of the
           number of tests being taken on each day.  I am  aware  that  the
           evidence on which the respondent relies is  not  foolproof,  but
           the  only  expert  evidence  actually  before  me  is  generally
           supportive of it.  I note the absence of evidence other than the
           appellant's own testimony, for example documentary  evidence  of
           payment of the appropriate  test  fee,  to  confirm  the  actual
           taking of the test, or duplicate certificates to  confirm  which
           element  was  failed.   I  am  on  balance  satisfied  that  the
           respondent has discharged the legal burden of proof,  and  shown
           that this particular appellant used proxies in the taking of his
           English test in 2012.  Although the test certificates  were  not
           thereafter used in any application I am satisfied that  this  is
           because the appellant chose  to  make  an  asylum  claim,  which
           failed, and thereafter to make no further  applications.   I  am
           not satisfied that the tests were taken purely  for  information
           and with no intent ever to use the certificates; the only likely
           reason for re-taking the test, after obtaining  the  information
           supposedly required, would in my judgment be to have a test pass
           available for use."


   46. I deal then with the individual challenges made  as  set  out  above
       using the same letters:


                  a)  The  reasoning  that  the  Appellant  might  find  it
                     convenient to use a proxy at  [23]  is  to  one  of  a
                     number of hypothetical reasons why the Appellant might
                     have done so notwithstanding  his  assertion  that  he
                     spoke good English.  That is in any event explained at
                     the end of [24] of the Decision where the Judge refers
                     to the need which he finds the Appellant  had  at  the
                     time  for  a  certificate  (even  though  he  did  not
                     subsequently use it in any application for the reasons
                     there given) and to the fact that,  even  on  his  own
                     account the Appellant had failed  part  of  the  first
                     test.


                  b) The Judge subsequently found that  the  Appellant  had
                     not been in the UK lawfully throughout his  stay  (see
                     extract from the Decision cited in relation to  ground
                     three).  The Judge found at [30] of the Decision  that
                     the  letter  refusing  the  asylum   application   was
                     "unequivocal".  As the Judge points out at [31] of the
                     Decision,  the  Appellant  was  allowed  to   continue
                     working due to the Respondent's error but that did not
                     affect the lawfulness of his position. Again,  in  any
                     event, what is said at [23] of the Decision is  merely
                     one of a number of  hypothetical  possibilities  about
                     why an individual may  use  a  proxy  even  though  he
                     speaks English.


                  c) The Judge accepts at [23] of  the  Decision  that  the
                     Appellant's  "English  may  well  have   been   at   a
                     reasonably good level".  He does not rely expressly on
                     the passage of time since the tests.  However, as  the
                     Judge points out, that part of the Appellant's case is
                     undermined to some extent by the scores in  the  first
                     test and that the Appellant even on his own  case  had
                     to re-sit the test.  As the  Judge  also  points  out,
                     there is a significant difference between  the  scores
                     in the first test and the second in spite of the  fact
                     that the tests were only a few weeks apart  (which  is
                     indicative of them not being sat by the same person).


                  d) The Judge records the Appellant's evidence of how  the
                     tests were conducted at [22] of the Decision.  That is
                     then taken into account in what the Judge says at [24]
                     of the Decision.  He rejects that as probative of  the
                     Appellant's case for the reasons there given  and  the
                     discrepancies in other regards.


                  e)  Although  I  accept  that  there  is  a  gap  in  the
                     spreadsheet evidence relating to the written  test  on
                     the second occasion, that does not of itself undermine
                     the evidence of the Respondent.  The Appellant himself
                     says that he failed part of the first test and had  to
                     re-sit it.  It is his case that  it  was  the  writing
                     part which he failed and the speaking  part  which  he
                     passed - although both scores  are  the  same  in  the
                     first test.  Be that as it may, it is the  Appellant's
                     case that he re-sat the test and the fact that he  had
                     low scores on the first  occasion  only  a  few  weeks
                     before  he  achieved  an  almost  perfect   score   is
                     indicative of at least the second test being taken  by
                     someone else.  Moreover, the Judge  did  consider  the
                     low scores at [23] of the Decision where he points out
                     that this may either be evidence that  the  proxy  who
                     took the test failed it or that  something  else  went
                     wrong.


   47. I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to make those findings on
       the evidence for the reasons given.  I am satisfied that there is no
       error of law  in  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  evidence  or
       reasoning in relation to the ETS issue.  Ground two is not made out.




    Conclusion


   48. For all of the above reasons, the Appellant's grounds are  not  made
       out.  I refuse permission to appeal on ground three.  I am satisfied
       that the Decision does not contain an error of law on the other  two
       grounds.  Accordingly, I uphold the Decision.


    DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P-J  S  White
    promulgated  on  14  September  2018  with  the  consequence  that  the
    Appellant's appeal stands dismissed
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 5 March 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
