
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16511/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 June 2019                      |On 05 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     OBO
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik, Counsel instructed by Calices Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  His date of birth is  5  August
    1971.

2.   I have anonymised the Appellant in order to  protect  the  identity  of
    his children.

3.   The Appellant claims to have come to the UK unlawfully in 1986.   On  7
    December  2010  he  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of  twelve   months'
    imprisonment  having  been  convicted  of  an  offence  of   dishonesty
    involving false documents which were used for the purpose of making  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain.  He pleaded guilty  on  the
    morning of  the  trial.  The  sentencing  comments  which  are  in  the
    Respondent's bundle indicate that the offence occurred  in  2005.   The
    Appellant  approached  solicitors  to   attempt   to   regularise   his
    immigration status.  The solicitors were corrupt and  have  since  been
    convicted of offences involving providing false information  for  those
    seeking to remain in the UK.  The sentencing judge stated as follow:-

         "I have no doubt you knew precisely what  you  were  entering  into
         which was illegal arrangements to remain in this country  it  being
         impossible to regularise your position given how you  arrived  here
         in any other way.  You therefore have accepted  that  you  provided
         false documentation, namely false work certificates which  led  the
         Home Office to believe that not only have you arrived here  legally
         but you have been  here  for  some  considerable  time.   That  was
         untrue."


4.   Following conviction, the Secretary of State made a  deportation  order
    on 5 September  2011.   The  Appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal.   His
    deportation was deemed by the Secretary of State to be conducive to the
    public good (s.3(5) of the Immigration  Act  1971)  and  a  deportation
    order was made pursuant to s.5(1) of the 1971 Act.  Pursuant to s.32(5)
    of the 2007 Act the Secretary of State must make a deportation order in
    respect of a foreign criminal unless there is an exception under  s.33.
    The Appellant claimed that an  exception  applied  because  deportation
    would breach his rights under Article 8 ECHR.  His appeal was dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   The Appellant remained in the UK in breach of a deportation order.   He
    then made an application to remain here on human rights  grounds  which
    was effectively an application to revoke the deportation  order.   This
    was refused by the Secretary of State on 15 November 2017.  His  appeal
    was  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision  that  was
    promulgated on 21 November 2019.  The decision was set aside by a panel
    comprising the Honourable Mrs Justice Lang DBE and Upper Tribunal Judge
    McWilliam in a decision that was promulgated on 18 March 2019.

The error of law decision

6.   The Upper Tribunal concluded as follows:-

         "16. The structure of the Rules and the statutory framework is such
             that the public interest question has been decided within  the
             sentencing thresholds.  KO  decided  that  Exception  2,  like
             Exception 1 is self-contained.  No account should be taken  of
             the   Appellant's   criminality   when   considering   whether
             deportation is unduly harsh.  We  do  not  accept  Mr  Malik's
             submission that the judge's assessment was autonomous and  her
             reference to criminality went no further than  to  acknowledge
             the thresholds within the statutory regime.  It is clear  from
             a proper reading of the decision that  when  assessing  unduly
             harsh in the context of the separation of the family the judge
             attached weight to the Appellant's criminality.  Following KO,
             this is a material error.


         17.  Moreover, we are troubled by the conclusion of  the  FTT  that
             the delay or failure to make arrangements for the  Appellant's
             deportation affected the public interest in deportation.   The
             Secretary of  State  made  a  deportation  order  against  the
             Appellant shortly  after  he  was  convicted  of  the  trigger
             offence.  This order was  maintained  on  appeal.   Thus,  the
             Appellant decided to remain in the UK in breach of it.  It  is
             difficult to see how this could reduce the public interest  in
             deportation.  Whilst the Respondent  relies  on  Patel  [2013]
             UKSC 72 where the Supreme Court decided that there was no duty
             to issue removal directions at the same time as  the  decision
             to refuse leave, we accept Mr Malik's submission that the case
             is not on point because it concerned a  removal  decision  and
             the  right  of  appeal  within  the  then  statutory   regime.
             However,  we  accept  that  there  is  no  obligation  on  the
             Secretary  of  State  to  make  arrangements  to  deport   the
             Appellant.  He decided to remain here unlawfully and in breach
             of a deportation order.  The delay  in  making  a  deportation
             order is not a matter which is capable of reducing the  weight
             to be attached to the public  interest.   He  is,  of  course,
             entitled to rely upon the consequence of the delay,  which  is
             that his private and family life, and that  of  his  children,
             has strengthened with time.


         18.  The judge attached weight to the Appellant's criminality  when
             assessing unduly harsh which  amounts  to  a  material  error.
             Furthermore, she found that there had been a delay or  failure
             to act by the Respondent and that this  decreased  the  public
             interest.  This was not a finding that was open to her.


         19.  However, we do not accept the  other  criticisms  of  the  FTT
             decision, made by the Secretary of State.  In  our  view,  the
             judge gave careful consideration  to  the  evidence  and  made
             rational findings in respect of the family and the  impact  on
             the children, which were properly open to her on the basis  of
             the evidence  before  her.   What  weight  to  attack  to  the
             evidence was a matter for her.  In the  Secretary  of  State's
             skeleton argument there is a specific challenge to the finding
             that the Appellant's son needs  a  male  role  model.   It  is
             asserted that this was not supported by the evidence.  In  our
             view it was open to  the  judge  to  make  this  finding  when
             considering the deportation of the father of an  eleven-  year
             old boy.  Therefore, we consider that the judge's findings  on
             the evidence should be preserved when the appeal is re-heard.


         20.  On the basis of the judge's findings,  which  found  that  the
             Appellant's deportation would have a significant impact on the
             children, we do not accept the Secretary of State's submission
             that the impact of the Appellant's deportation on  the  family
             amounted to no more than the usual consequences of deportation
             and therefore it was not capable in law of meeting the "unduly
             harsh" test.  In our view, that will be a matter for the Upper
             Tribunal to decide when the appeal is re-heard.


         21.  Therefore, we allow the appeal only on the basis of the errors
             of law set out above, at paragraphs 16 to 18.   We  set  aside
             the decision of the FTT and adjourn the matter for  a  hearing
             in the UT in order for the decision to be remade,  having  had
             regard to the Practice Statement of the  Senior  President  of
             Tribunals of 25 September 2012.  The  findings  of  the  judge
             relating to the  children  are  preserved.   The  task  to  be
             undertaken by the UT on the next occasion is the assessment of
             "unduly harsh" in the context of separation of the family.


         22.  We make the following directions:-


             (1)  Should the Appellant wish to rely on  evidence  that  was
                  not before the FTT an application should be made  pursuant
                  to Rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure Rules no  later  than
                  two weeks before the hearing.


             (2)  The Appellant is to serve and file a consolidated  bundle
                  not later than two weeks before the substantive hearing.


             (3)  Parties are to file  and  serve  skeleton  arguments  not
                  later that seven days before the substantive hearing."


7.   The Appellant and his wife, BO, have three children; EMO  and  EZO  are
    the eldest children. Their dates of birth are respectively  20  October
    2004 and 29 January 2007. They are British citizens. The youngest child
    is ESO.  ESO's date of birth is 21 January 2011.  ESO and BO have leave
    to remain.  All the children were born here in the UK.

8.   The Upper Tribunal preserved findings that were made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal (see [19] to [21] of the decision of the Upper Tribunal).  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that the children had  lived  here
    all their lives and that they were in full-time education.  The  eldest
    child at that time was in year 9 and the judge found at [53] that  this
    was a significant point in her education.  The judge took into  account
    that the children had  not  visited  Nigeria  and  that  they  had  "no
    meaningful relationship with any family members in Nigeria".  The judge
    concluded that it would be in the children's best interests  to  remain
    here as part of a family unit in the UK.  There  was  evidence  of  the
    wife's employment and the judge found  that  the  Appellant  played  "a
    significant role in caring for the children".  The judge concluded that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect the children to return  to  Nigeria.
    This was conceded by Mr Wilding representing the Secretary of State  at
    the error of law hearing.

At the resumed hearing

9.   At the start of  the  hearing  Mr  Malik  asked  for  further  time  to
    consider the Secretary of State's skeleton  argument  and  the  further
    evidence adduced by the Secretary of State pursuant to Rule  15(2A)  of
    the 2008 Procedure Rules.  He also wanted to make  enquiries  with  his
    instructing solicitors and the Appellant about  any  further  evidence.
    None had been served by the Appellant in response to the directions  of
    the Upper Tribunal.  I rose  for  fifteen  minutes  to  give  Mr  Malik
    further time.  The hearing was resumed.  Mr Malik indicated that  there
    was no further evidence to be relied upon by the Appellant and  he  was
    content for the matter to proceed by  way  of  submissions  only.   The
    further evidence submitted by the Respondent related to  the  issue  of
    delay.  Mr Malik indicated that the Appellant did not  rely  on  delay.
    The further evidence was therefore not material to my conclusions.

10.  In the light of the findings of the Upper Tribunal when  setting  aside
    the decision it  is  necessary  at  this  point  in  this  decision  to
    summarise the findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney which I
    accept are the starting point for my decision.   The  salient  findings
    are as follows:-

         "53. The appellant's eldest daughter is in Year 9 at  school.   She
             may well have started her GCSEs and if she  has  not,  she  is
             likely to be making important decisions about  which  ones  to
             take.  It is reasonable to  say  that  this,  for  her,  is  a
             significant point  in  her  education.   The  appellant's  two
             eldest children are 14 and nearly  12  and  have  spent  their
             whole lives in the United  Kingdom.   They  have  not  visited
             Nigeria much less lived there in the past.  I accept they have
             no meaningful relationship with any family members in  Nigeria
             and to expect them to leave the United  Kingdom  to  enter  an
             entirely new education system, with a different curriculum, in
             a different country which they have never  visited  away  from
             their friends, community and established support  in  my  view
             would be unduly harsh.


         54.  I must also consider if it would be unduly harsh to expect the
             children to remain in the United Kingdom without their father.
              In doing so I have had  regard  to  the  public  interest  in
             deportation, to which I have  given  reduced  weight  for  the
             reasons set out above.  I have also had  regard  to  the  fact
             that the appellant is their main carer and the person to  whom
             they turn if they have a problem (evidence of the  appellant's
             wife), that the absence of the appellant is likely to severely
             impact on his wife's ability to sustain her  employment  given
             the increased childcare responsibilities  that  will  fall  on
             her.  It is in the public interest  for  working  families  to
             remain working families.


         55.   The  two  eldest  children  have  described   clearly   their
             attachment to their father and what his absence would mean  to
             him and I place weight on their wishes.  This is  not  a  case
             where the appellant was separated from  his  family  during  a
             lengthy period of imprisonment.  His eldest daughter  was  not
             quite six years old when he went to prison  and  his  son  was
             only three and a half.  While they may remember their father's
             absence, their father has been a  constant  presence  for  the
             majority of their lives and his absence was a relatively short
             one between August 2010 and March 2011 which included a period
             of immigration detention.


         56.  The appellant's son is of an age where a male  role  model  is
             very important and while it might be open to him to visit  the
             appellant in Nigeria, or  to  maintain  communication  through
             other means, this is no substitute for the appellant's  active
             presence  in  his  life.   The  prospect  of  the  appellant's
             children being able to visit him, certainly in  the  short  to
             medium term in  Nigeria  is  limited.   This  is  because  the
             appellant's wife is on a limited income and, unless and  until
             the appellant could find work in Nigeria, is likely to be  the
             one who has to fund any travel.  The reality therefore is that
             the only contact that is likely between the appellant and  his
             children in the short to medium term is by telephone or  other
             indirect means."


The Legal Framework

11.  This is an application to revoke a deportation order and  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules are set out at  paragraph  390,  390A,  and  391A[1].
    Sections 117A-D of  the  NIAA  2002  Act  are  material  with  specific
    reference to Section 117C(5)[2].

12.  The considerations  set  out  in  the  statute  are  reflected  in  the
    Immigration Rules[3].



Application of the Legislation and the Immigration Rules

13.  In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53, Lord Carnwath (giving  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court)
    analysed the exception, based on the  deportee's  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, in Section 117C(5) NIAA 2002 and paragraph 399(a) IR.
     At [15], he explained that he started from the  presumption  that  the
    provisions were intended to be consistent with the  general  principles
    relating to the "best interests" of children, including  the  principle
    that "a child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not
    responsible, such as the conduct of a parent" (see Zoumbas v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74  per  Lord  Hodge  at
    [10]).  He concluded that the exception was self-contained and  so,  in
    deciding whether or not it applied,  the  decision  maker  should  only
    consider the factors specified and disregard the degree of  seriousness
    of the parental offending and other public interest considerations  (at
    [20]-[23]).

14.  Lord Carnwath gave guidance on the meaning of "unduly harsh" at [23]:

         "23. On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             'reasonableness' under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word 'unduly' implies an  element  of  comparison.
             It assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is
             a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant
             context.  'Unduly' implies something going beyond that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in
             IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be
             equated with a requirement to show 'very compelling  reasons'.
             That would be in  effect  to  replicate  the  additional  test
             applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences  of  four
             years or more."


15.  Lord Carnwath cited with approval  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223:-

         "27. Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of 'unduly harsh'  in
             this context was given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J
             President and  UT  Judge  Perkins)  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223
             (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15  April
             2015.  They referred to the 'evaluative  assessment'  required
             of the tribunal:


                  'By way of self-direction, we  are  mindful  that  "unduly
                  harsh" does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
                  undesirable or  merely  difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a
                  considerably more elevated  threshold.   "Harsh"  in  this
                  context, denotes something severe, or bleak.   It  is  the
                  antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore,  the
                  addition of the adverb "unduly" raises an already elevated
                  standard still higher.'


             On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal  held
             that the test was satisfied:


                  'Approached  in  this  way,  we  have  no  hesitation   in
                  concluding that it would be unduly harsh for either of the
                  two seven year old British citizen children  concerned  to
                  be  abruptly  uprooted  from  their  United  Kingdom  life
                  setting and  lifestyle  and  exiled  to  this  struggling,
                  impoverished and plague stricken west African  state.   No
                  reasonable or right thinking person  would  consider  this
                  anything less that cruel.'


             This view was based simply on the wording of  the  subsection,
             and did not apparently depend on  any  view  of  the  relative
             severity of the particular offence.  I do not  understand  the
             conclusion on the facts of that case to be controversial."


16.  In RA (S.117C: "Unduly harsh" seriousness of offence) Iraq [2019]  UKUT
    123 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  considered  the  test  of  unduly  harsh
    following KO and decided that the approval by the Supreme Court of  the
    test formulated by the Upper Tribunal in MK does not mean that the test
    includes the way in which the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation to
    the facts of the case before it.  At paragraph 17  the  Upper  Tribunal
    said:

         "17. As can be seen from paragraph 27 of KO (Nigeria), the test  of
             'unduly harsh' has a dual aspect.  It is not  enough  for  the
             outcome to be 'severe' or  'bleak'.   Proper  effect  must  be
             given to the adverb 'unduly'.   The  position  is,  therefore,
             significantly far removed from the test  of  'reasonableness',
             as found in section 117B(6)(b)."


    And the court decided that the way in which a court or Tribunal  should
    approach Section 117 remains as set out in the judgment of  Jackson  LJ
    in NA (Pakistan) and Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA  Civ  662
    and the court said as follows:

         "22. It is important to keep in  mind  that  the  test  in  section
             117C(6) is extremely demanding.  The fact that, at this point,
             a  tribunal  is  required  to   engage   in   a   wide-ranging
             proportionality   exercise,   balancing   the   weight    that
             appropriately falls to be given to  factors  on  the  proposed
             deportee's side of the  balance  against  the  weight  of  the
             public interest, does not in any sense permit the tribunal  to
             engage in the sort of exercise that would  be  appropriate  in
             the case of someone who is not within  the  ambit  of  section
             117C.  Not only must regard be had to the factors set  out  in
             section 117B, such as giving little weight to  a  relationship
             formed with a qualifying partner that is established when  the
             proposed deportee was in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  the
             public interest in the deportation of a  foreign  criminal  is
             high; and even higher for a person sentenced  to  imprisonment
             of at least four years."


17.  In NA the Court of Appeal said as follows:-

         "28. The next question which arises concerns the meaning  of  'very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2'.  The new para. 398 uses the same language
             as  section  117C(6).    It   refers   to   'very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those  described  in  paragraphs
             399 and 399A.'  Paragraphs 399 and  399A  of  the  2014  rules
             refer to the same subject matter as  Exceptions  1  and  2  in
             section 117C, but they do so in greater detail.

         29.  In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  'there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         ....

         32.  Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  'near  miss'
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   'very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  He would need to have a far stronger case  than  that
             by reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to  bring
             himself within that  fall  back  protection.   But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  The decision  maker,  be  it
             the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must  look  at  all  the
             matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in  order  to  determine
             whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high
             public interest in deportation.

         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation  will  be  rare.   The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

         ...

         36.  In relation to a medium offender, first see whether  he  falls
             within Exception 1 or Exception  2.   If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds.  If he does not, then the next stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  'sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  If there are, then the Article 8 claim succeeds.   If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim  fails.   As  was  the
             case under the 2012 rules  (as  explained  in  MF  (Nigeria)),
             there is no room for a general Article  8  evaluation  outside
             the 2014 rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act."

Submissions

18.  Mr Malik made submissions in the context of his skeleton argument.   He
    started by stressing that certain findings had been  preserved  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.

19.  The issue before the Upper Tribunal  is  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the  Appellant.   It
    was conceded by the Presenting Officer on the  last  occasion  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for  them  to  relocate  with  the  Appellant  to
    Nigeria.

20.  Mr Malik drew my attention to four findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    as preserved by the Upper  Tribunal  which  he  submitted  cumulatively
    amounted to undue harshness for the purposes of  Section  117C(5).   He
    relied on paragraph 54 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   Those
    factors are as follows:

    1.   The Appellant was the children's main carer and the person to whom
         they turn to if they have a problem.

    2.   The Appellant's wife is a part-time student and she is employed on
         a part-time basis.  In the absence of the Appellant her ability  to
         sustain employment given increased childcare responsibilities would
         be severely impacted.

    3.   The Appellant's son is at an age where a male role model  is  very
         important.

    4.   The prospect of the Appellant's children being able to  visit  him
         "certainly in the short to medium term in Nigeria is limited".

    Mr Malik accepted that the first three  factors  relied  upon  are  not
    sufficient,  individually  or  cumulatively  to  meet  the  high  test.
    However, in his view, what tips it over enabling the Appellant to  meet
    the elevated threshold is the fourth factor.  The Appellant's  wife  is
    on a limited income and the judge found that the Appellant  was  likely
    to be the one who would have to fund travel and therefore he would have
    to find work in Nigeria first.   Thus,  the  judge  concluded  that  in
    reality the only contact that is likely between the Appellant  and  his
    children "in the short  to  medium  term"  is  by  telephone  or  other
    indirect means.  The final factor relied upon according to Mr Malik  is
    a powerful finding in the  Appellant's  favour  when  assessing  unduly
    harsh.  He stated further that he accepted that the evidence  does  not
    establish unduly harsh by a significant margin but that  it  may  cross
    the threshold.

21.  I heard submissions from Mr Tufan.  He relied on  KO  and  RA  and  his
    skeleton argument.  In his view nothing out of the  ordinary  has  been
    identified which would  amount  to  unduly  harsh  or  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above in accordance with s.117B(6)  bringing  my
    attention to the fact that Mr Malik  had  not  made  submissions  under
    s.117B(6).

22.  Mr Malik responded.  The Appellant not being able  to  have  meaningful
    contact  with  his  children  is  not  a   "natural   consequences   of
    deportation" rather it would amount to bleak  and  severe  consequences
    for the children.

Conclusions

23.  The problem with the Appellant's case  is  that  factors  going  beyond
    those that normally follow a deportation when  a  family  is  separated
    have not been properly identified.   He  has  chosen  to  rely  on  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  not  to  submit
    further evidence which may have assisted his case.

24.  The judge found that there would likely be  a  delay  in  the  children
    being able to visit  Nigeria.   I  do  not  accept  that  this  factor,
    together with the other three factors (which unarguably, as conceded by
    Mr Malik, are not individually or together capable of meeting the  high
    threshold) would enable the Appellant to meet the elevated test.  There
    is nothing preventing the Appellant from seeking employment in  Nigeria
    on his return.  There is no evidence that the  Appellant's  wife  would
    have to give up her employment and/or studies here.  The  children  are
    of  school  age.   Whilst  I  accept  that  she  will  be  faced   with
    difficulties attempting to juggle childcare and other responsibilities,
    I do not find that the Appellant's deportation would prevent  her  from
    working.  The judge's findings as to  what  amounts  to  the  short  to
    medium term is not specified.  The Appellant has chosen not to  provide
    further evidence on the issue of employment opportunities  for  him  in
    Nigeria.  It is not reasonable to draw an inference  from  the  judge's
    conclusions that there would be a significant delay in the  Appellant's
    children being able to visit him in Nigeria which would establish  that
    the circumstances reached  the  high  threshold.   I  accept  that  the
    Appellant's wife may not earn very much and that there may  some  delay
    in the Appellant finding employment in Nigeria, but  I  do  not  accept
    this this, together with the other  three  factors  relied  on  by  the
    Appellant reach the elevated threshold.

25.  The judge found that the  Appellant  was  the  children's  main  carer.
    Whilst not departing from this finding, it must be viewed  in  context.
    The Appellant was not able to work at the date of the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal because of his status  here.   He  may  at  present
    spend more time looking after the children than his wife does, however,
    the children have two parents who are both able and willing to care for
    them.  There is no evidence that the Appellant's wife's ability to care
    for the children will be materially compromised by the absence  of  the
    Appellant.  It is clear that separation of the family  will  be  tragic
    and have adverse effects on the children who will be devastated.   They
    probably do not remember his incarceration.  Whilst it is very much  in
    their best interests to remain here in the UK with  both  parents,  the
    Appellant has failed  to  identify  factors  of  meeting  the  elevated
    hurdle.

26.  Mr Malik did not rely on s.117C(6)  of  the  2002  Act.   There  is  no
    evidence before me that the Appellant could satisfy any  of  the  limbs
    s.117 (4).  He has not been lawfully resident here most  of  his  life.
    There is no evidence that there would be very significant obstacles  to
    integration.  He did not advance  a  case  on  the  basis  that  he  is
    socially and culturally integrated and the evidence would not support a
    finding in his favour.  Very compelling  circumstances  have  not  been
    properly  identified  that  would  be  capable  of  amounting  to  very
    compelling circumstances, notwithstanding that the Appellant is  not  a
    serious offender.  In any event, in this case the Appellant would  have
    to establish "exceptional circumstances" in the context  of  para  390A
    and the evidence on which he has chosen to rely  falls  well  short  of
    this.

27.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under Article 8.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 03 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
-----------------------

  [1]    390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
   considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
   following:


       (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;


       (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;


       (iii)  the interests of the community, including the maintenance of
       an effective immigration control;


       (iv)   the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
       circumstances.


   390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will consider
   whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only
   be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in maintaining
   the deportation order will be outweighed by other factors.


   391.  In the case of a person who has been deported following conviction
   for a criminal offence, the continuation of a deportation order against
   that person will be the proper course:


       (a)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
       person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4
       years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the
       deportation order when, if an application for revocation is received,
       consideration will be given on a case by case basis to whether the
       deportation order should be maintained, or


       (b)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
       person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years,
       at any time,


   Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to the Human
   Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status
   of Refugees, or there are other exceptional circumstances that mean the
   continuation is outweighed by compelling factors.


   391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
   authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either by a
   change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
   information coming to light which was not before the appellate
   authorities or the Secretary of State.  The passage of time since the
   person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change of
   circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.






  [2]    117A Application of this Part


       (1)    This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
          determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -


          (a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
             life under Article 8, and


          (b) as a result would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998.


       (2)     In considering the public interest  question,  the  court  or
          tribunal must (in particular) have regard -


          (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section  117B,
             and


          (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
             the consideration listed in section 117C.


       (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
          question of whether an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
          respect for private and family life  is  justified  under  Article
          8(2).


   117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases


       (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
          public interest.


       (2)    It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that
          persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
          to speak English, because persons who can speak English -


          (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


          (b) are better able to integrate into society.


       (3)    It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that
          persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
          financially independent, because such persons -


          (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


          (b) are better able to integrate into society.


       (4)    Little weight should be given to -


          (a) a private life, or


          (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


          that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
          the United Kingdom unlawfully.


       (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life established by
          a person at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
          precarious.


       (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
          public interest does not require the person's removal where -


          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and


          (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.


   117C  Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
   criminals


       (1)     The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
          interest.


       (2)    The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
          the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.




       (3)    In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
          sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or  more,  the
          public interest requires C's deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
          Exception 2 applies.


       (4)    Exception 1 applies where -


          (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,


          (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and


          (c) there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


       (5)    Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
          relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a   genuine   and
          subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the
          effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be  unduly
          harsh.


       (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
          period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
          requires   deportation   unless   there   are   very    compelling
          circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and
          2.


       (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
          into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a  decision
          to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the  reason
          for the decision  was  the  offence  or  offences  for  which  the
          criminal has been convicted.


   117D  Interpretation of this Part


       (1)    In this Part -


          "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
          Rights;


          "Qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of  18  and
          who -


          (a) is a British citizen, or


          (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more;


          "qualifying partner" means a partner who -


          (a) is a British citizen, or


          (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of
             the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).


       (2)    In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person -


          (a) who is not a British citizen,


          (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
             and


          (c) who -


             (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                 least 12 months,


             (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious
                 harm, or


             (iii)    is a persistent offender.


       (3)    For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to an
          order under -


          (a) section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964
             (insanity etc),


          (b) section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
             (insanity etc), or


          (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order 1986
             (insanity etc),


          has not been convicted of an offence.


       (4)    In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
          a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time -


          (a) do not include a person who has received a suspended sentence
             (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or any
             part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);


          (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to a period of
             imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of being
             sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate to
             that length of time;


          (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention, or ordered or
             directed to be detained, in an institution other than a prison
             (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution for
             young offenders) for that length of time; and


          (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or
             detention, or ordered or directed to be detained, for an
             indeterminate period, provided that it may last for at least
             that length of time.


       (5)    If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to
          whether a person is a British citizen, it is for the person
          asserting that fact to prove it.






  [3] A398    These rules apply where:


       (a)    a foreign criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
          deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
          under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


       (b)    a foreign  criminal  applies  for  a  deportation  order  made
          against him to be revoked.


   398.  Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
       the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention,
       and


       (a)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
          public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


       (b)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
          public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of less  than  4  years  but  at  least  12
          months; or


       (c)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
          public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
          Secretary of State, their offending has  caused  serious  harm  or
          they are a persistent offender who shows  a  particular  disregard
          for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that  claim  will
          consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it  does
          not, the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
          other factors where there are very compelling  circumstances  over
          and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


   399.  This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -


       (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
          with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


           (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or


           (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the   date   of   the
                immigration decision; and in either case


                (a)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                    country to which the person is to be deported; and


                (b)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                    the UK without the person who is to be deported; or


       (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
          partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled  in
          the UK, and


           (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                (deportee) was in the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration
                status was not precarious; and


           (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
                country to which the person is to be  deported,  because  of
                compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in
                paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


           (iii)  it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain  in
                the UK without the person who is to be deported.


   399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -


       (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
          his life; and


       (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


       (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
          into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.


