
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16265/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2021                   |On 27 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ROBERT MIAH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:     Mr Biggs, Counsel


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

       1.  Following  a  'resumed  hearing'  I  now  remake  the   decision
          concerning Mr Miah's appeal against the SSHD's decision dated  19
          September 2019, refusing  him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
          Kingdom ('UK').

       2. This decision should be read  with  my  'error  of  law'  decision
          promulgated on 12 October 2020,  in  which  I  accepted  that  the
          SSHD's grounds of appeal were made out and concluded that, in  its
          decision dated 18 February 2020, the First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')
          erred in law in allowing Mr Miah's appeal.

Background

       3. Mr Miah is a citizen of Bangladesh.  His  immigration  history  is
          lengthy and complex.   The  parties  agreed  a  chronology  and  I
          include the most relevant aspects here.

          15.1.10            M arrives in the UK as a  student  having  been
                      granted a Tier 4 (General) Student Visa  expiring  on
                      30.7.12.


          30.7.12       M  application  to  extend  leave   as   a   student
                      (ultimately extended to 28.12.14)


          16.10.14     M receives a Degree  in  business  studies  from  the
                      University of Greenwich


          28.12.14     M further (in time) application to extend leave as  a
                      student


          9.4.15  FLR(O)  application  for  leave  to  remain  'outside  the
                      Rules', attaching M's letter dated 1.4.15 in which he
                      explains he seeks an extension in order to attend his
                      graduation ceremony and to obtain a CAS to enable him
                      to  study  for  a  Masters  course   in   'any   good
                      University'


          15.6.15      28.12.14 student application voided by SSHD


          8.10.15      ('the 2015 refusal')


                      SSHD's decision (no right of appeal) refusing to vary
                      leave because:


                       (i) discretion should not be exercised in M's  favour
                      and the application for leave is being sought  for  a
                      purpose not covered by the  Rules  pursuant  to  para
                      322(1), and


                       (ii) in his application dated 30.7.12 M used a  TOEIC
                      certificate fraudulently obtained, pursuant  to  para
                      322(5)


          23.10.15     M sends a  pre-action  protocol  ('PAP')  challenging
                      the 2015 refusal but SSHD maintains the decision in a
                      reply dated 28.10.15


          13.5.16      M (second) application to remain in the  UK  'outside
                      the Rules' (refused 18.7.16)


          22.7.16      M (third) application to remain 'outside  the  Rules'
                      (refused 30.1.17)


          1.10.16      M application to  remain  as  an  EEA  family  member
                      (refused 10.4.17, refusal  unsuccessfully  challenged
                      in JR proceedings; 20.12.17 permission refused)


          22.3.18      M served with liability to removal


          3.5.18 M (second) application to remain as an  EEA  family  member
                      (refused 22.8.18).   Third  and  fourth  applications
                      also refused.


          11.1.19      Final EEA family member application refusal


          27.4.19      M 'encountered' during an enforcement visit  when  he
                      was arrested and detained.  SSHD alleged that  M  was
                      found with four credit cards, a driving permit not in
                      his name and a counterfeit biometric residence permit
                      in his name.  M served with notice of removal  window
                      and bailed.


          3.6.19 M application to remain on basis of Article 8 private life


          8.8.19 M attends an interview regarding  the  allegation  that  he
                      used a fraudulent TOEIC certificate in 2012


          19.9.19      ('the 2019 refusal')


                      Human rights claim refused:  M  could  not  meet  the
                      requirements of the Rules and also failed on  grounds
                      of 'suitability' in the light of the materials  found
                      in his possession when he was arrested on 27.4.19


            SSHD makes it  clear  that  M's  interview  responses  re  TOEIC
                      certificate have been assessed as  credible  and  the
                      allegation that he committed TOEIC fraud is no longer
                      maintained


          2.10.19      M's grounds of appeal to the FTT alleging that as  it
                      is now accepted that he  did  not  use  a  fraudulent
                      TOEIC certificate, the SSHD's decision dated  8.10.15
                      was wrong and he should be put in the position he was
                      in before that decision was made


          18.2.19      FTT decision allowing M's appeal


          12.10.20     UT decision allowing appeal against the FTT  decision
                      and giving directions


       4. Mr Miah's immigration history may be summarised  as  follows.   He
          entered the UK as a student  on  15  January  2010.   His  student
          leave expired  on  28  December  2014  and  was  not  successfully
          extended.  Although Mr Miah made  regular  efforts  to  regularise
          his immigration status by making applications to  remain  'outside
          the  Rules'  and  as  an  EEA  family  member,  these   were   all
          unsuccessful.  After his last EEA family  member  application  was
          refused in January 2019, Mr Miah continued to  remain  in  the  UK
          unlawfully and only came to the attention of the SSHD  because  he
          was 'encountered' during  an  enforcement  visit  in  April  2019,
          after which he  made  a  human  rights  application.   It  is  the
          refusal of that application, i.e. the 2019 refusal,  that  is  the
          subject of Mr Miah's appeal before me.

Hearing

Documentary evidence

       5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Biggs confirmed that he  relied
          upon a 162-page bundle prepared pursuant to my directions for  the
          'resumed hearing' before the Upper Tribunal ('the UT bundle')  and
          a skeleton argument dated 22 December 2020.

       6. Mr Diwnycz relied upon a short skeleton argument dated  4  January
          2021, prepared by Mrs Aboni.  He did not have a  copy  of  the  UT
          bundle.  Mr Biggs emailed a copy of the bundle to Mr  Diwnycz  and
          I gave him further time to consider it.   This  repeated  much  of
          the  evidence  before  the  FTT  but  also  contained  a   witness
          statement from Mr Miah dated 16 October 2020.   I  explained  that
          the statement contained a number of assertions that were  disputed
          by the SSHD and as such I anticipated that there would need to  be
          cross-examination.  Mr Biggs acknowledged that the  appellant  was
          ready and willing to be cross-examined  on  the  contents  of  his
          witness statement.

Application to admit evidence late

       7. After a short break Mr Diwnycz indicated  that  he  was  ready  to
          proceed but wished to make an application to  rely  upon  evidence
          that had  not  yet  been  served  -  a  note  of  the  immigration
          officers' enforcement visit in April 2019  ('the  IO  note').   Mr
          Diwnycz explained that this evidence was material  to  the  SSHD's
          allegations underpinning the contention that Mr Miah did not  meet
          the  suitability  criteria.   I  heard   submissions   from   both
          representatives and then announced that I refused the  application
          to admit late evidence.  I outline my reasons for this here.

       8. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the delay was  lengthy  and  significant.
          He conceded that the evidence should have  been  disclosed  before
          the FTT and he could see no reason why it was  not.   He  accepted
          that the delay in seeking to rely  upon  this  evidence  continued
          during the course of the UT proceedings.   I  had  made  it  clear
          that  any  evidence  regarding  the  suitability  allegation   was
          relevant to Article 8 and gave both  parties  the  opportunity  to
          file and evidence regarding this in  accordance  with  directions.
          The appellant filed and served his evidence on 21 October 2020  in
          compliance with the directions.  According to the directions,  the
          SSHD was therefore required to file and serve her  evidence  by  4
          November 2020.  The breach of directions therefore runs from  this
          date to now - over two months.

       9. At first  Mr  Diwinycz  sought  to  explain  the  delay  upon  the
          assertion that the SSHD did not receive the UT bundle or at  least
          it was not provided to the relevant officers  to  deal  with.   Mr
          Biggs clarified the chronology of relevant events  as  follows  by
          reference to emails:

          21.10.20     Mrs Aboni (a Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer)
                       agrees the proposed chronology served  by  Mr  Miah's
                       solicitors.  UT bundle filed and served


          4.11.20      Last date for SSHD to file  and  serve  evidence.  Mr
                       Miah's solicitors chase Mrs Aboni /  SSHD  for  their
                       evidence pursuant to the UT directions.


          5.11.20      Mrs Aboni confirms that the SSHD has received the  UT
                       bundle and only relies upon the SSHD's bundle  before
                       the FTT.


          22.12.20     Mr Miah's  skeleton  argument  makes  it  clear  that
                       notwithstanding   serious    allegations    regarding
                       suitability in the 2019 refusal, the SSHD elected  to
                       adduce no evidence to substantiate those allegations,
                       and the SSHD cannot  therefore  displace  the  burden
                       upon her in this regard.


          4.1.21  SSHD's  skeleton  argument   maintains   the   suitability
                       allegation but makes no reference to any evidence  in
                       support of the suitability allegation.


      10. Having  had  an  opportunity  to  reconsider  this  chronology  of
          relevant emails, Mr Diwnycz candidly accepted the  chronology  and
          expressly conceded that the SSHD had no clear explanation for  the
          delay in seeking to rely upon the IO note.  He  acknowledged  that
          this was a "huge stumbling block" but invited  me  to  nonetheless
          admit  the  evidence  because  it  was  highly  relevant  to   the
          suitability allegation.  I accept that it would  be  very  helpful
          to have a copy of the IO note and it was relevant to an  issue  in
          dispute, albeit it could not be said to be an issue  determinative
          of the appeal.  However there has been a significant delay  and  a
          flagrant breach of  directions,  without  any  clear  or  credible
          explanation for it.  To admit the evidence at the very late  stage
          of the hearing would probably  have  required  an  adjournment  to
          enable instructions to be taken and further evidence  in  rebuttal
          sought.  The appeal could  still  be  determined  fairly  to  both
          parties  without  the  evidence.   Having   considered   all   the
          circumstances of the case, including the  overriding  objective  I
          refused the application to admit the IO note.

      11. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the burden to establish that Mr Miah  did
          not meet the suitability criteria for the reasons alleged  by  the
          SSHD rested upon her, and she was unable to displace  that  burden
          in the absence of any evidence.  In the circumstances  Mr  Diwnycz
          withdrew reliance upon  the  suitability  allegation,  and  simply
          relied upon the remainder of the 2019 refusal.

Issues in dispute

      12. Prior to hearing evidence, I invited the  representatives  to  try
          to  agree  whether  any  other  matters  were   agreed   and   the
          outstanding issues in dispute.  I summarise the  outcome  of  that
          discussion  here.   It  was  agreed  that   Mr   Miah   has   been
          continuously resident in the  UK  from  15  January  2010  to  the
          present.  He was lawfully resident  until  just  after  8  October
          2015, first with leave as a student and  then  with  'section  3C'
          leave.  Mr Biggs added the caveat that his  primary  position  was
          that the 2015 refusal should be treated as void.   However  if  he
          was wrong about that he accepted that Mr Miah should  properly  be
          treated as having a precarious immigration  status  from  2010  to
          October 2015, and then to have  remained  unlawfully  after  that,
          albeit pursuing various applications.

      13. Mr Biggs also accepted  that  Mr  Miah  was  unable  to  meet  the
          Immigration Rules as at the date of the 2019  refusal  or  at  the
          date of hearing.  Mr Biggs confirmed that  he  continued  to  rely
          upon the three  alternate  arguments  in  his  skeleton  argument,
          which he submitted should result in Mr Miah's appeal on Article  8
          grounds being allowed.  Mr Biggs clarified  that  he  only  relied
          upon Mr Miah's  private  life  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8.
          Whilst that private life  necessarily  included  the  family  life
          with his brother and his brother's  immediate  family  members  in
          the UK, Mr Biggs correctly conceded that this did not contain  the
          necessary elements to constitute family life for the  purposes  of
          Article 8.

Oral evidence

      14. I heard evidence from the appellant.  He confirmed  the  truth  of
          his witness statement and was  then  cross-examined  briefly.   Mr
          Diwnycz focussed upon the nature and extent of Mr  Miah's  private
          life.  I then asked a few questions to clarify matters.  The  oral
          evidence is recorded in my record of proceedings.

Submissions

      15. Mr Diwnycz invited me to find that Mr Miah's private life  in  the
          UK was relatively slight and could not on any view be regarded  as
          strong enough to outweigh the public interest in his removal.

      16. Mr Biggs' oral  submissions  mirrored  his  skeleton  argument  in
          large measure. He relied upon three alternative arguments which  I
          summarise, but address in more detail below.

              i) The UT is obliged to make a finding that Mr  Miah  did  not
                 commit  TOEIC  fraud,  and  given  the   absence   of   any
                 countervailing considerations including the  withdrawal  of
                 the suitability allegation, Mr Miah was entitled  to  leave
                 pursuant to the SSHD's policy such that his appeal must  be
                 allowed.


             ii) The 2015 refusal was vitiated by public law error and  gave
                 rise to 'historical injustice' with the consequence that Mr
                 Miah should be treated as if that error had not  been  made
                 in accordance with the principles set out in R  (Ahsan  and
                 others) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009,  [2018]  Imm  AR  531,
                 particularly [120].


            iii) In any event, Mr Miah has been seriously prejudiced by  the
                 belated recognition that he did  not  commit  TOEIC  fraud.
                 This 'historical injustice' drastically reduced the  weight
                 to be attached to the public interest in this  case  -  see
                 Patel (historic injustice; NIAA Part 5A)  [2020]  UKUT  351
                 (IAC), such that even though Mr Miah's private life was not
                 strong, it nevertheless could  not  be  outweighed  by  the
                 applicable public interest.


      17. At the end of his submissions,  I  invited  Mr  Biggs  to  clarify
          whether Mr Miah ever challenged the  2015  refusal  including  the
          TOEIC fraud allegation by  way  of  judicial  review  proceedings.
           I had observed in my 'error of law'  decision  that  although  Mr
          Miah did not have a right of appeal, he did not seek to  challenge
          the 2015 refusal "by way of judicial review (yet challenged  other
          decisions by judicial review)  and  made  no  further  application
          until 13 May 2016".  This was  not  contradicted  in  his  witness
          statement, which only referred to sending  a  pre-action  protocol
          and receiving a reply maintaining the decision.   However I  noted
          that there was a reference in the papers to Mr Miah having  lodged
          a judicial review on 20 November 2015 which was refused on 12  May
          2016.  No further information was given.  In the light of  this  I
          asked Mr Biggs for the matter to be clarified in the  form  of  an
          email to me by 10am  the  following  day  after  the  hearing  but
          nothing was received by the  time  this  decision  was  finalised.
          The  matter  therefore  remains  unclear.   I  am  satisfied  that
          whether Mr Miah challenged the 2015  refusal  in  judicial  review
          proceedings or not, my approach  to  the  case  would  remain  the
          same.

Remote hearing

      18. At the conclusion of the hearing  both  representatives  confirmed
          that they were content that the hearing,  which  took  place  over
          the course of  some  three  hours  via  Skype  for  Business,  was
          conducted fully and fairly and they had  no  concerns  whatsoever.
          The representatives were satisfied, as was I, that  this  mode  of
          hearing involved no prejudice to the interests  of  either  party.
          I  am  satisfied  that  the  mode  of   hearing   was   necessary,
          appropriate and proportionate.

Relevant background and findings of fact

      19. It is unnecessary  for  me  to  make  detailed  findings  of  fact
          because much of the history is now of  either  marginal  relevance
          or accepted.  I have not made any findings regarding  the  matters
          relied upon by the SSHD  to  support  the  suitability  allegation
          because this has been withdrawn.  I  have  highlighted  undisputed
          facts  and  made  findings  on  the  most  relevant   matters   in
          chronological order, having considered all  the  evidence  in  the
          round, both documentary and oral.  Mr Miah gave his evidence in  a
          straightforward manner, and made a  clear  effort  to  answer  the
          questions he was asked carefully  and  honestly.   Notwithstanding
          this, I do not accept many  of  the  assertions  he  made  in  his
          witness statement for the reasons I set out below.

      20. It is undisputed that Mr Miah has been resident in  the  UK  since
          entering lawfully as  a  student  on  15  January  2010.   He  has
          therefore been resident in the UK for a lengthy period of some  10
          years.  He was lawfully present  as  a  student  until  his  leave
          expired on 28 December 2014.  During  that  time  he  successfully
          completed a Bachelor of Arts in Business Studies, as evidenced  by
          his  October  2014  degree  certificate  from  the  University  of
          Greenwich.

      21. Mr Miah made an in-time application to  vary  his  leave  'outside
          the Rules'.  The reasons for this are  not  altogether  clear  but
          having considered all the evidence I am prepared  to  accept  that
          his letter  dated  1  April  2015  summarises  his  reasoning  for
          wishing to  remain  in  the  UK:  (i)  to  attend  his  graduation
          ceremony in July 2015; (ii) to pursue further studies in the  form
          of a Masters degree in the UK.  At that time he entirely  accepted
          he could not meet the Immigration Rules because he  did  not  have
          the requisite CAS.  However his reasoning for not  being  able  to
          obtain a CAS was unclear.  In his  letter  he  appears  to  assert
          that he was offered places in a few colleges  but  their  licences
          were revoked and he therefore needed more time to  obtain  a  CAS.
          There is some support for this in  his  earlier  letter  dated  26
          January 2015.  There was no evidence cited  in  support  of  this.
          No specific institution was named and  dates  were  not  provided.
          In any event, this was inconsistent with his witness statement  in
          which he stated that he applied to many universities and  colleges
          but they refused to admit him because he  "sat  for  the  ETS  and
          also...did not have  any  valid  leave".   The  evidence  said  to
          support Mr Miah's attempts to enrol in a Masters in the UT  bundle
          (pages 60-71) appear more exploratory  in  nature.    His  witness
          statement was silent on any current plans  regarding  his  further
          education.

      22. Mr Miah's letter also made no meaningful effort to explain why  he
          could not return to Bangladesh, in order to apply for  a  CAS  and
          undertake any required English test from there.   In  his  witness
          statement  Mr  Miah  explained  that  he  could  not   return   to
          Bangladesh without a Masters degree because  his  family  expected
          this from him and he needed a Masters to get a  good  job.   I  do
          not accept this explanation for not returning at the  time.   When
          I asked Mr Miah why he did not return to Bangladesh  to  make  the
          required applications he said that he needed to clear his name  in
          the UK, having been accused of TOEIC fraud.  The  difficulty  with
          this explanation is that Mr Miah clearly gave up on  clearing  his
          name by October 2016, when he  turned his attention  to  remaining
          in the UK as an EEA family  member  of  his  brother,  an  Italian
          citizen.

      23. For the reasons I set out  in  my  'error  of  law'  decision  and
          below, the 2015 refusal  is  not  vitiated  by  the  SSHD's  later
          withdrawal of the TOEIC  fraud  allegation,  because  the  primary
          reason for refusing the application remained.  It follows that  Mr
          Miah  became  an  overstayer  in  October  2015.   The  chronology
          demonstrates  that  although  Mr  Miah  made  regular  efforts  to
          regularise his immigration status after becoming an overstayer  by
          making applications to remain 'outside the Rules' and  as  an  EEA
          family member, these were all unsuccessful.  After  his  last  EEA
          family member application was refused in  January  2019,  Mr  Miah
          continued to remain in the UK unlawfully  and  only  came  to  the
          attention of the SSHD  because  he  was  'encountered'  during  an
          enforcement visit in April 2019,  after  which  he  made  a  human
          rights application.  In his witness  statement  Mr  Miah  accepted
          that he was 'encountered' on 27 April 2019  at  a  London  address
          where he was living  in  shared  accommodation.   In  his  witness
          statement, he claimed to have done  "nothing  wrong".   There  has
          been a complete  failure  on  his  part  to  acknowledge  that  he
          remained in the UK as an unlawful overstayer, having  been  served
          with a RED.0001 on 22 March 2018 and his  EEA  application  having
          been refused on 11 January 2019.

      24. It is clear from the chronology that Mr Miah wished to  remain  in
          the UK 'come what may' and  continued  to  reside  in  the  UK  in
          blatant disregard of immigration law.  It is difficult to see  why
          Mr Miah did not return to Bangladesh from where he could  seek  to
          clear his name with the help  of  legal  representatives  and  his
          brother in the UK, with a view to lawfully re-entering the UK.

      25. I do not accept Mr Miah's vague and generalised assertions in  his
          witness statement that he suffered anxiety,  depression  and  lost
          his "career ... youth ... dignity and respect as  a  human  being"
          as a result of wrongly being accused of TOEIC fraud  in  the  2015
          refusal.  During his oral evidence, Mr Miah explained that he  has
          been  prescribed  anti-depressive  medication  but  accepted  that
          there was no medical  evidence  to  support  his  claims  to  have
          suffered  anxiety  and  depression.   In  addition,  Mr  Miah  has
          exaggerated the role that the TOEIC  fraud  allegation  played  on
          his life.  He has entirely failed to  acknowledge  that  he  could
          not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  irrespective  of   the   TOEIC
          allegation since his student leave expired in  December  2014  and
          he chose to remain in the UK for a lengthy period in  a  state  of
          unlawful limbo.

      26. I now turn to Mr Miah's private life.   Although  there  has  been
          lengthy residence, Mr Miah's activities  and  contacts  have  been
          inevitably restricted as a result of his lengthy unlawful  status.
           In his witness statement he explained that he has been  living  a
          "destitute life" for five  years.   I  accept  that  Mr  Miah  has
          friendships in the UK and note all  the  evidence  in  support  of
          this in the UT bundle.  I also note that he has been  involved  in
          a cricket team in which  he  plays  on  a  voluntary  basis  in  a
          professional league and has  undertaken  charity  activities  with
          the Newham Welfare Trust.

      27. I accept  that  Mr  Miah  enjoys  family  relationships  with  his
          brother and his brother's family member  and  they  do  with  him.
          These relationships are not particularly close.  During  his  oral
          evidence Mr Miah admitted that although  he  used  to  divide  his
          time between his brother's home in Luton and  London,  since  2019
          he only visited Luton  once  or  twice  a  month.   The  brother's
          assertion in his supporting letter dated 3 February 2020  that  Mr
          Miah is a great support to his children and  they  have  a  strong
          bond with him must be viewed in this context.

Assessment

Issue (i) - impact of policy

      28. Mr Biggs submitted that "simply  because"  Mr  Miah  was  "falsely
          accused of TOEIC fraud", he  was  entitled  to  benefit  from  the
          SSHD's policy that he should be granted six months leave.  I  have
          no hesitation in rejecting this submission.

      29. The SSHD  policy  relied  upon  is  entitled  Educational  Testing
          Service (ETS): casework instructions  ('the  ETS  policy').   This
          states at page 9:

                 "If the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds  but  a
                 finding is made
                 by the Tribunal that the appellant did not obtain the TOEIC
                 certificate by
                 deception, you will need to give effect to that finding  by
                 granting six months
                 leave outside the rules.


                 This is to enable the appellant  to  make  any  application
                 they want to make
                 or to leave the UK."


      30. Mr Biggs submitted that I am obliged to make clear  findings  that
          Mr Miah did not  cheat  in  his  English  language  test  and  was
          falsely accused of TOEIC fraud in the 2015 refusal.  There  is  no
          need for me to make such  findings.   This  is  because  the  2019
          refusal made it clear that Mr Miah was  "deemed  as  credible"  in
          his explanation that he did not  commit  TOEIC  fraud.   The  SSHD
          accepted the credibility of Mr Miah's explanation that he did  not
          obtain his TOEIC certificate by deception.  For  that  reason,  Mr
          Miah and his legal representatives have been aware that  the  SSHD
          withdrew the TOEIC fraud allegation since  the  2019  refusal  and
          have  approached  the  Tribunal  appeal   proceedings   with   the
          knowledge that this was no longer an issue of concern to the  SSHD
          - see the grounds of appeal against the 2019 refusal  and  [9]  of
          the FTT's decision.

      31. Mr Biggs argued that I was required to make the requisite  finding
          because  it  was  clearly  a  relevant  matter  for   the   proper
          determination of the Article 8  balancing  exercise.   I  entirely
          accept the relevance of the  SSHD's  belated  acceptance  that  Mr
          Miah did  not  exercise  deception  to  the  Article  8  balancing
          exercise but there is no need for me to make a formal  finding  in
          order to weigh up this undisputed fact.

      32. In any event, there is no evidence available to me to support  the
          proposition that the TOEIC  fraud  allegation  was  falsely  made.
          Rather, the SSHD has belatedly accepted Mr Miah's  explanation  as
          credible and acknowledged that  her  earlier  contrary  allegation
          was mistaken.

      33. The ETS policy therefore does not require the  SSHD  to  grant  Mr
          Miah six months leave - the Tribunal  has  not  been  required  to
          make a finding on the matter, because  the  issue  as  to  whether
          there was TOEIC fraud was already determined in Mr  Miah's  favour
          within the decision under appeal.  Mr Biggs did  not  take  me  to
          any other part of the ETS policy  or  any  other  policy  said  to
          apply in circumstances such as this case wherein it was  the  SSHD
          and not the Tribunal who concluded that  the  individual  did  not
          obtain the TOEIC certificate by deception.

Issue (ii) - application of Ahsan (supra)

      34. Mr Biggs acknowledged that in order to make  good  his  submission
          that the reasoning in Ahsan applied  by  analogy  to  the  instant
          case, he needed to establish that the 2015  refusal  was  vitiated
          by 'public law error'.  I am prepared to assume, without  deciding
          the matter, that it is appropriate for me to consider whether  the
          2015 refusal contains the two public law wrongs identified  by  Mr
          Biggs, for the purposes  of  conducting  the  ultimate  Article  8
          balancing exercise.

      35. First, Mr Biggs submitted that the 2015  refusal  failed  to  take
          into account a relevant matter, Mr Miah was  an  unwitting  victim
          of a series of unfortunate events including being let down by  his
          sponsor.  I am entirely  satisfied  that  the  SSHD  properly  and
          accurately summarised  the  reasoning  provided  by  Mr  Miah  for
          making an application to remain 'outside the Rules': in short,  he
          required an extension of a few months in order  to  obtain  a  CAS
          and arrange to continue his studies.  That encapsulates Mr  Miah's
          reasons adequately.  There was no requirement on the part  of  the
          SSHD to outline  every  single  reason  asserted.  As  I  observed
          earlier, the articulated  reasons  were  not  entirely  clear.  In
          particular, the difficulties Mr Miah experienced  in  obtaining  a
          CAS were obscure and there was no evidence to  support  his  vague
          and contradictory assertions.  The mere vague  assertion,  without
          any supporting evidence, that potential  sponsors  lost  licences,
          was not without more capable of generating leave, particularly  in
          circumstances where Mr Miah had completed  his  first  degree  and
          was hoping to begin an entirely discrete  stage  of  his  tertiary
          education i.e. this was not a case in which a course of  education
          was being disrupted.

      36. Second, Mr Biggs submitted  that  the  decision  to  refuse  leave
          'outside of the Rules' in the 2015  refusal  was  a  discretionary
          one and it was impossible to separate the  TOEIC  issue.   In  the
          premises, Mr  Biggs  submitted  the  2015  refusal  considered  an
          immaterial matter: Mr Miah was guilty of TOEIC fraud.  I  have  no
          hesitation in rejecting this submission for the  reasons  provided
          in my 'error  of  law'  decision.   For  convenience  I  repeat  a
          summary of that reasoning here.

      37. It is clear from the wording of the 2015  refusal  that  the  SSHD
          refused Mr Miah's  application  for  two  discrete  reasons.   The
          first reason was based upon the nature of the application  itself.
           The application for leave 'outside the Rules' was based  upon  Mr
          Miah's desire to have more time to find  a  sponsor  in  order  to
          obtain a CAS to support an application within the Rules  to  study
          for a Masters degree.  In these circumstances, the SSHD was  fully
          entitled to conclude that discretion should not  be  exercised  in
          his favour and this was not a purpose covered by the  Rules.   The
          SSHD explained that it would undermine the immigration system  and
          be unfair to other students for Mr  Miah  to  be  granted  further
          leave when he was unable to provide a CAS, one of the  most  basic
          requirements of the  Rules  for  students.    The  SSHD  was  also
          entitled to find that  it  was  open  to  Mr  Miah  to  return  to
          Bangladesh to make an application for entry clearance  there  when
          he was in a position to meet the requirements of the Rules.

      38. The second reason for  the  2015  refusal  related  to  the  TOEIC
          fraud.  That this reason was a  discrete  and  alternative  reason
          for refusal  is  apparent  from  the  wording  used  in  the  2015
          refusal.  This second reason was  clearly  "in  addition"  to  the
          first reason.  Hence  the  SSHD  "also"  refused  the  application
          under para 322(5) of the Rules.

      39. In my judgment when the 2015 refusal  is  read  as  a  whole,  the
          first reason (inability to meet the  requirements  of  the  Rules)
          was clearly the primary reason for the refusal,  with  the  second
          reason cited as an additional but unrelated and  separate  reason.
          I therefore do not accept Mr Biggs' submission that  the  mistaken
          second reason "inevitably tainted" the exercise of  discretion  in
          relation to the  first  reason.   Each  of  the  two  reasons  was
          capable of justifying the refusal  on  its  own  and  without  the
          other.  If one of the two reasons  fell  away  the  SSHD  remained
          entitled  to  refuse  the  application  for  the  other  remaining
          reason.  The fact that  the  SSHD  has  resiled  from  the  second
          reason, did not obviate the well-foundedness of the  first  reason
          and the ultimate refusal.  The application was  a  straightforward
          one asking for more time.  In these  circumstances  the  SSHD  was
          entitled to conclude  that  discretion  should  not  be  exercised
          outside the Rules, irrespective of her conclusion as to the  TOEIC
          certificate.

      40. I therefore reject Mr Biggs' submission that  Mr  Miah  should  be
          treated as though he has always been in the UK with leave  because
          his  in-time  application  for  further  leave  was  not  lawfully
          decided.  Mr Biggs accepted that in order for  the  principles  in
          Ahsan to apply by analogy, it was necessary  for  there  to  be  a
          finding that the 2015 refusal was a nullity or vitiated by  public
          law error.  Given  my  findings,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
          explore Ahsan in any further detail.

Issue (iii) - Article 8 balancing exercise

      41. I now turn to the  third  alternative  means  by  which  Mr  Biggs
          argued that the appeal should be allowed pursuant to Article  8  -
          Mr Miah was prejudiced by the false allegation of  TOEIC  cheating
          to such a degree that his  removal  at  this  stage  would  breach
          Article 8.   Mr Biggs fine-tuned that submission during  his  oral
          submissions as  follows:  although  he  accepted  that  Mr  Miah's
          private life was not strong, the public  interest  in  support  of
          his removal was so reduced that his private  life  outweighed  the
          public interest.

      42. It follows that the overarching issue to be determined is  whether
          or not the SSHD's decision to  refuse  Mr  Miah  leave  to  remain
          constitutes  a  disproportionate  breach  of  his   private   life
          pursuant to Article 8,  ECHR.   The  jurisdiction  I  exercise  is
          limited to human rights grounds,  which  may  only  be  determined
          through the provisions of the ECHR -  see  Charles  (human  rights
          appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 00089 (IAC).

      43. The proper approach to the relevant Article 8  balancing  exercise
          in a case such as this requires consideration of Part  5A  of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   I  must  therefore
          have regard to the considerations in s. 117B and do  so.   I  must
          also apply the principles in the Strasbourg authorities to  ensure
          compatibility with the UK's obligations under Article 8 - see  the
          recent Strasbourg judgment of Unuane v UK, App  no.  80343/17  (24
          November  2020)  at   [72-75]   and   [81-83].    The   Strasbourg
          authorities set out the relevant  criteria  to  use  in  order  to
          assess whether an expulsion measure was necessary in a  democratic
          society and proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued.   The
          respective  weight  to  be  attached  to   these   criteria   will
          inevitably vary according to the specific  circumstances  of  each
          case - see Unuane at [78]. These criteria  include  the  following
          inter alia:

            - the nature and seriousness of any offence committed;


            - the length of the stay in the UK;


            - the nature and strength of any family life in the UK and  the
              impact of disruption upon all  family  members,  including  a
              consideration of the best interests of children;


            - the time elapsed since the  offence  was  committed  and  the
              conduct during that period;


            - the nationalities of the various persons concerned;


            - the seriousness of the difficulties the person is  likely  to
              encounter in the country to which  the  applicant  is  to  be
              expelled;


            - the solidity of social, cultural and  family  ties  with  the
              host country and with the country of destination.


      44. I must address the strength of the public interest and the  nature
          and extent  of  Mr  Miah's  private  life  and  then  conduct  the
          relevant  balancing  exercise.   I  note  the  warning  in   Patel
          (supra), against 'double-counting' at (4) of the headnote:

                 "In all  cases  where,  for  whatever  reason,  the  public
                 interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective   immigration
                 controls falls to be given less than its  ordinary  weight,
                 the usual course should be for the  judge  so  to  find  in
                 terms, when addressing section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act. The
                 same result may be achieved, at least in  some  situations,
                 by qualifying the consideration  in  section  117B(4)  that
                 little weight should be given to a private life formed when
                 the person concerned is in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully.
                 Judicial fact-finders should, however, avoid  any  recourse
                 to double-counting, whereby not only is the  weight  to  be
                 given to  effective  immigration  controls  diminished  but
                 also, for the same reason, a private  life  is  given  more
                 weight than would otherwise be possible  by  the  undiluted
                 application of section 117B(4)."


Public interest

      45. The maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
          public interest.  It is undisputed that Mr Miah  has  been  unable
          to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for  a  lengthy
          period.  In addition, although he has  made  various  applications
          along the way, on my findings he is  an  unlawful  overstayer  who
          has shown a blatant disregard for immigration  controls.   I  bear
          in mind that Mr Miah can speak English and has  the  potential  to
          be financially independent if given  permission  to  work.   These
          matters considered together give rise  to  a  prima  facie  strong
          public interest in his removal.  In recognition  of  the  guidance
          in Patel (supra) Mr Biggs submitted that the  public  interest  in
          this case was reduced  because  Mr  Miah  suffered  a  'historical
          injustice'.

      46. For the reasons explained in Patel (supra) at [41] this is  not  a
          case involving  'historic  injustice'.   Rather,  there  has  been
          'historical injustice' - see [46] of Patel.  In my  judgment,  the
          SSHD formed a view about Mr  Miah's  behaviour,  which  led  to  a
          TOEIC fraud allegation and this formed an  alternative  basis  for
          an adverse immigration decision in the form of the  2015  refusal;
          but the SSHD's view turned out to be mistaken  i.e.  she  accepted
          that Mr Miah provided a credible explanation.  What  bearing  does
          this  type  of  'historical  injustice'  have  on  the  Article  8
          balancing exercise?  At [47] of Patel, the  President  noted  that
          one  way  in  which  this  kind  of  erroneous  treatment  of   an
          individual can have a bearing on the balancing exercise was  where
          "the individual would be able to argue that,  if  the  [SSHD]  had
          not formed the mistaken view of their conduct,  he  or  she  would
          have been given leave to remain; and that  this  should  be  given
          weight in the balancing exercise...".   For  the  reasons  I  have
          already provided, the 2015 refusal was inevitable  for  the  first
          and primary reason contained within it.   Even  if  there  was  no
          TOEIC fraud allegation, Mr Miah's application to  remain  'outside
          the Rules' was bound to fail and he was not entitled  to  'section
          3C leave'.  In the light  of  this  there  is  no  requirement  to
          consider how Mr Miah should be put  into  the  position  he  would
          have been in had the TOEIC fraud allegation not been made  in  the
          2015 refusal.  I accept that in 2015 Mr Miah  wished  to  continue
          on to a wholly different level of studies in the  UK.   I  do  not
          accept that the TOEIC fraud allegation played a material  role  in
          preventing this at that time.

      47. I accept that the extant TOEIC fraud allegation meant  that  there
          was little prospect that Mr Miah would  be  able  to  find  a  new
          sponsor in order  to  obtain  leave  to  remain  to  continue  his
          studies in the UK or obtain leave on some other  basis.   However,
          after the 2015 refusal, Mr Miah became an  overstayer  and  it  is
          difficult to see how any in-country application  to  remain  as  a
          student could be successful.  I have already set  out  above  that
          Mr Miah has not provided a reasonable explanation  for  continuing
          to remain in the UK after receiving the 2015  refusal.   He  could
          not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  on  any  view.
          He clearly could not meet the requirements to  remain  as  an  EEA
          family member, hence four failed applications on this basis.

      48. I nonetheless acknowledge  that  an  allegation  of  deception  is
          serious and is likely to have caused Mr Miah upset such  that  'he
          wished to clear  his  name'.   I  have  already  found  that  this
          process could have continued from Bangladesh.

      49. In all the circumstances I am prepared to find that  the  mistaken
          TOEIC fraud allegation caused Mr  Miah  limited,  but  not  as  Mr
          Biggs submitted "incalculable", prejudice.  I  accept  the  SSHD's
          mistake has caused Mr Miah stress and  anxiety  and  there  was  a
          lengthy period before the mistake  was  corrected.   This  reduces
          the strong public interest in his removal but  only  to  a  modest
          degree.

      50.  Mr  Miah  has  complained  about  various   disappointments   and
          inadequacies he  encountered  from  educational  institutions  and
          legal advisors.  Those inadequacies are not of a kind that can  be
          linked to the SSHD and were essentially private concerns.  In  the
          circumstances they are not capable of reducing the weight  of  the
          public interest in this case - see Patel (supra) at [78] to  [81].



Private life

      51. Mr Biggs accepted  that  Mr  Miah's  private  life  could  not  be
          described as strong.  He was correct to do so.   In  my  judgment,
          it can at best be described as of moderate strength.

      52. Regardless of how the SSHD, immigration advisors  and  educational
          institutions have behaved towards Mr Miah,  it  remains  the  case
          that his status has at all times been either precarious  (in  that
          he has at all times  lacked  indefinite  leave  to  remain  -  see
          Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 [2018], 1 WLR 5536)  or  unlawful.
          I am satisfied that I should apply the 'little weight'  provisions
          in s. 117B of the 2002 Act in this  case.   Little  weight  should
          generally be given to a private life  established  when  a  person
          was present in the UK unlawfully or without a right  of  permanent
          residence, absent "particularly  strong  features".   Although  Mr
          Miah has been resident in the UK for  a  lengthy  period  and  was
          wrongly alleged  to  have  cheated,  his  private  life  does  not
          contain any particularly strong features.  He  has  been  resident
          in the UK for 10 years but he spent most  of  his  life  (some  22
          years) in Bangladesh, where he  was  born  and  brought  up.   The
          importance of upbringing and  education  in  the  formation  of  a
          person's social identity is well recognised.  It is  important  to
          note that he spent no part of his childhood in  the  UK  and  only
          came here as an adult in order to commence tertiary education.

      53. Mr Miah's private life is nevertheless entitled  to  some  weight.
          Relevant  social  ties  obviously   include   relationships   with
          friends, as well as ties formed through employment or  other  paid
          or unpaid work or through participation  in  communal  activities.
          Mr Miah  has  not  worked  in  the  UK.   I  accept  he  has  some
          friendship and community ties.  A person's social identity is  not
          defined solely by relationships with others but is constituted  at
          a deep level by familiarity with and participation in  the  shared
          customs,  traditions,  practices,  beliefs,   values,   linguistic
          idioms and other local knowledge  which  situate  a  person  in  a
          society or social group and generate a  sense  of  belonging.   Mr
          Miah speaks English and has adjusted over a long period to  living
          a British life which has generated a certain sense  of  belonging.
          That is mitigated by the inevitable limitations  that  accompanied
          his unlawful status. He was unable to work and  was  reliant  upon
          his brother, who I note earned a modest income as  a  crew  member
          of Macdonald's.  As Mr Miah accepted  he  has  lived  a  destitute
          life  with  inevitable  constraints  on  his   social   life   and
          activities in the UK.

      54. I am satisfied that Mr Miah  has  family  relationships  with  his
          brother and his brother's family members, including children,  but
          this does not include any particularly close or  dependent  family
          life.  As acknowledged by Mr Biggs, Mr Miah faces  no  significant
          obstacles  to  re-integration  in  Bangladesh  and  can   maintain
          relationships with  his  family  members  in  the  UK  via  modern
          technology and visits.

Balancing exercise

      55. I reject Mr Biggs' submission that the  only  way  to  remedy  the
          'historical injustice' in this case would be for the SSHD to  give
          Mr Miah leave to remain allowing him time to  seek  to  regularise
          his status.  In any event, Mr Miah's witness statement offered  no
          clue as to how he proposed to regularise his status if  given  the
          opportunity.  The ambition to complete a Masters  degree  has  not
          resulted in any updated research.  In any event  it  is  difficult
          to see how that would be funded.

      56. For the reasons I have provided the public interest in  favour  of
          Mr Miah's removal remains strong  but  is  tempered  to  a  modest
          degree by the mistaken TOEIC fraud  allegation.   I  must  balance
          this public interest with  the  moderate  strength  of  Mr  Miah's
          private life in the UK.   In  addition,  I  note  that  Mr  Miah's
          removal would cause no rupture  to  any  meaningful  close  family
          relationships and within a reasonable period of time he  would  be
          able to re-integrate to Bangladesh.   Having  considered  all  the
          relevant circumstances I am satisfied that the public interest  in
          this case outweighs private life by a  considerable  margin,  such
          that Mr Miah's removal would be proportionate.

Conclusion

      57. It follows that Mr  Miah's  removal  would  not  give  rise  to  a
          disproportionate breach of Article 8, ECHR.



Decision

      58. I dismiss Mr Miah's appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                         Dated: 14 January 2021
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
