
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16917/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 October 2020                 |On 4 November 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                JUBAIR MAHMUD

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions

For the appellant:     Mr M West of Counsel instructed by PGA Solicitors

For the respondent:    No submissions received



                            DECISION AND REASONS





    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 9 August
         2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Young-
         Harry, promulgated on 18  December  2019  following  a  hearing  at
         Birmingham on 10 December 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 16 October 1992. He
         arrived in the UK as a student  in  April  2011  with  leave  until
         October 2014. He met his wife in January 2017 and they  married  in
         July 2018. He  appeals  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  2
         October 2019 to refuse his  application  for  leave  to  remain  on
         private/family life grounds.  His wife is a white British  national
         and a Christian. It is maintained that they would,  therefore,  not
         be able to enjoy family life in Bangladesh  due  to  the  sponsor's
         race and religion.  Additionally,  the  sponsor  suffers  from  ill
         health.

      3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Young-Harry.  She
         heard oral evidence from the appellant and his wife  but  concluded
         that family life could be enjoyed in Bangladesh.  Accordingly,  she
         dismissed the appeal.

      4. The appellant successfully sought permission  to  appeal.  Although
         this was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  on  7  May
         2020, it was granted upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

    Covid-19 crisis : preliminary matters

      5. The appeal would then have normally been listed for hearing but due
         to the pandemic this could not be done and  instead  the  grant  of
         permission, sent out on 28  August  2020,  included  directions  in
         which Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson  expressed  the  view  that  the
         appeal could be decided on the papers. The parties were invited  to
         put forward any objections they may have to that  proposal  and  to
         make further submissions within certain time limits. The  appellant
         has responded to the directions and agreed to a paper determination
         but there has been no compliance by the respondent.  I am satisfied
         that the respondent was properly served  with  the  directions  and
         that she has had ample opportunity to respond. I also note that the
         appellant's  submissions  were  forwarded  to  her  on  11  and  25
         September 2020 so that would have given her two  further  reminders
         to comply. I now proceed to determine the matter on the papers.







    Discussion and conclusions

      6. I have considered the evidence, the determination, the grounds  for
         permission, the grant of permission and the two sets of submissions
         forwarded by the appellant's Counsel.

      7. Three grounds are put forward. The first is that the  judge  failed
         to provide any adequate reasons for her conclusions when  assessing
         the  sponsor's  medical  conditions.  The  second  is   that   when
         considering the issue of the interfaith marriage, the judge  failed
         to consider important country information. Third, it is argued that
         the  judge   failed   to   correctly   consider   public   interest
         considerations. I now consider each in turn.

      8. The first complaint  arises  from  the  judge's  finding  that  the
         sponsor would have access to medical health services in  Bangladesh
         or alternatively that her  father  could  assist  her  to  continue
         receiving treatment in the UK (at paragraph 21).  It  is  correctly
         argued that  the  affordability  of  treatment  in  Bangladesh  was
         addressed in the skeleton argument to which no reference  is  made.
         It  was  pointed  out  in  the  skeleton  argument  that   the   UK
         government's advice was that Bangladesh had extremely limited  free
         medical  care.  I  cannot  see  any  reference   in   the   judge's
         determination to any consideration of that argument. Indeed, as the
         grounds argue, the judge fails entirely to  give  reasons  for  her
         conclusion that  the  sponsor  would  be  able  to  access  medical
         services in Bangladesh.

      9. It is also the  case  that,  as  argued,  the  judge's  alternative
         finding was flawed because the  test  under  paragraph  EX.1(b)  of
         Appendix FM considers only the situation  for  both  appellant  and
         sponsor in Bangladesh. The insurmountable obstacles test as defined
         in EX.2 pertains to circumstances outside the UK and so the judge's
         finding that the sponsor would have the assistance of her father to
         help her in the UK has no  bearing  on  the  issue  the  judge  was
         required to consider.

     10. Extensive evidence on the sponsor's medical conditions was provided
         in the appellant's bundle (at 26-82). The sponsor suffers from  the
         frequent dislocation of the temporomandibular joint and  synovitis.
         The judge failed to have regard to whether these  conditions  would
         amount to very significant difficulties as per EX.2.

     11. Ground 2 deals with the couple's interfaith marriage. As argued  in
         the grounds and submissions, the judge appears to  have  approached
         this issue  as  though  a  protection  claim  had  been  made.  Her
         consideration of a sufficiency of protection is irrelevant  to  the
         issue of whether  the  appellant  and  his  wife  would  face  very
         significant difficulties to continuing family life outside the  UK.
         Further, the judge failed to have regard to the country evidence on
         interfaith marriages which are said to be very rare  and  generally
         poorly regarded. The fact that the sponsor may not be a  practising
         Christian, which is the basis on which the judge found she and  the
         appellant would have no problems, is irrelevant to how the marriage
         would be perceived particularly in the context  of  disapproval  by
         the appellant's orthodox Muslim family. The findings on whether the
         marriage would add  to  the  very  significant  problems  they  may
         encounter should have been made in the context of all  the  country
         evidence.

     12. The third ground takes issue with the judge's misunderstanding that
         the appellant was unlawfully in the UK when  he  met  the  sponsor.
         Whilst the judge records that the appellant was without leave after
         October 2014, she has entirely overlooked the fact that he  had  3C
         leave at the time he met the sponsor and only exhausted his  appeal
         right in March 2017.  Her  consideration  of  s.117B  factors  was,
         therefore, made on a factually incorrect premise.

     13. For all these reasons, I find that the  judge's  decision  contains
         errors of law which render it unsustainable. It is set aside in its
         entirety. Neither party has sought to preserve any findings and the
         matter is thus remitted for a de novo  hearing  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  In accordance with the appellant's  request  the  appeal
         shall be heard at Taylor House.

    Decision

     14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and
         it is set aside. A fresh decision shall be made by another judge of
         the First-tier Tribunal.

    Anonymity

     15. No request has been made at any time for an anonymity order  and  I
         see no reason to make one.




    Directions

     16. Further directions for the hearing shall be issued by the  relevant
         Tribunal in due course.




    Signed


    R. Keki?
    Upper Tribunal Judge               Date: 29 October 2020


