
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16586/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     PPN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Bailey-Perkins, solicitor Solacexis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  H
    Clark, promulgated on 20 March 2019. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 24 April 2019.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a  student  on  18  October
    2009. She was granted further leave to  remain  in  the  same  capacity
    until 18 August 2014. She made an in-time application for further leave
    to remain as a student which was refused with a right of  appeal.  That
    appeal was dismissed on 12 June 2015 and the  appellant  exhausted  her
    rights of appeal on 22 October 2015. On 9 November 2015, the  appellant
    made further submissions which were refused in letters  dated  25  June
    2016 and 14 September 2016 without a right of  appeal.  On  7  December
    2016 an enforcement visit was made  to  the  appellant's  home  address
    during which she was served with  the  decision  refusing  her  further
    submissions.  The   appellant's   current   solicitors   made   further
    submissions on 14 December 2016 which were based on her  health  and  a
    previous relationship with a British citizen. Several  additional  sets
    of further submissions were made between 24 November 2017 and  17  July
    2018, which culminated in the decision under appeal, dated 26 July 2018
    to refuse her human rights claim.

 4. In refusing the human rights application, the respondent  decided  that
    the appellant's relationship did not fall for consideration  under  the
    Rules because of its short duration. Otherwise it was  noted  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  and  there
    were no very significant obstacles to her  integration  in  India.  The
    respondent considered the appellant's confirmed medical  problems,  her
    relationship, her  estrangement  from  her  family  in  India  and  her
    closeness to her cousin and her family but concluded that these did not
    amount to exceptional circumstances. It was noted that her  cancer  had
    been treated and that she could obtain follow-up appointments in India.
    The respondent concluded that the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
    Article 3 ECHR would not be engaged.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant, her cousin and a friend gave evidence before the  judge.
    The Tribunal dismissed the appeal for the same  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal were fourfold. Firstly, it was  argued  that  the
    judge made a number of legal errors.  Secondly,  that  the  judge  made
    factual errors regarding the appellant's  mental  and  physical  health
    problems, the affordability of care and lack of support  in  India  and
    aspects of the appellant's private life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    third ground contended that the  judge  failed  to  attach  appropriate
    weight to the documentary evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  which
    addressed her mental and physical state,  her  vulnerability,  lack  of
    emotional  and  financial  support  in  India  and  the  pollution  and
    unhygienic  living  conditions  there.  Fourthly  and  lastly,  it  was
    submitted  that  the  judge  entered  into  speculation  regarding  the
    assistance which she found would  be  available  to  the  appellant  in
    India.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted for the following reasons.

         "It is arguable that the judge has attached insufficient weight  to
         the cumulative effect of the concatenation of  issues  advanced  on
         behalf of the Appellant. At paragraph 58 the Judge went on to refer
         to the most obvious difficulty in relation to access to  healthcare
         of the same quality. The judge dealt with that  matter  by  stating
         that in circumstances where this did not  amount  to  a  breach  of
         Article 3 it could not amount to a very significant obstacle. It is
         arguable that the ostensibly discrete approach adopted by the Judge
         has militated against the attachment of sufficient  weight  to  the
         cumulative effect of the issues raised. It is arguable  given  this
         approach to the question of the  fulfilment  or  otherwise  of  the
         Immigration  Rules  that  the  proportionality  exercise  has  been
         affected."

 8. Permission was not refused on any ground.

The hearing

 9. Ms Bailey-Perkins relied on her skeleton argument and argued that there
    was substantial evidence before the judge which fell within  the  ambit
    of Article 8. She referred me to  the  substantial  appellant's  bundle
    which contained evidence of the  appellant's  medical  issues;  stating
    that the respondent did not refute any  of  it.  She  argued  that  the
    judge's assessment of that evidence was erroneous both in  relation  to
    whether there were very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  re-
    integration in India or unjustifiably harsh consequences under  section
    117B. Ms Bailey-Perkins further argued that the  judge's  consideration
    of the appellant's claim in the context of her precarious leave did not
    show the element of flexibility permitted by Ruppiah [2017] UKSC  0075.
    Furthermore, she argued that the judge erred in her findings as to  the
    appellant's  financial  independence,  given  that  the  appellant  was
    supported by her  cousin.  She  urged  me  to  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.

10. Ms Everett argued that there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision. She said that it was a misreading of the decision to say that
    the judge decided there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  applied
    because Article 3 was not breached.  Read in isolation it might  appear
    that  very  significant  obstacles  were  not  considered  but  in  the
    preceding paragraphs  the  health  issue  was  looked  at.  Ms  Everett
    conceded that it was a step to far to say that case would  not  succeed
    in any event. She contended that  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant were largely an attempt to reargue the case  and  that  there
    was no factual disagreement.

11. In response, Ms  Bailey-Perkins  reiterated  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the appellant's circumstances in totality and had  separated
    the health concerns from the Article assessment.





Decision on error of law

12. The judge stated at [58], "in circumstances where this does not  amount
    to a breach of Article 3,  it  cannot  amount  to  a  very  significant
    obstacle to integration for the purpose of Article 8." This approach is
    an overly restrictive interpretation of GS (India) [2015] EWCA  Civ  40
    given that the Court of Appeal  said  that  a  claim  was  unlikely  to
    succeed under Article 8 if an Article 3 claim failed, unless there  was
    "some separate or additional factual  element  which  brings  the  case
    within the Article 8 paradigm."

13. A further error made by the judge was in concluding that the  appellant
    was  not  economically  independent  in  circumstances  where  it   was
    accepted, including by the judge, that the  appellant  was  financially
    dependent upon her cousin.  In  Ruppiah  at  [55]  it  was  held  that,
    financial independence in section 117B(3) means an absence of financial
    dependence upon the state.

14. The judge applied section 117B (5) of the 2002 Act which  required  her
    to give little weight to the appellant's  private  life  owing  to  her
    precarious stay at [61].  However,  that  requirement  was  subject  to
    section  117A(2)(a),  which  conferred  on  her  a  limited  degree  of
    flexibility, Ruppiah considered. When considered with the judge's error
    in relation to section 117B (3), a different outcome  may  have  ensued
    had the judge considered that she had a  small  degree  of  flexibility
    under section 117A(2)(a).

15.  The  above-mentioned  matters  amount  to  material  errors  of   law.
    Consequently, the conclusions of the judge are set aside.

16. Ms Bailey-Perkins invited me to immediately remake the decision and the
    appeal proceeded by way of  submissions  alone.  A  full  note  of  the
    submissions made is set out in my note of the  hearing.  The  appellant
    was present with SL and did not give evidence, other than to clarify  a
    couple of points. She stated that she was in considerable pain  and  it
    appeared to me that she was  in  some  discomfort.   Ms  Bailey-Perkins
    argued that there were very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    reintegration in India and in the alternative that her removal from the
    United Kingdom would amount to an unjustifiably  harsh  outcome  and  a
    breach of her private and family life.

17. Ms Everett argued that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  had
    not been met and urged me to exercise caution regarding the  assertions
    made regarding the  availability  of  healthcare  in  India  and  risks
    relating to forced marriage, regarding which the evidence before me was
    inadequate. She did not challenge the appellant's circumstances in  the
    United Kingdom including her health concerns and her close relationship
    with her cousin.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Remaking

18. From  the  considerable  material  before  me  which  includes  witness
    statements and medical evidence, the appellant's circumstances  can  be
    summarised as follows. She has been resident in the United Kingdom  for
    9 years and 8 months having arrived here at the age of 18 with leave to
    enter as a student. She has not returned to India  since.  Her  studies
    were sponsored  by  her  cousin  SL,  who  accommodated  the  appellant
    following her arrival in the United Kingdom to the present day.  SL  is
    married with two children now aged 11 and  15.  The  appellant  studied
    marketing in the United Kingdom initially and then commenced  the  ACCA
    programme after she was granted further leave to remain  and  continued
    with that programme until  August  2014.  Her  timely  application  for
    further leave to remain was refused, according to the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge KW Brown (IA/46969/2014)  promulgated  on  10  June
    2015 because the appellant had no Certificate of Acceptance for Studies
    (CAS) at the time of her application.  In  her  grounds  of  appeal  in
    relation to that appeal, the appellant  explained  that  she  had  been
    unable to obtain a CAS because most of the  colleges  had  been  closed
    down or had their licence suspended and that she requested some time to
    "get her life settled."

19. In mid-2015, the appellant found a lump in her neck  and  by  September
    2016  she  had  been  diagnosed  with  thyroid  cancer.  The  appellant
    underwent surgery during October 2016 and had radioiodine treatment  in
    February 2017. Unfortunately, another cancerous lump was found and  she
    had further surgery in July  2017  and  radioiodine  treatment  shortly
    afterwards. While the appellant remains under the care of an oncologist
    to date, this mainly consists of further tests to check  the  appellant
    remains free of cancer.

20. The appellant has a range of other medical problems. She  suffers  from
    severe migraines since being treated for cancer  as  well  as  constant
    pain in her neck and back. These back  pains  worsened  after  she  was
    involved in a road traffic accident while a passenger on a bus in 2018.
    The appellant continues to suffer from thyroid  problems  which  causes
    her to suffer from dizziness, severe migraines and nausea  as  well  as
    sensitive teeth. In addition, she suffers with numbness  in  her  hands
    and cannot grip things. She explains that this has had an impact on her
    ability to undertake activities  of  daily  living  such  as  squeezing
    toothpaste,  opening  medication,  getting  dressed,  doing  her  hair,
    cooking and shopping. The  appellant's  cousin  SL  provides  her  with
    practical  support  with  day  to  day  tasks  and  attending  hospital
    appointments as well as high levels of emotional support. In  addition,
    SL provides the appellant with free accommodation and food as  well  as
    contributing monthly to the costs of the appellant's treatment  on  the
    NHS. As well as physical health complaints, the appellant is  suffering
    from symptoms of mental  illness  for  which  she  has  been  receiving
    counselling since March 2019.

21. There is a wealth  of  supporting  medical  evidence  before  me  which
    confirms that the appellant has been treated  and  is  currently  being
    treated or investigated by the  oncology,  endocrinology,  dermatology,
    ENT,  MRI,  neurology,   neurophysiology,   pathology,   physiotherapy,
    cardiology and pain management departments of  the  Surrey  and  Sussex
    Healthcare NHS  Trust.  In  addition,  there  is  confirmation  of  her
    counselling sessions. The appellant's presentation before  me  was  not
    incongruous with the medical evidence, in that she appeared  physically
    frail and vulnerable.

22.  The  appellant  brought  up  to  date  evidence  of  her   forthcoming
    appointments and investigations which was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Of note were the following items.

23. Correspondence from Surrey and Sussex Healthcare  confirming  that  the
    appellant underwent surgery and radioiodine treatment in 2016 and  that
    she also underwent a "total thyroidectomy  with  level  2,  3,  4  neck
    dissection and excision of a mass between the internal jugular vein and
    subclavian" in July 2017 owing to thyroid carcinoma and  that  she  had
    radioiodine treatment for the second time.

24. The appellant has been diagnosed with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome,
    which was most recently referred to in a letter  from  the  Sussex  MSK
    Partnership dated 30 April 2019. The letter states that the appellant's
    endocrinologist was of the view  that  her  high  thyroid  levels  were
    causing this issue and that if the levels were stabilised the  symptoms
    in the hands may settle.  It is apparent from this letter  as  well  as
    other evidence that the appellant has declined  injection  therapy  and
    would prefer that her symptoms were monitored. The appellant's symptoms
    are to be reviewed  by  both  the  endocrinology  and  Hand  and  Wrist
    departments.

25. An ultrasound report dated 28 May 2019 revealed that a  32mm  cyst  had
    been observed on the appellant's left ovary.

26. A detailed letter dated 13 May 2019 from a physiotherapist who examined
    the appellant explained that she had reduced sensation to  light  touch
    on the left side, that  she  had  reduced  range  of  movement  in  her
    shoulder on one side and that her grip strength was  50%  reduced.  The
    therapist remarked that even very light touch to  the  patient's  spine
    provoked high levels of pain which she  was  unable  to  tolerate.  The
    goals of treatment were described as "pain relief,  increased  movement
    and increased ease in getting dressed."

27. The clinical impression formed by  the  physiotherapist  was  that  the
    appellant's symptoms were neurogenic in nature and originating  in  the
    neck and that he had cautioned that a target of pain management  rather
    than resolution was realistic. The appellant was referred to the spinal
    clinic to determine if the pain originated in the cervical spine.

28. A report from the Pain Medicine Department dated 21  May  2019  written
    after the  appellant's  examination  on  the  same  day  confirmed  her
    complaint of neck pain and headaches  which  became  much  more  severe
    since the thyroidectomy  in  2016  and  that  she  was  suffering  from
    tingling and numbness in both sets of fingers, but more so on the  left
    side. The consultant who examined the appellant formed  the  impression
    that the appellant was  suffering  with  "migraine  with  post-surgical
    neuropathic neck pain and possible radicular left arm pain," booked  an
    MRI spinal scan to rule out any "radicular  component"  and  prescribed
    topical creams in the interim. The MRI scan took place on 3 June  2019,
    the results of which were not apparent in the evidence before me.

29. The appellant has a number of further appointments  arranged.  In  June
    2019 there are two appointments with physiotherapists at the  Hand  and
    Wrist Clinic and another with the Endocrinology department.

30. In July 2019, the appellant has an ENT appointment, in  September  2019
    she has an appointment with the  Neurology  department  as  well  as  a
    further appointment with the  Pain  Management  department  in  October
    2019.

31. In relation to the appellant's mental health, there is confirmation  in
    the form of a letter from Sussex Community NHS Foundation Trust dated 8
    May 2019. The letter states that the appellant was referred for help in
    February 2019 regarding her low  moods  and  anxiety  and  underwent  a
    telephone assessment on 13 March 2019. The appellant  was  referred  to
    the Olive Tree and has received support. During the hearing, I saw  the
    appellant's appointment cards which showed appointments arranged for 17
    April, 15 May, 29 May and 12 June 2019.

32. An affidavit from the appellant's parents signed on 4 January 2019 sets
    out their circumstances  in  India.  They  live  in  a  named  village,
    described as remote, in Gujarat State in a bedroom house  with  one  of
    their daughters who works as a labourer  to  support  the  family.  The
    appellant's father no longer works owing to mental  health  issues  and
    her mother can no longer work as a labourer because of  her  bad  back.
    They are not in a position to support the appellant let alone  pay  for
    her care  and  treatment  for  her  medical  conditions  and  they  are
    concerned about her life being at risk due to a lack of any hospital in
    the area as well as owing to a lack of hygiene and  the  prevalence  of
    various diseases including malaria.

33. The appellant's cousin SL provided a detailed statement which  confirms
    her close relationship to  the  appellant  and  the  appellant's  close
    relationship to SL's sons who were aged 1  and  4  when  the  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2009. The statement explains that  the
    children refer to the appellant, whom they adore, as their  big  sister
    and that the appellant takes an active interest  in  the  children  and
    their education. SL considers that her children will feel a  tremendous
    loss if the appellant  is  removed.  SL  confirms  that  she  has  been
    providing the appellant with personal  care,  accommodation,  emotional
    and financial support.  In particular, SL takes the  appellant  to  her
    medical appointments, attends those appointments,  contributes  to  the
    cost of NHS treatment and helps the appellant with basic personal tasks
    such as getting dressed, combing her hair, cooking  and  shopping.  She
    further confirms that the appellant suffers from severe neck  and  back
    pain, migraines, nausea, tooth  sensitivity,  a  lack  of  taste,  skin
    allergy, numbness and mental health issues.

34. SL is concerned with the obstacles and struggles  the  appellant  would
    have to face if removed to India. SL also expresses  concern  that  the
    appellant will be forced to endure  an  arranged  marriage,  which  she
    considered  a  shame  given  the   appellant's   previous   educational
    achievements.

35. The appellant's concerns  regarding  being  removed  to  India  can  be
    summarised thus. That she would lose the support provided by  SL,  that
    she is concerned about her survival owing to her health problems,  that
    she is concerned that she would be unable  to  find  work  due  to  her
    illness, that her presence would adversely affect her parents and  that
    she is worried that she would get an infection owing  to  the  lack  of
    hygiene in her family home in India or owing  to  air  pollution.  That
    home was described as a one-bedroom house which lacked running water or
    toilet facilities and which  was  situated  in  a  remote  village.  In
    addition, the appellant doubted  that  she  would  be  able  to  access
    appropriate medical treatment and that she believed  that  her  parents
    would try to marry her off, perhaps by force. On the last two points, I
    was referred to no objective evidence to support the claim  that  there
    was no treatment for the appellant's conditions anywhere in  India  nor
    any evidence  she  was  at  risk  of  being  forced  to  marry.  I  do,
    nonetheless, accept that the appellant's parents may wish to arrange  a
    marriage her, as they have for her older sisters and are in the process
    of doing for the sister who is currently still at home.

36. There has been no  challenge  raised  as  to  the  appellant's  medical
    condition or the level of pain and disability she  experiences  and  no
    challenge has been raised that the appellant, although an adult remains
    financially, emotionally and practically dependent on her cousin.

37. Considering all of the evidence in  the  round,  I  conclude  that  the
    appellant would face very significant obstacles to her reintegration in
    India because of the longstanding severe pain she  experiences  in  her
    neck and back which is unlikely to resolve according to her consultant,
    as well as her inability to care for herself owing to the carpal tunnel
    syndrome, without considerable assistance.  Whilst  the  appellant  has
    parents and sisters in India, the evidence is that her parents are  not
    in a position to take care of her practical needs because of their  own
    health issues, two older sisters are married  and  the  last  remaining
    sister at home supports the family from labouring and efforts are being
    made to find her a husband in any event.

38. The appellant has not returned to India since leaving in  2009  at  the
    age of 18. I further accept that the conditions the appellant would  be
    returning to would present additional difficulties in  terms  of  self-
    care. During the hearing, I heard that  the  appellant  would  have  to
    travel to a source of water in order to wash  and  that  she  would  be
    required to use the outdoors for her toilet needs as she did during her
    childhood. This is relevant given  the  evidence  of  the  support  she
    requires from SL to dress and attend to her appearance.   The  evidence
    before me is that it is SL who accompanies  the  appellant  to  medical
    appointments since she was first diagnosed with cancer in  2016.  I  am
    bound by GS (India) and fully  accept  that  a  claim  is  unlikely  to
    succeed under Article 8 if an Article 3 would not succeed, unless there
    was "some separate or additional factual element which brings the  case
    within the Article 8 paradigm." The additional element in this case, is
    the appellant's dependence upon SL and the private and family life  she
    has developed with her and her family over close to a decade.

39. The background evidence shows that, in general,  medical  treatment  is
    available in India and I find that it is likely that SL  would  do  her
    best to continue to support the appellant financially in the  same  way
    she and her husband pay for the medical costs relating to her  parents-
    in-law who live in India.

40. It is difficult to see how the  appellant  would  access  this  medical
    treatment given her frailty and need for  constant  support.  I  accept
    that it is likely that without the practical support of someone who can
    care for her in a  similar  manner  to  that  provided  by  her  cousin
    including accompanying her to see specialists, that  her  physical  and
    moral integrity would deteriorate. I consider that these factors amount
    to very significant obstacles to her reintegration in  India  and  that
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) are met.

41. If I am wrong on the foregoing conclusion, I consider  that  Article  8
    outside of the Rules in engaged for the same reasons. The appellant has
    established a private and family life in the United  Kingdom  based  on
    her length of lawful residence and as a dependent on her cousin who  is
    a British citizen.  The appellant's entire adult life has been spent in
    the United Kingdom and she has been educated  here.  In  addition,  she
    suffers from a number of serious and debilitating  physical  conditions
    which stem from the life-saving treatment she received for cancer which
    require  ongoing  treatment  and  investigation.  The  removal  of  the
    appellant to India would create an interference because  she  would  be
    separated from her cousin's support,  the  ability  to  access  ongoing
    medical treatment and this would place her at  risk  of  infection  and
    further deterioration of her health. The appellant's relationship  with
    SL is akin to mother and daughter as opposed to cousins and amounts  to
    family life owing to her high level of dependency  on  SL.  I  consider
    that the extensive support provided by SL since  the  appellant  became
    unwell has led to strengthened bonds with her cousin  and  goes  beyond
    the normal emotional ties between adult relatives. SL's children  treat
    her as an older sister. That level of support cannot be  replicated  by
    the appellant's parents because of their own health issues. Nor can  an
    equivalent level of support from SL be provided  via  modern  means  of
    communication and financial remittance.

42. Such proposed interference would ordinarily be in accordance  with  the
    law, putting to one side my earlier decision in relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv).  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal  is  required
    to strike a fair balance between the rights of the individual  and  the
    interests of the community. The public interest in  this  case  is  the
    preservation of orderly system of immigration control.  I find that  in
    this case, the level of interference  would  be  significant,  that  it
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant  and
    that it would not be proportionate. In carrying out the proportionality
    assessment, I have taken account of my findings above. In assessing the
    public  interest,  I  have  taken  section  19  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 into account. Section 117B (1) provides
    that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.

43. The appellant speaks English and obtained qualifications in the  United
    Kingdom before her cancer diagnosis. She is  financially  dependent  on
    her cousin. While her medical  treatment  is  arguably  a  reliance  on
    public funds, there is evidence that SL is contributing  to  that  cost
    and in any event, the appellant  has  lived  in  this  country  without
    breaching immigration laws. These are neutral issues in  the  balancing
    exercise and I have therefore attached no  weight  to  the  appellant's
    side of the balance sheet in considering them.

44. The appellant was granted limited leave to enter the United Kingdom  as
    a healthy 18-year old and could have had no expectation that she  would
    be permitted to stay permanently. Indeed, she had  no  such  intention.
    Regrettably, her stay was extended owing to her to her cancer diagnosis
    and treatment and she is still dealing with the  medical  repercussions
    of that.

45. Whilst the appellant's stay in this country is precarious to the extent
    that she entered the United Kingdom for a temporary purpose and  sought
    to extend her leave on  either  the  same  basis  or  on  human  rights
    grounds, given the length of residence she has now attained of close to
    10 years and the reason for her continued presence here, I  place  less
    weight on that matter. The public interest lies in maintenance of  fair
    and consistent immigration controls. In this instance  the  exceptional
    factors are such  that  when  taking  all  matters  into  account,  the
    interests of the appellant outweigh the public interest.  I  find  that
    the balance comes down in favour of the  appellant.  I  find  that  the
    appellant has shown, on the balance of probabilities, that the decision
    is a disproportionate breach of her rights, and those  of  SL  and  her
    family, to a family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

I substitute a decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be  payable  for  the  following
reason. The appeal is allowed on the same or similar evidence to that  which
was before the Secretary of State prior to the decision under challenge.


Signed   Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

