
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Numbers: HU/16800/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 March 2019                              |On 4 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                     PK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro of Counsel instructed by Visa Expert Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or any member of the  Appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is married. She and her husband are citizens of India. He
    has leave for a period of 30 months. The  date  upon  which  his  leave
    expires is not evident from the Tribunal file. They have a  child  born
    in 2013 who is now a naturalised British citizen  and  a  second  child
    born in 2018, some 11 months after the Appellant's appeal  rights  last
    became exhausted.

 2. On 27 January 2011 the  Appellant  entered  with  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) student migrant which leave was extended in the same capacity
    to expire on 18 November 2014. She then applied  in  time  for  further
    leave on the basis of  her  private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom. On 11 February 2015 the  Respondent  (the  SSHD)  refused  the
    application. The  Appellant  appealed  and  her  appeal  rights  became
    exhausted on 7 July 2017. More than a year later, on 06 August 2018 she
    made a further claim based on her family life and  in  particular  with
    her child who had some three weeks earlier become a naturalised British
    citizen.

The SSHD's decision

 3. On 06 August 2019, a year later to the day, the SSHD  refused  it.  The
    Appellant was not  considered  to  meet  the  suitability  requirements
    because the SSHD asserted she had used a proxy test taker for  a  TOEIC
    speaking test on 16 May 2012 with Educational Testing Service (ETS)  at
    Elizabeth College.

 4. The SSHD accepted that Section EX1 of Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules was applicable but made no further analysis of its applicable  it
    is to the circumstances of the Appellant or her  child.  The  Appellant
    failed to meet any of  the  time  critical  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.  The  SSHD  noted  the  Appellant's
    parents resided in India where the Appellant had spent the majority  of
    her life and so concluded that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
    to her read-integration on return. Further, there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which warranted consideration of the grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules. Additionally, the SSHD considered
    it would not be justifiably harsh for the Appellant's child to live  in
    India. The reasons for refusal did not include a consideration  of  any
    specific circumstances of the Appellant or her child.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 5. On 14 August 2018 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal challenging the
    part of the refusal based on the SSHD's claim she had used a proxy test
    taker and on the basis that the decision in respect  of  her  child,  a
    British citizen was perverse. The SSHD  had  not  considered  the  best
    interests of the child and the decision was contrary to the SSHD's then
    current Immigration Directorate Instruction Family Migration:  Appendix
    FM  Section  1.0b  of  22  February  2018  and  finally  that  it   was
    disproportionate to her rights protected by Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention.

 6. By a decision promulgated on 29 January 2019 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal NJ Osborne dismissed the appeal on all grounds. On 11 February
    2019 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal.

 7. On 22 February 2019 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal EM Simpson granted
    permission because it was arguable the Judge had erred in  relation  to
    his treatment of the apparent facility  or  lack  of  facility  of  the
    Appellant in the English language in which she chose to  give  evidence
    although an interpreter was available. Particularly so, in the light of
    what the Judge recorded at  paragraph  40  of  his  decision  that  the
    Appellant relied on  the  interpreter  when  it  came  to  submissions.
    Further criticisms were made of the Judge's  reasons  for  his  adverse
    credibility  findings.  Additionally,  Judge  EM  Simpson  referred  to
    difficulties that arguably now  arose  in  the  light  of  the  Judge's
    assessment of the proportionality of the decision to  return  to  India
    the

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

8.   The Appellant attended the hearing. I  explained  the  purpose  of  and
    procedure to be followed at an Error of Law hearing. She confirmed  her
    address but otherwise took no active part in the proceedings.

9.   At the start of the hearing  the  likely  issues  in  the  appeal  were
    canvassed, particularly in the light that the Appellant's  husband  has
    limited discretionary leave. The Judge  had  noted  that  this  was  on
    account of the British citizenship status of the eldest  child  of  the
    family.

10.  Both parties properly agreed without the  making  of  full  submissions
    that the Judge's assessment of  the  Appellant's  claim  based  on  her
    private and family life contained an error of law, particularly in  the
    light of the Presidential panel decision subsequently  reported  on  15
    March 2019 in JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave"  UK)  Turkey  [2019]
    UKUT 00072 (IAC) and his failure adequately to  address  the  fact  the
    Appellant's elder child is a British citizen  in  the  context  of  the
    jurisprudence in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  The  failure  may
    have originated from the proposition of  law  at  paragraph  8  of  his
    decision that he had to consider the  facts  as  at  the  date  of  the
    Appellant's application, at which time the eldest child  had  not  been
    naturalised. This is an error of law because it failed to  reflect  the
    provisions of s.85(4) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as
    amended. The Judge made no  reference  to  whether  the  naturalisation
    constituted a new matter for the purpose of s.85(5).

11.   The  parties  proposed  that  the  substantive   appeal   be   settled
    immediately on the basis that it be allowed so that the Appellant might
    be granted discretionary leave in line with that of her husband.  There
    was no explanation why the appeals of the Appellant and her husband had
    not been linked. Given the apparent reason why the Appellant's  husband
    has been granted limited leave, and the presence of  the  second  child
    who at the date of the Upper Tribunal hearing was less than  12  months
    old, I do not find the Respondent's decision to  refuse  the  Appellant
    leave, at least in line with her husband,  to  be  proportionate.  This
    finding is made but without any finding being made in relation  to  the
    deceit alleged by the SSHD to have been used by the  Appellant  in  the
    claimed employment of a proxy TOEIC test taker. This is a matter  which
    is not disposed of by this decision and will remain a  potential  issue
    to be addressed in any future application by the Appellant or  decision
    by the SSHD.

Anonymity

12.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and there  were  no
    submissions made why it should not be continued. There  are  two  minor
    children involved and in the circumstances the anonymity  direction  is
    continued.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.
    The appeal the Appellant is allowed.
    Anonymity direction continued.



Signed/Official Crest                                           Date  01.04.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal in circumstances in which I  do  not  consider  it
appropriate to make any fee award.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 01.  04.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
