
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16931/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:|
|On 23 October 2018                          |On 04 December 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Isha Pun
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Hoa Dieu, Solicitor with N.C. Brother & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse  her  entry  clearance  as  the
    adult child of a deceased member of the Brigade of Gurkhas, pursuant to
    Article 8 ECHR.  The claimant is a citizen of Nepal who seeks  to  join
    her widowed mother in the United  Kingdom,  the  Gurkha  father  having
    died.



Background

 2. The claimant's father was discharged from the Gurkhas on 30 July  1976.
    He did not then settle in the United Kingdom because  of  the  historic
    injustice.  The claimant's parents have 5  children,  two  now  in  the
    United Kingdom, one in India  and  one  in  the  United  Arab  Emirates
    (Dubai).

 3. The claimant was born in April 1987.  She is  now  31  years  old.  The
    claimant's father died on 1 January 2005.  Her  mother  was  granted  a
    settlement visa as his widow, on 18 February 2011, but  no  application
    was then made for the claimant, who would have been 19 years old.

 4. The claimant's application was not made until 25 May 2016, when she was
    29 years old.  Her mother had been in the United Kingdom  for  5  years
    and the claimant had continued her education, supported by her  mother,
    who relied on public funds in the United Kingdom to  top  up  her  late
    husband's army pension and her own United Kingdom pension  entitlement.



 5. With her mother's help, the claimant has trained  and  qualified  as  a
    nurse in Nepal. She has lived alone and apparently has  an  independent
    life. She had no medical conditions and was a fit  and  capable  adult,
    able to look after herself and not in need of long-term  personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks.

Refusal letter

 6. The Secretary of State did not state in the refusal letter  whether  he
    accepted that when the mother went to  the  United  Kingdom  there  was
    family life between mother and daughter; he made his  decision  on  the
    basis that the claimant was an adult when her  mother  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom and family life could continue as it 'may have done'.

 7. The Secretary of State considered  that  while  the  claimant's  mother
    could afford to support her from those  limited  resources,  while  the
    claimant was in Nepal, the claimant's arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom
    would inevitably entail additional dependence on public funds.

 8. The Secretary of  State  considered  that  the  interference  with  any
    private life between the mother and the claimant was proportionate  and
    refused entry clearance.  Annex K made no provision for family  reunion
    between settled Gurkha widows and their adult children.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 9. For the claimant, Mr Dieu accepted that the claimant  could  not  bring
    herself within the provisions in Annex K specific to Gurkha dependents.
     The First-tier Judge found that there was no breach of the Immigration
    Rules but then considered whether the appeal should  be  allowed  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

10. The First-tier Judge noted the omission  of  provision  for  the  adult
    children of the settled widows of deceased Gurkhas, although at [5]  in
    Annex K, the policy stated that:

         "5.  Spouses, civil  partners,  unmarried  or  same  sex  partners,
         children under 18 and widows  of  former  Gurkhas  are  covered  by
         existing published  guidance  (see  background  to  the  policy  in
         paragraphs 6-8 below) and are therefore outside the scope  of  this
         policy."

11. The Judge noted that the provisions of Annex K, itself an  addition  to
    earlier guidance, dealt only with the relationship between  the  former
    Gurkha and his adult children:

         "38. It is unclear from the published guidance whether  this  is  a
         deliberate exclusion or an inadvertent  omission.   It  would  have
         been  helpful  to  me,   when   weighing   the   balance   in   the
         proportionality issue, to have been made aware of the basis of  the
         exclusion of adult children of deceased  former  Gurkhas  from  the
         policy, since it would then have been possible for  me  to  balance
         the public interest in immigration control  which  would  or  might
         have been served by  the  exclusion  of  this  class,  against  the
         interests of the [claimant]."

12. The Judge went on to consider that 'on the balance of probabilities and
    the on the totality of the evidence the [claimant] has  discharged  the
    burden of proof' and allow the appeal.

13. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

14. Permission was granted on the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had
    failed to ask herself whether any family  life  which  existed  between
    mother and daughter in 2011 endured at  the  date  of  hearing,  or  to
    follow the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Singh  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630, Butt v  Secretary
    of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  184  and  Rai  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

Rule 24 Reply

15. The claimant filed a Rule 24 Reply, albeit out of time.  Her solicitors
    argued therein  that  the  Judge  had  considered  Article  8  and  the
    proportionality assessment properly, and that having  regard  to  [55]-
    [57] in Rai, and in the light of  the  historic  injustice,  there  was
    nothing which would have affected the outcome of  the  appeal  in  this
    case.   The claimant's solicitor argued that the First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of proportionality was sound and sustainable.

16. I did not admit the Rule 24  Reply  but  have  treated  it  as  a  late
    skeleton argument.  The solicitors are required to write to  the  Upper
    Tribunal explaining the delay.

17. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

18. For the claimant, Mr Dieu apologised for the lateness of  the  Rule  24
    Reply.  The evidence for family life was the  financial  and  emotional
    support the sponsor had given, including 3 visits to  Nepal  in  the  6
    years she had been away.  The substance of  the  Judge's  Article  8(1)
    analysis was there and there had  been  no  challenge  to  whether  the
    evidence placed before the First-tier Tribunal was genuine.

19. The sponsor had given  oral  evidence.   Mr  Dieu  could  not  remember
    whether she was cross-examined.  Her witness statement showed that  she
    had made regular telephone calls on a calling card,  sent  money,  that
    the claimant was living in the former family home and had  been  mostly
    studying, except between 2011 and 2013.  She had not finished  most  of
    the courses she started but had finally  completed  a  nursing  course.
    She was currently undertaking  voluntary  work  in  Nepal  as  she  had
    difficulty finding work as a nurse. Mr Dieu was unable to  explain  why
    there was no witness statement from the claimant herself, nor from  any
    other family members apart from the sponsor mother.

20. Mr Dieu argued that Annex K  was  not  a  complete  resolution  of  the
    difficulties caused  by  the  historic  injustice,  which  remained  an
    important factor in non-Annex K cases.  There  were  no  decided  cases
    dealing with the dependants of Gurkha widows,  but  the  same  historic
    injustice principle should apply, and the same test  as  for  a  Gurkha
    parent.  Mr Dieu relied on the decision in Gurung  &  Ors,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 8 at [27] for the correct approach to the historic injustice.

21. Mr Dieu asked that if the appeal were allowed, it should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for further findings on family life to be made.

22. For the Secretary of State, Mr Melvin said that the real  question  was
    whether the First-tier Judge had done enough to establish  family  life
    before  moving  to  proportionality  reasoning.   On  both  heads,  the
    reasoning was not very clear. The claimant's Gurkha father had died  12
    years ago.   There was not much evidence of payment in the bundle.

23. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

24. The provisions of Annex K constitute an indication by the Secretary  of
    State as to how his discretion will be exercised,  and  are  in  effect
    binding on him as a matter  of  policy.   I  note  that  when  Annex  K
    applies, the adult child of a living Gurkha father  must  be  under  30
    years of age when making the application to join their parent here.

25. The Secretary of State's discretion to grant entry clearance beyond the
    provisions of Annex K is at large  on  general  Article  8  principles.
    There is no finding in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
    whether family life continued once the claimant was a qualified  nurse.
    It is right that she lives in the former family home and receives money
    from the sponsor, but she does have a nursing qualification  and  there
    was no evidence from the claimant herself  about  how  she  lives,  the
    nature of any dependency, the difficulty in obtaining employment or any
    of the other factors which might have  supported  a  finding  that  the
    claimant  remained  Kugathas  dependent  on  her   mother.    That   is
    particularly striking, given the evidence  in  the  mother's  statement
    (unsigned) on 3 November 2017 that she had just returned from  a  visit
    to Nepal to see the claimant.

26. I have had regard to the guidance in Gurung.  While at [27], the  Court
    recognised the historic injustice, at [38]-[43]  they  found  that  the
    historic injustice was only one of the factors to  be  weighed  against
    the  need  to  maintain  a  firm  and  fair  immigration  policy,   not
    necessarily determinative:  'If it were, the application of every adult
    child of a United Kingdom-settled Gurkha who establishes that he has  a
    family life with his parent would be bound to succeed'.

27. At [43]-[46], the Court considered what weight should be given  to  the
    historic injustice in Article 8(2) exceptional circumstances cases, and
    when family life is engaged:

         "43.  ...The  flexibility  of   the   'exceptional   circumstances'
         criterion is such that it does not require the  historic  injustice
         to be taken into account at all.  It certainly does  not  prescribe
         the weight to be given to the injustice, if  indeed  it  is  to  be
         taken into account.  The requirement to  take  the  injustice  into
         account in striking a fair balance between the Article  8(1)  right
         and the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy is
         inherent in Article 8(2) itself, and it is ultimately for the Court
         to strike that balance.  This requirement does not derive from  the
         fact that the policy permits an adult  dependent  child  to  settle
         here in exceptional circumstances. ...

         45.  Ultimately, the question whether an individual  enjoys  family
         life is one of fact and depends on a careful consideration  of  all
         the relevant facts of the particular  case.   Ms  McGahey  submits,
         therefore, that the caselaw, both domestic and European, can be  of
         only limited assistance.  She (rightly) accepts that, as  a  matter
         of law, in some instances an adult child (particularly if  he  does
         not have a partner or children of his own) may  establishment  that
         he has a family life with his parents.    It  all  depends  on  the
         facts.

         46.  We think that the cases are of some  assistance  to  decision-
         makers and Tribunals who have to decide these  issues.   Paragraphs
         50-62 of the determination of the UT in Ghising contains  a  useful
         review of some of the jurisprudence and the correct approach to  be
         adopted.  It concludes at paragraph 62 that 'the different outcomes
         in cases with superficially similar features emphasises to us  that
         the issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive'. ..."

28. The burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that she still has  family
    life with the sponsor, her mother.  That must  be  established  to  the
    usual standard of balance of probabilities, on the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. There  is  no  clear  finding  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision on this important factual  question  and  that  is  a
    material error of law.

29. The decision in this appeal will be set aside and remade in the  First-
    tier Tribunal on a date to be  fixed,  with  no  findings  of  fact  or
    credibility preserved.

DECISION

30. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal will be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


Date:         30 November 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson




