
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16342/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th March 2018                      |On 28th March 2018                 |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                          MISS SHIRLEY ANN PARSONS
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Choudhary, Counsel instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND Reasons

 1. This is an appeal by Miss Shirley Ann Parsons, who was born on the 30th
    November 1966 and is a citizen of the United  States  of  America.  She
    appeals against the decision of Judge Devlin, promulgated on  the  28th
    February 2017, to dismiss her appeal against refusal of her application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on private  and  family  life
    grounds.

 2. The background  to  this  appeal  can  conveniently  be  summarised  as
    follows.

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  the  25th  September  2015
    with limited leave to remain as a visitor until the  25th  March  2016.
    Upon her arrival she began  to  cohabit  with  Mr  Paul  Keith  Holland
    (hereafter, "the sponsor") who she had met online and who  had  visited
    her in the USA a few months earlier. They have cohabited in the UK ever
    since. The sponsor has two young sons by a previous relationship,  both
    of whom are British citizens. He sees one of those son's (Joe)  at  the
    home of the child's mother,  but  his  other  son  (Jack)  has  avoided
    contact with his father since the time he  began  cohabiting  with  the
    appellant. The appellant relinquished all her assets in  the  USA  upon
    divorcing her former husband in November 2015.

 4. The respondent  had  refused  the  appellant's  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules on two grounds: (a) the parties had not cohabited for
    continuous period of 2 years at the time of the application and did not
    therefore qualify as 'partners' in a relationship akin to marriage, (b)
    the appellant was in the UK as a "visitor" and was  therefore  required
    to make an appropriate application for entry clearance from the USA.

 5. In a lengthy and detailed decision, Judge Devlin found that  (a)  there
    was insufficient evidence to  prove  that  the  appellant  had  resided
    continuously with the sponsor in the UK for a period of  2  years,  (b)
    she did not have a parental relationship with either of  the  sponsor's
    children, (c) she did not meet the 'financial eligibility requirements'
    in respect of the sponsor's income for either  leave  to  enter  or  to
    remain in the UK, and (d) given all the  circumstances,  including  the
    best interests of the sponsor's children, the appellant and the sponsor
    could reasonably be expected to continue  their  relationship   in  the
    USA.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shimmin on grounds that Judge
    Devlin had arguably erred by (a) attaching  "excessive  weight  to  the
    public interest in the appellant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom",
    and (b) "failing to give sufficient weight to the best interests of the
    sponsor's children".

 7. The judge noted that given that the appellant  had  only  been  granted
    leave to remain as a visitor for a period of 6 months, both she and the
    sponsor knew or  ought  to  have  known  from  the  outset  that  their
    relationship may be unable to continue in the United Kingdom beyond the
    period of that leave. He  therefore  concluded  that,  "something  very
    compelling (which will be 'exceptional') will be required  to  outweigh
    the public interest in her removal" [paragraphs 216 to 218].

 8. Ms Choudhary submitted that absent a criminal  record,  the  judge  had
    placed undue emphasis upon  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    removal. She further submitted that there  was  no  authority  for  the
    proposition that additional weight attaches to the public interest if a
    person has a poor immigration history. I reject both submissions.

 9. The public interest in removal,  as  reflected  in  the  terms  of  the
    'immigration eligibility requirements' of Appendix FM,  is  to  prevent
    circumvention of the stringent requirements for settlement by  entering
    the United Kingdom as a short-term visitor and  thereafter  seeking  to
    remain indefinitely on family life grounds. That policy will  obviously
    not apply where it is established that the person  concerned  would  in
    any event meet the requirements for settlement were they  to  make  the
    appropriate application (Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40).  However,  as  the
    judge observed at paragraph 2014, this was "not a Chikwamba case".

10. One of the clearest statements of support for the approach taken by the
    judge (albeit not one cited in his scholarly analysis of the  law  from
    paragraph 26  to  paragraph  78  of  his  decision)  can  be  found  in
    Konstantinov v The Netherlands (Application no.  16351/03)  26th  April
    2007

         48. The Court further reiterates that, moreover, Article 8 does not
         entail a general obligation for  a  State  to  respect  immigrants'
         choice of the country of their residence and  to  authorise  family
         reunion in its territory. Nevertheless, in a  case  which  concerns
         family life as  well  as  immigration,  the  extent  of  a  State's
         obligations to admit to its territory relatives of persons residing
         there will vary according to the particular  circumstances  of  the
         persons involved and the general interest. Factors to be taken into
         account in this context are the extent  to  which  family  life  is
         effectively ruptured, the extent of the  ties  in  the  Contracting
         State, whether there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the
         family living in the country of origin of one or more of  them  and
         whether there are factors of immigration control  (for  example,  a
         history of breaches of immigration law) or considerations of public
         order  weighing  in  favour   of   exclusion.   Another   important
         consideration will also be whether family life  was  created  at  a
         time when the persons involved  were  aware  that  the  immigration
         status of one of them was such that the persistence of that  family
         life within the host State would be precarious from the outset. The
         Court has previously held that where this is the case it is  likely
         only to be in the most exceptional circumstances that  the  removal
         of the non-national family member will constitute  a  violation  of
         Article 8. [Emphasis added]

11. Neither is it the case that the judge failed to give adequate weight to
    the best interests of the sponsor's children. These were  addressed  in
    considerable detail at paragraphs 228 to 269 of his decision. The judge
    was entitled to find, in the circumstances summarised  at  paragraph  3
    (above), that the interests of the children were only marginally better
    served by the sponsor remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  and  thus  to
    conclude that those  interests  were  outweighed  by  the  considerable
    public interest attaching to

12.  The Appellant's removal as summarised at paragraphs 9 and 10 (above).

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 26th March 2018
