
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16856/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 March 2018                       |On 19 April 2018                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                   Mr MD R
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hossain instructed by Tower Hamlet Barristers
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  The respondent's refusal is based on a
    number of matters, in particular his lack of suitability because he  is
    one of those considered to have participated in the ETS/TOEIC fraud  at
    Synergy College and his ETS/TOEIC English language certificate has been
    withdrawn.

 2. However, it is also said to be  the  case  that  the  appellant  has  a
    partner now a wife, and a 3 year old daughter.  The partner is  settled
    and the daughter is a British citizen.  There is a further son born  in
    January 2018 who is also a British citizen.

 3. It is common ground between the parties today  and  the  Tribunal  that
    there was an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's approach in that
    the appeal was considered  on  the  basis  that  the  family  could  be
    expected to go to Bangladesh with the appellant if he is returned,  but
    of course  the  appellant's  children  cannot  be  expected  to  go  to
    Bangladesh as they are British citizens and indeed his wife is  settled
    in the United Kingdom.

 4. For the appellant, Mr Hossain sought to persuade me that the  ETS/TOEIC
    question ought to be left open, but on the basis of the evidence before
    the First-tier Tribunal and before  the  Upper  Tribunal  there  is  no
    reason to interfere with the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  conclusions
    thereon.  I note that the  appellant  has  not  called  for  his  voice
    recordings or produced any other direct evidence of his presence at the
    hearing centre on the date alleged.  That is not a matter which can  be
    dealt with in the context of an appeal against this decision.   If  the
    appellant wishes to challenge those conclusions he must do so by way of
    further submissions to the Secretary of State based on  fresh  evidence
    if that is what he is advised to do.

 5. The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on a date to be fixed. in relation to the Article 8 issues  only.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to ETS/TOEIC,  and  the
    findings of fact which that entailed, are to be preserved.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision in relation to the  human  rights  element  of  the
appeal.  The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a  date
to be fixed.

Signed:           Judith A J C  Gleeson                     Date:         18
April 2018
             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



