
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16387/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 30 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               mr Faizan Zaman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma (instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of Judge Devittie  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 12 April 2019 in  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    human rights appeal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 20 June 1991.

 3. He entered the UK in May 2011 with entry clearance as a Tier 4  student
    valid until August 2012. That leave was then extended on the same basis
    until November 2014. However, his leave was curtailed on 26 March  2013
    to expire on 25 May 2013.

 4. The appellant then made a human rights application on 27 July  2017  on
    the basis of his relationship with his wife and two children in the UK.
    That application was refused on 23 July 2018 and it was the refusal  of
    that application which was the basis of the appeal  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. The application was refused firstly  on  suitability  grounds,  on  the
    basis that the Secretary of State alleged that, in his  application  of
    July 2012 for further leave as a student,  he  had  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate which the Secretary of State concluded,  on  the  basis  of
    information provided  to  him,  had  been  obtained  fraudulently.  The
    appellant thus failed the suitability requirements of Appendix FM.  The
    Secretary of State, in the  Letter  of  Refusal,  considered  paragraph
    Ex.1,  although  if  the  appellant  did  not  meet   the   suitability
    requirements Ex.1 could not be available to him.

 6. The Secretary of State then went on to consider  the  circumstances  of
    the appellant's relationship with his wife and two  children,  who,  it
    was noted are British. The Secretary of State noted that the  appellant
    commenced his relationship knowing he was in  the  UK  on  a  temporary
    basis and that it was open to the appellant to  continue  contact  with
    his partner and children in the UK from Pakistan. So far as his private
    life was concerned, the Secretary of State also took into  account  the
    fact that the appellant had been in the UK on a temporary basis only.

 7. In his judgment, Judge Devittie considered first of all the suitability
    issue at some length and his findings commence at paragraph  9  of  his
    Decision and Reasons in that regard. He noted that in oral evidence the
    appellant had  been  unable  to  give  a  coherent  response  to  basic
    questions about whether he had paid for the examination by a bank  card
    or cash. He had been unable to recall when he opened a bank account  in
    the UK and the judge found that aspect of his evidence did not  enhance
    his credibility in terms of whether he had sat the test in person.

 8. The judge set out in his decision a verbatim record of the  appellant's
    evidence at the hearing, from which it is clear that the appellant  was
    struggling to express himself coherently in relation to the contents of
    the examination he claimed to have sat.  The judge stated that he would
    have expected, eight years after taking the test,  that  the  appellant
    would have been able to show fluency sufficient to  explain,  in  basic
    terms, the content of the test.  On the other hand, the judge said that
    if the appellant's responses did not relate  to  his  lack  of  English
    language proficiency, then they surely  showed  that  he  had  not  the
    slightest clue about the content of the examination  and  that  he  was
    trying to make up answers on matters he had no knowledge of.  He  found
    that undermined the credibility of the appellant's claim  to  have  sat
    the examination.

 9. The judge then went on to say that it was clear that the appellant  had
    a very strong incentive to practice deception, as the scrutiny  of  his
    bundle of documentary evidence did not reveal that he had been able  to
    produce a single document showing that he had ever completed any of the
    courses for which he was enrolled since arriving in the UK

10. Further, the appellant had stated in his evidence that he had  received
    a copy of the recording of his speaking test and acknowledged that  the
    voice on the recording was clearly not his. Having accepted  that,  the
    appellant then  took  no  further  action  in  relation  to  the  voice
    recording or evidence provided, which the judge concluded entitled  him
    to draw an adverse inference.

11. The judge therefore concluded that he was satisfied, having  regard  to
    the evidence as a whole, that the respondent had discharged  the  legal
    burden of  showing  that  the  appellant  had  practiced  deception  in
    relation to his 2012 test. He also found,  at  paragraph  9,  that  the
    appellant had failed to provide an innocent explanation.

12. The judge then turned to the Article 8 claim  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, the appellant  being  unable  to  succeed  under  the  Rules  on
    suitability grounds.

13. The judge found the appellant had established a private and family life
    in the UK which would be interfered with should he be removed. He noted
    that the appellant's two children were both born in  2017,  being  only
    nine months apart in  age,  that  both  were  British  citizens,  which
    involves rights which they would be unable to exercise in Pakistan. The
    judge then went on to note that nationality is not a trump card and may
    be outweighed by countervailing considerations and that  in  this  case
    the appellant had practiced deception and  begun  his  relationship  in
    full knowledge that his immigration status was precarious.

14. The judge went on to note that the children were of an age  where  they
    could readily adapt to life in Pakistan as they were  tender  in  years
    and had not reached an age where they had begun to establish a  private
    life independently of their family unit. The judge noted that there was
    no evidence that the appellant had no close family members in  Pakistan
    to facilitate his integration and that of his family and children.   He
    noted the appellant's spouse also had family  in  Pakistan.  The  judge
    noted that the appellant had come to study in the UK,  which  indicated
    that at the time of the grant of his student visa he was  a  person  of
    some financial means. Whilst accepting that  the  children's  long-term
    interests may best be served by  remaining  in  the  UK,  he  found  it
    reasonable for them to settle in Pakistan.

15. The judge noted there was evidence showing that the appellant's  spouse
    suffered from  various  ailments  and  in  particular,  depression  and
    arthritis. He accepted that she had mobility problems and  that  it  is
    with the assistance of the appellant that she is able to care  for  her
    two children.  However, the judge found that  they  would  be  able  to
    access appropriate medical care in Pakistan.

16.  The  judge  noted  that  little  weight  should  be  attached  to  the
    appellant's family life, it having been commenced in the full knowledge
    that he had no right to  remain  in  the  UK  and  found  there  to  be
    compelling public interest considerations in this case.

17. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal. The grounds had argued the judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account an expert report.  However, the judge  refusing  permission  to
    appeal noted that there was no evidence that this was ever submitted to
    the judge and certainly it was not contained in  the  file.  The  judge
    found that the conclusions reached by the judge were open  to  him  and
    that he had considered the best interests of the children.

18. A judge of the Upper Tribunal subsequently granted  permission  on  the
    basis that the judge may have overlooked the IDI, cited in the  grounds
    and in the skeleton argument. The judge granted permission finding that
    failure arguably material as this was not a deportation  case  and  the
    applicant had two British children with whom it was accepted he  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship. However, the  materiality  of  any
    such error would be dependent upon the guidance,  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant, remaining in force at the date of hearing.

19. Before me Mr Bramble helpfully provided the applicable IDI's.  One  was
    published on 22 February 2018 and a further on 19 December 2018 and  it
    is that latter that was applicable at the date of  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

20. Mr Sharma argued that  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  allegation  of
    deception was flawed and that he had  not  considered  the  appellant's
    innocent explanation. He also relied upon the arguable  error  referred
    to by the Upper Tribunal judge who granted permission.

21. In terms of the error of law, I do not find any error  in  the  Judge's
    treatment of the allegation of deception. It is clear from the decision
    that the judge gave detailed consideration to this, as I have  set  out
    above, and gave reasons why the appellant had not offered  an  innocent
    explanation and therefore that the Secretary of  State's  had  met  the
    burden of proof in that regard.

22. In relation to the judge's  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
    rules, I note that no mention whatsoever is made of section 117 of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which is  mandatory  when  considering
    Article 8 outside the Rules and  the  proportionality  of  removal.  In
    particular, the judge ought to  have  considered  section  117B(6),  it
    being  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with two qualifying children.  His  consideration  of  the
    reasonableness of either the  appellant's  British  wife  and  children
    removing to Pakistan is brief in the extreme  and  I  find  a  material
    error of law.

23. Having found an error of law it was agreed that I was able to  redecide
    it on the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

24. The issue for me to decide is the proportionality of  removal,  bearing
    in mind section 117 and in particular the appellant's relationship with
    his wife and two British children.

25. One of the children  has  liver  problems  which  require  six  monthly
    checks. No other treatment is  required,  assuming  the  checks  remain
    satisfactory. The child also has impaired speech  development.  Neither
    of those conditions is life threatening and there is no  evidence  that
    treatment for both cannot be received in Pakistan.

26. The appellant's wife is of Pakistani heritage. The couple met in  April
    2015 and discovered that their families in Pakistan knew each other and
    that in fact they are related. The relationship developed and they were
    married in March 2016. They  subsequently  had  their  first  child,  a
    daughter in January 2017 and their second child in November 2017.

27. The appellant's wife has problems with her knees, for which  she  takes
    painkillers. This means it is difficult for her to go upstairs  and  so
    the appellant assists her with taking the children up and down  stairs.
    She also suffers from anxiety and low mood. It is said that  she  would
    struggle without the support of the appellant.

28. A lot of emphasis is placed on  the  IDI  on  the  appellant's  behalf.
    However, the IDI in force at the date of the hearing was that issued in
    December 2018.

29. According to the IDI,  having  established  that  there  is  a  genuine
    relationship with a qualifying child, the decision-maker is required to
    ask themselves whether the consequences of refusal of  the  application
    will be that the child is required to leave the UK. Clearly that is not
    the case here as both children would  have  their  mother  in  the  UK.
    However the guidance goes on to state that where there is a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship between the applicant and  child,  the
    removal of the applicant may still disrupt their relationship with that
    child and for that  reason  the  decision-maker  would  still  need  to
    consider whether, in the round, removal of the applicant is appropriate
    in light of all the real-life circumstances of the  case,  taking  into
    account the best interests of the child as a primary consideration  and
    the impact on the child of the appellant's applicant's  departure  from
    the UK or them having to leave the UK with them. If  it  is  considered
    that refusal would lead to unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    applicant, the child and their family, leave will fall to be granted on
    the basis of exceptional circumstances.

30. So far as the reasonableness of expecting a child to leave  the  UK  is
    concerned, it is said that the starting point  is  that  it  would  not
    normally expect a qualifying child to leave  the  UK  and  that  it  is
    normally in the child's best interests for the whole family  to  remain
    together, which means that if the child is not expected to leave,  then
    the parent or parents with primary care of the child would also not  be
    expected to leave the UK.

31. The guidance quotes the case of KO and Ors. [2018] UKSC  53  where  the
    Supreme Court found that reasonableness is to be considered in the real-
    world context in which the child  finds  themselves  and  the  parents'
    immigration status is a relevant fact to establish that context. If the
    child's parents are both  expected  to  leave  the  UK,  the  child  is
    normally expected to leave with them, unless there is evidence that  it
    would be unreasonable.

32. The guidance goes on to suggest specific circumstances where it may  be
    reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the UK with  the  parent  or
    primary carer or for the parent or primary carer to leave  the  UK  and
    for the child to stay.  The guidance provides that in such  cases,  the
    decision-maker must consider the best interests of the  child  and  the
    facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision-maker should also
    consider any specific issues raised by the family or by, or  on  behalf
    of the child (or other children in the family).

33. It goes on to say that it may be reasonable for a qualifying  child  to
    leave the UK with the parent or primary carer where for example: -

      a) the parent or parents, or child, are a citizen of the  country  and
         so able to enjoy the full rights of being a citizen in that country

      b) there is nothing in any country information including as  contained
         in the relevant country information which suggests that  relocation
         would be unreasonable

      c) the parent or parents or child have  existing  family,  social,  or
         cultural ties with the  country  and  if  there  are  wider  family
         relationships with friends or community overseas that  can  provide
         support:

          i) the decision-maker must consider the extent to which the child
             is dependent or requires support from wider family members  in
             the UK in important areas of his  or  her  life  and  how  the
             transition to similar support overseas would affect them

         ii) a person who was extended family or a network  of  friends  in
             the country should be able to rely on them to support to  help
             reintegrate there

        iii) parent or parents or a child who have  lived  or  visited  the
             country before for periods of more than a few weeks should  be
             better able to adapt, or the parent or parents would  be  able
             to support the child in adapting, to life in the country

         iv) the decision-maker must consider any evidence of exposure  to,
             and the level of understanding of, the cultural norms  of  the
             country

          v) for example, a period of time spent living amongst a  diaspora
             from the country may give a child an awareness of the  culture
             of the country

         vi) the parent of parents or child can speak, read and write in  a
             language of that country, or are likely to achieve this within
             a reasonable time period

        vii)  fluency  is  not  required  -  an  ability   to   communicate
             competently  with  sympathetic  interlocutors  would  normally
             suffice

      d) removal would not give rise to a significant risk  to  the  child's
         health

      e) there are no other specific factors raised by or on behalf  of  the
         child.

34. In this case the appellant is a  national  of  Pakistan.  His  wife  of
    Pakistani heritage. They are related to each other.  Both  have  family
    members in Pakistan and  their  families  approve  their  relationship.
    There is therefore no suggestion that they would not  have  support  if
    returned to Pakistan.

35. Whilst I accept that the best interests of these children would  be  to
    remain  in  the  UK  with  both  parents,  I  have  to   consider   the
    reasonableness of their leaving the UK notwithstanding that  to  remain
    would be in their best interests.

36. The children are both very young and their parents are  the  centre  of
    their lives. Whilst one of the children does have a medical  issue,  it
    is not life-threatening and there is no suggestion  that  treatment  is
    unavailable in Pakistan.

37. Given the heritage of both parents, integrating into Pakistani  culture
    would not be difficult for either parent or the children.

38. The interests of  immigration  control  in  this  particular  case  are
    strengthened by the appellant's practice of deception in the submission
    of a false TOEIC certificate.

39. The appellant knew when he entered into his relationship with his  wife
    that he had no right to be in the UK  and  that  it  was  by  no  means
    certain he and his wife would be able to  continue  their  family  life
    together in the UK.

40. The guidance to the Home  Office  does  not  state  that  it  is  never
    reasonable to expect a British child to leave  the  UK.  Reasonableness
    has to be assessed "in the real world."  The real world in this case is
    that they are very young, their father  has  an  appalling  immigration
    history and no right to be in  the  UK.   Both  of  their  parents  are
    familiar with the culture and language  of  Pakistan  and  have  family
    support there. Whilst the appellant's wife  has  some  medical  issues,
    again, with the help and support of the appellant, there is  no  reason
    why sha cannot relocate with him to Pakistan.

41. For those reasons I find that the requirements of  section  117B(6)  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 do not  require  the  appellant  to
    remain in the UK and that it would not be unreasonable for  either  his
    wife or the children to accompany him to Pakistan; whether they in fact
    do so of course is a matter for them.

42. For the above reasons I do not find the removal of the appellant  would
    be a disproportionate breach  of  Article  8  and  the  rights  of  the
    appellant, his wife or children to a private family life.

Notice of Decision

43. The appeal to the upper tribunal is dismissed

44. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date 23 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

