
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16948/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Crown Court      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2019                   |On 29 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     LEG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford instructed by Central England Law Centre

For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Groom promulgated on 22 March 2019 in which the  Judge
       dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.






Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on the 10 January 1972 who
       is the subject of an  order  for  his  deportation  from  the  United
       Kingdom. The appellant appealed maintaining that his removed from the
       United Kingdom will be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
       pursuant to article 8 ECHR or any other  relevant  provision  of  the
       Convention.
    3. An issue arose during the early stages of the proceedings before  the
       First-tier Tribunal regarding the nature and number of  offences  for
       which the appellant had been convicted. This matter was  resolved  in
       the appellant's favour as noted by the Judge who,  when  setting  out
       the appellant's immigration history and criminal record between [5  -
       12], wrote:

           "5.    The Tribunal set out below the facts as  found  based  on
                the oral and written evidence.


           6.     The Appellant was born in Jamaica  on  10  January  1972.
                Whilst there is some discrepancy over  the  date  that  this
                Appellant entered the UK, the Respondent  submits  the  date
                was 26 March 1998, however the Appellant claims  it  was  28
                September 1997, what is agreed is  that  the  Appellant  was
                admitted for a period of 6 months.


           7.     The Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on 29
                March 2007, on the basis of his  private  and  family  life.
                This application followed on from his marriage to [MLC  (now
                G)] a British citizen. Leave to remain was granted on 17 May
                2013 until 17  November  2015.  The  reason  for  the  delay
                between the date of application and date of decision was due
                to there being  issues  over  the  use  of  the  Appellant's
                identity by  another  man.  West  Midlands  Police  released
                information to the Respondent which clarified the  position.
                Namely that  the  Appellant's  identity  had  been  used  by
                another. This information from West Midlands Police was then
                accepted by the Respondent.


           8. On 3 November 2015, the Appellant applied for  further  leave
                to remain on the basis of his family and  private  life.  At
                application was considered and  refused  in  line  with  his
                deportation.


           9. On 17 November 2016, the Appellant was convicted after trial,
                at Wolverhampton Crown Court, one  count  of  Rape  and  one
                count of Indecent Assault. He  was  sentenced  to  11  years
                imprisonment on 18 November  2016.  The  Appellant  appealed
                against his conviction and sentence. On  25  May  2018,  the
                Court of  Appeal  Criminal  Division  varied  the  appellant
                sentenced to 8 years imprisonment. Leave to  appeal  against
                the Appellant's conviction was refused.


           10.    The Appellant was served with a  Notice  of  Decision  to
                Deport on 1 June 2018. The Appellant responded to the notice
                on 13 June 2018.


           11.    On 7  August  2018,  the  Appellant  was  served  with  a
                deportation order and a Notice of Decision to refuse a Human
                Rights claim. However, since the Respondent now accepts that
                there has been previous misuse of this Appellant's  identity
                and upon acting on information received from  West  Midlands
                Police, a new Notice of Decision to refuse  a  Human  Rights
                claim was made and dated 14 August 2018 and was served  upon
                the Appellant on 17 August 2018.


           12.    For the purposes of this appeal, Respondent  rely  solely
                on the criminal conviction obtained by this Appellant on  17
                November 2016 for Rape and Indecent Assault."

    4. The appellant sought an  adjournment  before  the  Judge  as  he  has
       continued to challenge his conviction for Rape and  Indecent  Assault
       claiming his case has been allocated for review by the Criminal  Case
       Review Commission although both at the date of the hearing before the
       First-Tier Tribunal and of this hearing before the Upper Tribunal the
       appellant's conviction remains as a  result  of  which  he  shall  be
       treated as a convicted sex offender.  If  at  some  later  stage  the
       Criminal Case Review Commission believe it appropriate to return  the
       case to the Court of Appeal and  if  the  appellant's  conviction  is
       quashed the deportation order predicated upon the same will fall.
    5. The sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Nawaz are as follows:

           "[LG], you have been found guilty by the jury of these two  very
           serious offences. On the evidence before the jury, on the  night
           of 2 November 2001, you, along with  two  others  [OC  and  LD],
           picked up, I can refer to [it is such?], [LK] as  she  was  then
           known, or [KM], now [KA]. She  was  known,  not  to  you,  well,
           although she gave evidence that she had seen you once before  in
           the company of those same two via her then  boyfriend,  [D].  It
           appears that there was a debt owed by [D] to one  of  the  other
           two, and I find that that  must  have  been  in  the  background
           insofar as  the  commission  of  these  offences  are  concerned
           because she was effectively, as she gave evidence to  the  jury,
           forced into that car whilst working the streets that  particular
           night.


           There is a degree of vulnerability so far as they are concerned;
           they place themselves at the mercy of  anybody  who  happens  to
           come along. They simply do not know who is going to  come  along
           and what they have in mind.


           She was taken to  a  flat,  driven  there,  despite,  she  said,
           protestations, then forced upstairs, her wrists being  held  by,
           not you, but she gave evidence that her perception was that  you
           had a knife and you were flicking it, opening and  shutting  it.
           You gave evidence that you had no knife but  you  had  a  mobile
           telephone in your hand. It is difficult  to  be  certain  as  to
           whether you did in fact have a knife  but,  again  her  arm  was
           being held and she was forced up the stairs into that particular
           flat. No suggestion that you said anything  when  you  had  that
           item in your hand or that you produced  it  at  any  other  time
           after having got into the flat.


           In that flat she was taken to or ordered into the bedroom, where
           she was then ordered to remove her clothing, and  she  was  then
           subjected to a sustained attack on her person in the  commission
           of sexual offences by you three. You three took it  in  turn  to
           indecently assault her, that is placing your penis in her mouth,
           and then vaginally rape to ejaculation.


           There was, I find, an element of threats and  coercion,  as  she
           gave evidence, and that she did  not  want  to  engage  in  that
           activity  but  effectively  forced  into  engaging   into   that
           activity.  She  was  then  dropped  back  where  she  had   been
           collected, with a warning that she should effectively obtain the
           money by one o'clock the next morning. She  managed  to  contact
           her friend. She was taken to  the  police  station  and  made  a
           statement to the police officers straightaway.


           You were not arrested at that  particular  time;  you  were  not
           identified. The other two were  named  by  her,  and  they  were
           arrested and they were convicted by a jury in 2003. They were at
           that time sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 8  years.  They
           were older than you by 10 years, I am told. You are now 44;  you
           were then, I think, at that time 28. You,  as  was  your  right,
           contested these matters, having  been  identified  by  the  DNA,
           which had been obtained from the Durex, which had been recovered
           from the toilet,  again  which  are  consistent  with  your  own
           evidence.


           You indicated that you had not engaged, or you  advanced  before
           the jury the defence that you had engaged in no sexual  activity
           with her at all, and the jury clearly disbelieve due as  far  as
           that aspect is concerned.


           ...


           Offences of rape are always serious, and the fact that  she  was
           working on the  streets  at  the  time  in  effect  acts  as  no
           mitigation  insofar  as  the  seriousness  of  the  offence   is
           concerned. Looking at the guidelines,  even  as  they  apply  in
           2003, the 8 years was effectively a starting point,  and,  as  I
           said in argument with counsel, it seems to  me  that  they  were
           fortunate to have received those sentences of  8  years  ordered
           then, given the circumstances of the offence.


           ...


           Knowing everything that I do know about your  background,  I  do
           not find that you  fall  into  the  dangerous  category,  and  a
           determinative sentence is the sentence which will follow. I bear
           in mind, of course, the totality principle, so you stand  to  be
           sentenced for two offences  they  were  committed  on  the  same
           occasion, and what I propose to do is to deal  with  it  on  the
           basis of a more serious offence, which is rape, and the  overall
           sentence will be passed in relation to that particular offence.


           The offences fall into Category 2A as have been  agreed  between
           the defence and the prosecution, the aggravating features being,
           in effect, that this was a sustained attack on a complainant  by
           a number of men with  the  coercion  and  threats  that  I  have
           already mentioned. It was not a short-lived experience; it  went
           on for a significant period of time."

    6. The Crown Court sentenced the appellant  to  a  period  of  11  years
       imprisonment for the rape and 6 years  concurrent  for  the  indecent
       assault.
    7. The Judge, having considered the  appellant's  written  evidence  and
       having had the benefit of seeing  and  hearing  oral  evidence  being
       given by both the appellant and his wife [MG], set  out  findings  of
       fact from [14] of the decision under challenge. The Judge records  at
       [14] that it was agreed between the advocates that the appellant  has
       a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and a genuine and
       subsisting parental relationship with  the  four  children  from  his
       marriage.
    8. Although the appellant maintained during his trial that  he  did  not
       engage in any sexual activity with the victim at all,  despite  there
       being DNA evidence adduced, the Judge notes at [18], when considering
       the OASys report at page 136, that  the  appellant  accepted  he  was
       present during the  incident  that  occurred  and  that  his  version
       suggested that consensual sex took place  with  the  victim  and  two
       other men and that the victim was not raped and that he was  prepared
       to engage in sexual activity with the  victim  although  did  not  go
       through with it. At page 144 the author of the  report  is  noted  to
       have recorded that the appellant denied raping the  victim  and  that
       any sexual exchanges between the four of  them  were  consensual.  At
       page 148 the author of the report finds the appellant to be deemed to
       be a risk, in particular to sex workers and other vulnerable females;
       but that unless there was  a  change  in  circumstances  or  loss  of
       protective factors the appellant was unlikely to  reoffend.  At  page
       149 the author of the report records that the appellant is deemed  to
       pose a high risk to the public whilst in the community.
    9. At [19] the Judge notes the appellant's witness statement  at  [17  -
       18] conflicts with both the continued challenge to his conviction and
       his version of events set out in  the  OASys  assessment.  The  Judge
       records that at [17] of the witness statement the appellant expressed
       remorse for what had happened in his past but claims he was  not  the
       same person, and at [18] that he now has the benefit of hindsight and
       realises that he was young and na�ve  and  with  the  wrong  type  of
       people when the rape incident took  place.  The  Judge  records  that
       statement conflicts with  the  appellant's  assertion  that  no  rape
       incident took place  and  that  as  he  continues  to  challenge  his
       conviction it was said to be unclear as to why he is very  sorry  for
       what had happened in his past if he is innocent of wrongdoing  as  he
       continues to claim.
   10. The appellant denies making such statements, even though this content
       is clearly recorded in the statement signed by  him.  He  blames  his
       legal adviser for including such contrary to his instructions.
   11. The claim by the appellant in his witness statement he cannot  return
       to Jamaica because he was very young when  he  left,  had  not  lived
       there as an adult, and did not  understand  the  culture  fully,  was
       found to contradict the fact the appellant entered the UK when he was
       around the age of 25 or 26 and had therefore had lived in Jamaica  as
       an adult and would understand the culture fully [20].
   12. The Judge sets out the correct legal test at [21] that the  appellant
       was required to show there are "very  compelling  circumstances"  set
       out in paragraph 399A of the Rules and section 117C(6)  of  the  2002
       Act. The Judge notes that under  section  117C(1)  of  the  2002  Act
       deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest  and  that
       such  deportation  is  conducive  to  the  public  good.  Accordingly
       significant weight could be attributed to the public  interest  which
       must be balanced against the individual  interests  of  the  deportee
       through the prism  of  their  human  rights  and  relevant  statutory
       provisions.
   13. The Judge at [22] states "As it is accepted that the Appellant has  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  and
       children, I must consider whether deportation is  "unduly  harsh"  on
       the qualifying family member to either live abroad or remain  in  the
       UK without the Appellant".
   14. The evidence of the appellant's wife before the Judge  was  that  she
       had no intention of going to live in Jamaica  with  her  children  as
       three of the children are at  school  and  settled  and  one  of  the
       children  has  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  Chronic  Fatigue
       Syndrome. The youngest child, at the date of the hearing  before  the
       First-Tier Tribunal, was not yet of school age. The Judge records  at
       [25] the evidence that since the appellant was  imprisoned  his  wife
       has had to give up work to look  after  the  children  and  that  she
       described having limited support from her own mother with regards  to
       caring for the children and for the majority of the  time  since  the
       appellant was imprisoned the main responsibility  for  childcare  has
       fallen to her.
   15. At [26] the Judge refers to documentary evidence and letters provided
       by  the  children  and  from  the  children's  school  and  from   an
       Independent Social Worker (ISW) from which it is said to be  apparent
       that the children have expressed their view that they have no  desire
       to leave the UK to go to Jamaica. The Judge clearly took the  content
       of this report into account when considering the  best  interests  of
       the children. The Judge notes  in  that  paragraph  "the  conclusions
       reached by Mr Nyoni (ISW) with regards to there being  a  devastating
       effect on the family dynamics and functioning should the Appellant be
       deported, is equally applicable to the consequence  of  the  enforced
       separation given the Appellant's conviction  for  Rape  and  Indecent
       Assault.
   16. The Judge draws together the threads of her findings at [27 - 28]  in
       the following terms:

           "27.   I have had particular  regard  to  section  117C(2);  the
                more serious the offence committed, the greater  the  public
                interest in deportation. Given the Appellant's  relationship
                with his qualifying partner and children, I have  considered
                whether the Appellant's article 8 rights would be  breached.
                In doing so, I have turned to the issue of  proportionality.
                It is for the Appellant  to  establish  that  article  8  is
                engaged and, if so, that the Respondent's  decision  amounts
                to a disproportionate  interference  in  his  family  and/or
                private life. If that is established, it  is  then  for  the
                Respondent to show that any  interference  is  proportionate
                Ghising and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong)  UKUT
                00567.


           28.    I had to assess the impact of  refusing  the  Appellant's
                Human Rights claim on all of  his  family  members.  On  the
                evidence before me it was  apparent  that  deportation  will
                cause interference with the Appellants ordinary family life,
                which had been built up prior to  his  conviction  in  2016.
                This is an Appellant who has been convicted of a significant
                and serious offence, of which there  were  many  aggravating
                features. The offence took place in 2001 and  the  Appellant
                was convicted some 15  years  later  on  the  basis  of  DNA
                evidence. Even though his sentence was reduced, 8  years  is
                still  a  significant  sentence  in  my  view.  This  is   a
                conviction that  even  at  the  date  of  this  hearing,  he
                continues to challenge. This is an Appellant who  is  deemed
                to be a high risk to the public.  Given  that  I  have  also
                found that this Appellant's oral  and  written  evidence  is
                contradictory, I conclude that  in  his  case  the  ordinary
                family life presented by him is insufficient to  defeat  the
                statutory emphasis given to deportation AD Lee v  SSHD  EWCA
                Civ 348.  Therefore, the interference in the ordinary family
                life, is not disproportionate in the circumstances.


           29.    In my judgement, there is a clear public interest in  the
                maintenance of effective immigration  controls  and  in  the
                circumstances,  the  interests  of  the  Appellant  do   not
                override it. I am satisfied that in this case the balance of
                proportionality lies in favour of dismissing the appeal.


           30.    Accordingly, appeal is dismissed."

   17. The appellant sought permission to appeal on four grounds  which  was
       initially refused by another judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  but
       granted by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  on  17  June  2019,  on  a
       renewed application, the operative part of the  grant  being  in  the
       following terms:

           "1.    It is arguable that the Judge did not make findings about
                whether the deportation would be unduly  harsh  despite  her
                self-direction at [22]. I am unable to decide with certainty
                that this was simply  a  structural  error  which  makes  no
                difference to the outcome. Therefore for this reason only, I
                grant permission on grounds 1  and  3.  In  respect  of  the
                application of NS v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, in RA (s.117C:
                "unduly  harsh";  offence:  seriousness)  Iraq   [2019]   UK
                Tribunal said that the way in  which  a  court  or  tribunal
                should approach section 117 C remains  as  set  out  in  the
                judgement of Jackson LJ in NA.


           2. The Appellant was convicted in 2016 of  rape  going  back  to
                2001. Ground 2 is not arguable.  It  is  arguable  that  the
                Judge  did  not  understand  the  factual  matrix  and   the
                timeline. She was an arguably entitled to attach  weight  to
                the appellant's assertion of innocence despite  having  been
                convicted of a  serious  offence  and  to  his  inconsistent
                account of the event. Furthermore the Judge  was  manifestly
                entitled to attach weight to the conclusions  in  the  OASys
                report that he was a is  deemed  high  risk  to  the  public
                whilst in the community. Whilst the offence was historic the
                assessment of risk was not.


           3. Ground 4.  Permission is refused on this ground.  It  is  not
                clear to me that any application was made to adjourn pending
                consideration by the CCRC or that the alleged mistakes  were
                brought to  the  judge's  attention.  The  grounds  fail  to
                establish that  the  alleged  mistaken  facts  are  arguably
                capable of having a material impact on the outcome  of  this
                appeal."


Error of law


   18. Section 117C is the most  important  provision  for  this  case.  The
       section reads:

           "117C Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving
           foreign criminals


           (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
           interest.


           (2)    The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation  of
           the criminal.


           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
           Exception 2 applies.


           (4)    Exception 1 applies where-


                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                for most of C's life,


                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                Kingdom, and


                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to  be
                deported.


           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh.


           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least four years,  the  public
           interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1
           and 2.


           (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
           taken into account where a court or tribunal  is  considering  a
           decision to deport a foreign criminal only to  the  extent  that
           the reason for the decision was  the  offence  or  offences  for
           which the criminal has been convicted."

   19. The Judge finds  there  is  an  overriding  public  interest  in  the
       appellants deportation.
   20. Mr Bedford, in his detailed submissions,  referred  to  a  number  of
       authorities including KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 in which that court
       gave consideration to  how  the  question  of  whether  an  effective
       deportation is unduly harsh was to be assessed.   The  Supreme  Court
       held that when looking at unduly harsh the  focus  was  only  on  the
       position of the child.  To take  into  account  the  conduct  of  the
       parent would be in direct conflict with the  Zoumbas  principle  that
       the child should not be held  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the
       parent. The way the Upper Tribunal expressed what unduly harsh  meant
       in MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223  is  that  "unduly  harsh
       does not equate  with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or
       merely difficult.  Rather  it  poses  a  considerably  more  elevated
       threshold.  "Harsh" in this  context,  denotes  something  severe  or
       bleak.   It  is  the   antithesis   of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
       Furthermore, the addition of the adverb "unduly"  raises  an  already
       elevated standard still higher".
   21. The Supreme Court noted the assumption that there was an "due"  level
       of harshness; a level which  may  be  acceptable  or  justifiable  in
       context.  "Undue" went beyond that.  The relevant context was set  by
       section 117C(1) that is the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
       foreign criminals.  One was looking for a degree of  harshness  going
       beyond what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with
       the deportation of a parent.
   22. The Judge was required to consider the provisions of the  Immigration
       Rules and section 117C of the 2002  Act  as  part  of  assessing  the
       proportionality of the respondent's decision. Although not set out in
       the structured manner advocated in Razgar the Judge clearly took into
       account relevant factors. It was accepted  that  family  and  private
       life exists protected by article 8 ECHR. The Judge concludes that the
       issue in the case is that of the proportionality of  the  deportation
       decision, i.e. Razgar question 5.
   23. The Judge noted the index offences were committed  in  2001  but  the
       reason the appellant was not convicted prior to 2016 was because  the
       police were unaware of his identity.  Whilst  forensic  evidence  had
       been obtained it was not  until  the  DNA  results  that  a  positive
       connection was made between one of the parties who raped  the  victim
       and the appellant. It is also the case that the other two individuals
       involved in the rape were arrested and convicted in  2003  for  which
       they were sentenced to 8 years imprisonment. It is not known  whether
       the appellant was aware that his associates  had  been  arrested  and
       subsequently convicted but if he was he failed to come forward or  to
       make himself known to the police. The fact a person  commits  offence
       but then tries to "lie low" does not mean they are any less culpable.
       Notwithstanding the period of time that has passed the appellant  was
       convicted by a  jury  and  sentenced  to  a  considerable  period  of
       imprisonment. Whilst it may be argued by some that lack of  offending
       in the  interim  period  lessens  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
       appellant's actions the reality is that Parliament has dictated  that
       it is the period of imprisonment that is  the  relevant  factor  when
       determining the nature of the test to be  considered  when  assessing
       the proportionality of the decision.
   24. The fact that during this intervening period the appellant  may  have
       assisted in the care of his children whilst his wife is  working  was
       clearly considered by the Judge who accepts there is  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship between  the  appellant,  his  wife  and  the
       children. The  nature  of  the  bond  between  them  is  relevant  to
       assessing  the  question  of   whether   separation   following   the
       appellant's deportation will be unduly harsh when considering whether
       the appellant is able to succeed under an exceptions  to  UK  Borders
       Act.
   25. The evidence relied  upon  before  the  Judge  included  the  witness
       statements which were clearly considered, the OASys,  school  reports
       and correspondence, and a report from an  Independent  Social  Worker
       (ISW). I do not find it made out the Judge  failed  to  consider  any
       aspect of the evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny.
   26. The report of the ISW dated 11  March  2019  was  prepared  after  an
       interview with the appellant's wife for their four  children  at  the
       home address on 1 October 2018, for a period of two hours. The report
       assesses the nature of the relationship between the  family  members,
       and the effect  and  impact  of  the  appellant's  removal  upon  his
       children. In Section 5 of the report it is written:

           "5 Conclusions and Recommendations.


                You are at liberty to consider the  best  interests  of  the
                child and making decisions pertaining  to  immigration.  The
                duty  imposed  by  section  55   Borders   Citizenship   and
                Immigration Act (2009) requires  the  decision-maker  to  be
                properly informed of the position of the child  affected  by
                the discharge of an immigration function and  sets  out  the
                key arrangements for safeguarding and promoting the  welfare
                of children. Decisions  affecting  children  must,  "prevent
                impairment of children's health or development, where health
                means 'physical or  mental  health'  and  development  means
                'physical, intellectual, emotional,  social  or  behavioural
                development". (Borders and Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
                2009, London HMSO) to  therefore  forcibly  remove  LLG  and
                potentially [T], [E], [D]  and  [L]  from  this  country  or
                advocate for anything that may potentially cause stress  all
                is for [T], [E], [D] and [L] and their way of life, will  be
                to go against the same principles.


                I have informed you of the  current  circumstances  of  [T],
                [E], [D] and [L] and discussed how they could be  negatively
                affected by their father's deportation from the UK and their
                relocation to Jamaica to be with him. [T], [E], [D] and  [L]
                are British, having lived in the UK since birth.  [T],  [E],
                [D] and [L] are being educated in the UK in the  event  that
                their father is deported there. They do not  want  to  leave
                their friends, extended family, half  siblings  and  school.
                [T], [E],  [D]  and  [L]  have  endured  a  long  period  of
                separation from their father and want him to return home  in
                order to be a complete family.


                The UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  (UNCRC)
                obligates ratifying countries to  respect  and  protect  the
                rights of all children within their territories,  regardless
                of a child's background  or  migration  status.  Article  12
                (respect for the views of the  child)  states  that:  "every
                child has the right to express  their  views,  feelings  and
                wishes in all matters affecting  them,  and  to  have  their
                views considered and taken seriously. This right applies  at
                all  times,  for  example  during  immigration  proceedings,
                housing decisions or the child's day to day home life." [T],
                [E], [D] and [L] made it clear that they do not want to live
                anywhere else and have no idea  of  what  life  is  like  in
                Jamaica. They do not want to be permanently  separated  from
                their father whom they have maintained stable contact during
                his  imprisonment.  [T]  spoke  of  not  having   the   same
                educational opportunities in Jamaica and would Mrs  extended
                family, half siblings, the school and friends. [MG] did  not
                feel it will be in her children's best interests  to  uproot
                them and relocate to Jamaica. [T],  [E],  [D]  and  [L]  are
                settled and thriving at school and [MG] continues to try and
                maintain consistency and stability in the  children's  lives
                despite the challenges and uncertainty about  her  husband's
                immigration status.


                Article 3 of the Convention states that: "the best interests
                of the child must be a top priority  in  all  decisions  and
                actions  that  affect  children".  Owing  to  the   evidence
                presented above it is my assessment that it is in  the  best
                interests of  [T],  [E],  [D]  and  [L]  to  continue  their
                educational, emotional and physical development  in  the  UK
                within a stable  family  unit,  which  would  include  their
                parents, their half siblings and extended family.


                Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
                provides the right to respect one's established family life.
                This includes  close  family  ties  and  significant  stable
                relationships. It is quite clear  that  [LEG]  has  a  well-
                established network of family, friends and support  networks
                in the UK. Therefore, it is of paramount importance that the
                family remain in the UK as a family unit. These  attachments
                are associated with a positive family home  environment  for
                [T], [E], [D] and [L].


                As well as those already mentioned a number of documents and
                acts advocate for the risks to children and  young  people's
                welfare to be minimised and that the protection of  harm  to
                their development,  emotional  and  physical  well-being  is
                paramount. These include The Childrens Act  (2004),  Working
                Together  to  Safeguard  Children  (2015)  and  Every  Child
                Matters Change for Children (2015). In accordance  with  the
                United Nations (UN) Convention on the rights of  the  child,
                the best interests  of  the  child  should  be  the  primary
                consideration. I have outlined the best interests  for  [T],
                [E], [D] and [L] as children who have been born  and  raised
                in the UK. To disrupt this family life in any  way  will  be
                detrimental  to  these  children's  physical  and  emotional
                health and well-being.


                I have outlined the best interests for  [T],  [E],  [D]  and
                [L]. In my opinion, to disrupt this family life in  any  way
                will be detrimental to these children's emotional health and
                well-being. It is clear that these children have established
                attachments with their father [T], [E],  [D]  and  [L]  have
                been able to form and nurture positive, social networks with
                their extended family and peers. [T], [E], [D] and [L]  view
                themselves as  British  and  have  a  wider  group  of  peer
                friendships. [T], [E], [D] and [L] are well integrated  into
                the English education system and are currently  thriving  in
                this environment. To uproot  the  family  or  separate  them
                owing to the deportation of [LEG], in my  experience,  would
                have  a  devastating  effect  on  the  family  dynamics  and
                functioning which would in turn  impact  negatively  on  the
                children's developing confidence,  stability  and  emotional
                well-being  and  prevent  them  from  reaching  their   full
                potential."

   27. The Judge clearly took into account section 55 and the best interests
       of the children which are not the  determinative  factor,  albeit  of
       paramount importance. It is not made out the Judge does not find that
       the best interests of the children will be to remain within a  stable
       family environment. Much of the report of the ISW  focuses  upon  the
       children leaving the United Kingdom but that is not going  to  occur.
       This is a family splitting case.
   28.  The  ISW's  evidence  corroborates  [LEG's]  claim  to  have   close
       relationships with his children. In the absence of any  other  cogent
       evidence beyond the closeness of the  relationships,  the  conclusion
       that the impact upon the children would be extremely  detrimental  is
       unsupported by any evidence other than the views of the ISW. This  is
       not a case in which any of the children have any  health  or  medical
       concerns such as to make the Judge's decision unsustainable.  The ISW
       is careful to refer  to  sources  to  support  his  clear  view  that
       separation between a loving parent and child can lead to difficulties
       for the child. However the test as explained by the Supreme Court  in
       KO (Nigeria) is not whether these children would face harshness,  the
       test is whether or not they would face a  degree  of  harshness  that
       goes beyond that which would be involved for any child faced with the
       deportation of a parent. The reasoning of the ISW  does  not  explain
       why, although the consequences may be harsh, they would be unduly  so
       and why it goes beyond that which would be  involved  for  any  child
       faced with the deportation of a parent.
   29. There was no rational foundation for the Judge to conclude  that  the
       effects of deporting the appellant would be  "unduly  harsh"  on  his
       wife or children.  Many parents have to face periods of adjustment or
       experience going through difficult periods and the fact the appellant
       is a foreign criminal parent would not be in  a  position  to  assist
       does not of itself mean that the  effects  of  deportation  would  be
       "unduly harsh" on his partner and children.
   30. No arguable error has been made  out  material  to  the  decision  to
       dismiss the appeal or the Judges conclusion  that  the  appellant  is
       unable to succeed under either Exception 1  or  Exception  2  of  the
       Rules or section 117C.
   31. The length of sentence received by the appellant  means  that  he  is
       requires to show there are sufficiently compelling circumstances over
       and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
   32. In this appeal the Judge's conclusion the decision  is  proportionate
       is clearly a finding that the appellant had not established either an
       entitlement to remain on  basis  of  either  of  the  exceptions  nor
       established facts sufficient to be categorised as being  sufficiently
       to amount to compelling circumstances over and above those set out in
       the exceptions. The Article 8 claim was not shown to be  sufficiently
       strong.
   33. Whilst the structure of the determination was of concern  and  it  is
       arguable that it could have been laid out in a different format it is
       clear the Judge was aware of the required test, as the  same  is  set
       out at [22]. The conclusion the  decision  is  proportionate  is  the
       Judge's assessment that deportation would not be unduly harsh on  any
       qualifying member of this family.
   34. This is a  particularly  heinous  offence  for  which  the  appellant
       received a substantial periods of imprisonment.  It  is  settled  law
       that neither the British nationality of the appellant's children  nor
       their likely separation  from  their  father  for  a  long  time  are
       exceptional circumstances which outweigh the public interest  in  his
       deportation, per se. The appellant failed to establish this is a case
       which,  on  a  proper  factual  analysis,  would  give  rise   to   a
       sufficiently strong claim to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
       deportation. It is accepted the impact upon the children  and  family
       will be difficult and is likely to  be  harsh.  It  is  accepted  the
       children and other family  members  would  prefer  the  appellant  to
       remain in the United Kingdom, but the desires of the family  are  not
       the requisite test. The Judge's conclusion the respondent's  decision
       is proportionate is well within the range of findings reasonably open
       to the Judge on the evidence.



Decision

   35. There is no material error  of  law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  The
       determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.


   36. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 25 October 2019.



