
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16465/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2020                  |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 jibin rajAn
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of India born on 21 April 1987, appeals, with
    permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
    his human rights appeal.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 11 May 2010 with entry clearance  as  a
    Tier 4 student valid until 26 February 2012  and  was  granted  further
    periods of leave on the same basis until 30 November 2015. He was  then
    granted a further period of leave as a Tier 2 Dependant Partner,  valid
    until 23 November 2019, but that leave was curtailed to  expire  on  27
    December 2015, due to his wife's employer's licence being revoked,  and
    a further  application  for  leave  on  the  same  basis  was  refused.
    Following an unsuccessful  administrative  review  and  the  subsequent
    issuing of  judicial  review  proceedings,  the  respondent  agreed  to
    consider a human rights application from the appellant.

 3. The appellant then made an application for leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds, on the basis of his  family  life  with  his  wife  and
    child, on 19 August 2019. The application was refused on  26  September
    2019 on suitability grounds, under paragraph S-LTR.1.6, on the basis of
    allegations of fraud in relation to  an  English  language  certificate
    obtained through the Educational Testing Service  (ETS)  and  submitted
    with the appellant's application of 8 November 2012 for further Tier  4
    leave. The respondent also considered that the appellant could not meet
    the eligibility requirements of the immigration rules under Appendix FM
    because his partner was not British and was not settled in the UK, that
    he could not demonstrate very significant obstacles to  integration  in
    India and that there were no very compelling circumstances justifying a
    grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt on 31  December  2019.  The  judge
    concluded  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  produce  an  innocent
    explanation in response to the allegation of fraud and  that  he  could
    not, therefore, succeed under the immigration rules as a result of  the
    suitability provisions. The judge  considered  Article  8  outside  the
    rules but concluded that the respondent's  decision  was  proportionate
    and was not in breach of the appellant's human rights.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Moffatt's  decision  on
    various grounds, which included, in ground 3,  an  assertion  that  the
    judge had failed to consider the fact that his  English  language  test
    result was cancelled on the basis of being "questionable"  rather  than
    "invalid" and had  thus  failed  to  adopt  a  holistic  approach  when
    considering the allegation of fraud.  Permission  was  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on that basis.

 6. The matter then came before  me.  At  the  hearing,  Mr  Lindsay  quite
    properly conceded that ground 3 was  made  out  and  that  that  was  a
    material error which affected the outcome of the appeal.  In  light  of
    his concession, I set aside Judge  Moffatt's  decision  and  agreed  to
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal, as both parties proposed.



DECISION

 7. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with  afresh,
    pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a),  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge Moffatt.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 10 November 2020
