
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16109/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 March 2019                              |On 28 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - AMMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Suad Abdulraheem abdulwahhab Al Adhami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Powell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Thomas of Counsel, instructed by Descartes
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is the appeal of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  I  will
    refer to the original appellant, a citizen of Iraq born on 7 May  1954,
    as the appellant herein.  Her appeal against the decision of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on 29 October 2017 to refuse her leave to  enter  the
    United Kingdom was allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  following  a
    hearing on 14 December 2018 on human rights grounds.   The  sponsor  is
    the son of the appellant.  The First-tier Judge heard evidence from the
    sponsor and his wife, the appellant's  daughter-in-law.   Reliance  was
    placed on the appellant's doctor, Doctor Wafiq.   The  judge  noted  in
    paragraph 29 that the evidence  of  Doctor  Wafiq  confirmed  that  the
    appellant has a serious physical health  condition  which  limited  her
    mobility.  The judge had no doubt that she was a vulnerable and  lonely
    woman separated from her  only  son  and  with  no  family  support  in
    Baghdad.  However, the judge did not accept Dr  Wafiq's  evidence  that
    the only option would  be  joint  replacement  surgery  which  was  not
    available in Iraq and if she had surgery  to  alleviate  her  pain  and
    improve her mobility "it would seem more than likely that she would  be
    able to deal with her own self-care within a short time."  Accordingly,
    the judge was not satisfied that the appellant,  due  to  her  illness,
    required long-term personal care  and  accordingly  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of E-ECDR.2.4.  Furthermore, with financial assistance the
    judge was not satisfied there was  no-one  in  Baghdad  who  could  not
    reasonable provide domestic  help,  help  with  shopping  and  doctor's
    visits.   Accordingly,  the  appellant  could  not  come   within   the
    provisions of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5.

2.   In relation to Article 8  the  judge  concluded  her  determination  as
    follows:

         "39. The appellant is a widow, residing alone.  The sponsor  stated
             that he contacted her by phone, text and  on-line,  and  there
             was daily contact.  I accept his evidence despite  a  lack  of
             documentation to confirm this.


         40.  The appellant is lonely and vulnerable, and I accept that  she
             has a family life with her son and his wife,  that  there  are
             more  than  normal  emotional  ties  between  them.   I   have
             therefore considered Article 8 ECHR  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules.  I have had regard to  the  tests  set  out  in  Razgar
             [2004] UKHL 27 and the  conditions  in  section  117B  of  the
             Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


         41.  The issues is one of proportionality, whether the  maintenance
             of effective immigration controls outweighs other factors.


         42.  The sponsor is now a British citizen.  His wife is British and
             had originally been granted leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom along with her parents who had  claimed  asylum.   Not
             unreasonably she has stated a fear of visiting Baghdad because
             of the dangers.  The sponsor has not felt it  safe  to  go  to
             Baghdad to see the appellant.


         43.  Family life with the appellant, her son and  his  wife  cannot
             reasonably be expected  to  be  enjoyed  in  Baghdad.   Whilst
             communication can be maintained by phone and online, given the
             security  issues,  it  is  unlikely  that  the   sponsor   can
             reasonably  be  expected  to  visit  the  appellant   in   the
             foreseeable future.


         44.  The sponsor and his wife are financially independent  and  are
             in a position  to  support  the  appellant.   They  can  offer
             emotional  and  psychological  support.   Further  social  and
             emotional support is available  from  the  daughter  in  law's
             parents.


         45.  In all the circumstances I consider that  on  balance,  it  is
             proportionate to grant leave for the appellant  to  enter  the
             United Kingdom to live in family with her son and daughter  in
             law."

3.   The judge accordingly allowed the appeal.

4.   The Entry Clearance Officer submitted that  the  judge  had  overlooked
    several important factors.  No explanation had been  provided  how  the
    appellant's emotional and physical needs were being cared  for  at  the
    present time or why the sponsor was unable to move to Iraq or why  care
    could not be provided by family or friends in Iraq.  The assertion that
    hired help could not be trusted was plainly speculative.   The  sponsor
    could pay for care to  be  provided  privately.   There  was  treatment
    available locally for the appellant's condition.  It  was  unclear  why
    the judge had allowed the appeal.

5.   It was argued that the judge had failed to  consider  Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act and the  need  for  effective  immigration  control.   The
    appellant was likely to be a considerable burden on the NHS  and  might
    not be  able  to  integrate  successfully  into  British  society.   No
    findings had been made on the appellant's  ability  to  speak  English.
    Reference was made to EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874.   The  UK
    could not be expected to  provide  medical  care  to  the  world.   All
    relevant factors needed to be considered in the round.   Reference  was
    made to Huang v Secretary of State [2007] UKHL 11.

6.   Ms Powell submitted that it was not clear  from  the  judge's  findings
    made for example in paragraphs 35 to 37 why the judge had  allowed  the
    appeal.  Care paid for by the sponsor could continue  in  Iraq.   There
    had been a failure to take into account Section 117B.

7.   In relation to Article 8 Counsel submitted  that  the  judge  had  made
    findings that the appellant was a lonely and vulnerable woman  and  she
    accepted that the appellant had family life with her son and  his  wife
    and that there were more than the normal emotional ties  between  them.
    The judge referred in paragraph 42  to  the  sponsor  being  a  British
    citizen.  His wife was also British  and  had  been  granted  leave  to
    remain in the UK  along  with  her  parents  who  had  claimed  asylum.
    Counsel pointed out that the parties had chosen to be married in Jordan
    and had not returned to Iraq.

8.   It was clear that the judge had referred to paragraph 117B of the  2002
    Act and was alive to the financial issues.  If leave were granted under
    Article 8 it would likely to be limited rather  than  indefinite  leave
    and the appellant would have limited access to healthcare.   The  judge
    had not materially erred in her consideration of  the  public  interest
    requirements and Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  If a material error  of
    law was identified there was a short bundle including further  evidence
    from Dr Wafiq taking issue with the judge's analysis  of  the  evidence
    and also evidence  that  the  appellant's  wife  is  expecting  a  baby
    shortly.

9.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the conclusions of the  First-tier  Judge  if  they
    were flawed in law.

10.  The respondent contends that  the  determination  is  not  sufficiently
    reasoned.  It is argued that it was not explained why the  sponsor  was
    unable to move to Iraq or why care could not be provided by  family  or
    friends and  it  was  submitted  that  the  sponsor's  assertions  were
    speculative and did not constitute  objective  evidence.   Furthermore,
    treatment was available for the appellant in Iraq.

11.  In my view the judge did sufficiently explain the reasons for  reaching
    her decision when the determination is read as a whole.   For  example,
    in paragraph 30 the judge states "I have no doubt that the appellant is
    a vulnerable and lonely woman, separated from her only son, and with no
    family support in Baghdad.   She  has  a  significant  physical  health
    condition."  Nevertheless, the judge accepted that the appellant had  a
    family life with the sponsor and his wife and there were more than  the
    normal emotional ties between them.   An  important  consideration  was
    that this family life could not reasonably be expected to be enjoyed in
    Baghdad.

12.  A point is taken that the judge did not consider Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.  The judge states that she had had regard both  to  the  test
    set out in Razgar and the conditions in Section 117B in paragraph 40 of
    her decision. I am not satisfied that she failed  to  give  the  public
    interest sufficient weight  having  expressly  confirmed  she  had  had
    regard to the relevant section.  The  judge  refers  to  the  financial
    circumstances of the sponsor and his  wife  in  paragraph  44  and  was
    satisfied that they were in a position to support the appellant and  in
    any event counsel submits that the appellant would be unlikely to be  a
    burden on the NHS if granted limited leave to enter, as  would  be  the
    normal position.  On the issue of integration, the judge  had  accepted
    that the appellant was  lonely  and  vulnerable  and  her  family  life
    revolved around the sponsor and his wife.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    sponsor and his wife would offer emotional  and  psychological  support
    and further  social  and  emotional  support  was  available  from  the
    sponsor's wife's parents.

13.  I do not find that the judge arguably overlooked  any  relevant  matter
    when reaching her conclusions. It does appear that a key factor in  the
    judge's decision was that family life could not reasonably be  expected
    to be enjoyed in Baghdad for the reasons she gives.  It  was  no  doubt
    this  consideration  in  particular,  together  with  the   appellant's
    vulnerability and isolation, which informed the judge's  assessment  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

14.  It may be that another judge might have reached  a  different  decision
    but I am not persuaded that the decision of this judge  was  materially
    flawed in law for the reasons advanced by the Entry Clearance  Officer.
    In the circumstances, I do not take into account the new evidence.

Notice of Decision

15.  For the reasons I have given this appeal is dismissed and the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge is confirmed.  The  First-tier  Judge  made  no
    anonymity direction and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date: 25 March 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
