
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16665/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 26 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel, instructed by S H Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. This decision is the remaking of the Article 8 ECHR appeal of A.  In  a
    decision dated 9 July 2019, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever found  an
    error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham  dated
    11 March 2019 which refused the appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim.

 2. As in the error of law decision of Judge  Lever  and  the  accompanying
    direction, the limited  issue  to  be  to  be  addressed  here  is  the
    assessment of whether there  would  be  a  disproportionate  breach  of
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration  Rules,  that  assessment  being
    informed by the provisions of paragraph 117B(6), in  particular,  where
    the appellant has a 4 year old British child.

 3. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever correctly identified that the case of
    KO v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 is authority for the proper  approach  to  the
    Section 117B(6) assessment. In  KO  the  Supreme  Court  identified  as
    follows in paragraphs 17 to 19:

         "17. As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
             of the rule without material change,  but  this  time  in  the
             context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would  infer
             that it was intended to have the  same  effect.  The  question
             again is what is "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ  said
             in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  1  WLR  5093,  para  36,
             there is nothing in the subsection to import  a  reference  to
             the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets out a  number  of
             factors relating to those seeking leave to  enter  or  remain,
             but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B(6)  is  on
             its face free-standing, the only qualification being that  the
             person relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of
             relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para  10  above)
             seems to me wholly  appropriate  and  sound  in  law,  in  the
             context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected
             to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to
             be with them. To that extent the record  of  the  parents  may
             become indirectly material, if it leads to  their  ceasing  to
             have a right to remain here, and having to leave. It  is  only
             if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave that the provision may give the  parents  a
             right to remain. The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd  in
             SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             2017 SLT 1245:

                  "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                  whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
                  UK one has to address the question, 'Why would  the  child
                  be expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a  case  such
                  as this there can only be one answer: 'because the parents
                  have no right to  remain  in  the  UK'.  To  approach  the
                  question in any other way strips away the context in which
                  the assessment of reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
             considering the 'best interests' of children in the context of
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

                  "58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of  the
                      best interests of the children must be  made  on  the
                      basis that the facts are as  they  are  in  the  real
                      world. If one parent has no right to remain, but  the
                      other parent does, that  is  the  background  against
                      which the assessment is conducted. If neither  parent
                      has the right to remain, then that is the  background
                      against which the assessment is conducted.  Thus  the
                      ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect
                      the child to follow  the  parent  with  no  right  to
                      remain to the country of origin?"

             To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully  disagree.  There  is
             nothing in the section to suggest that 'reasonableness' is  to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world  in  which  the
             children find themselves."

 4. The appellant in this appeal is a national of Pakistan, born on  4  May
    1987. He came to the UK on 24 April 2011  as  a  Tier  4  Student.   He
    obtained a further grant of leave to  remain  until  5  December  2013.
    However, in a decision dated 27 September 2013, the  respondent  sought
    to curtail his leave as of 29 November 2013.  This  was  in  connection
    with a TOEIC certification said to have been obtained by using a proxy.
    On 26 November 2013 the appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  under
    Article 8 ECHR but, after refusal, an appeal was struck out on 16 April
    2014 and the appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 16 April 2014.

 5. The appellant made a further Article 8 ECHR application on 3 June  2014
    which was refused on 8 July 2014. On 21 July 2014 the appellant made  a
    further Article 8 ECHR application which was  refused  on  27  February
    2015.

 6.  Meanwhile,  on  6  October  2014  the  appellant   submitted   another
    application for leave to  remain  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   That
    application was refused on 1 April 2015.  The matter  proceeded  to  an
    appeal which was dismissed on  14  June  2016.   The  appellant  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 22 November 2016.

 7. The appellant made a further application under Article  8  ECHR  on  20
    September 2017.  That application was refused on 11 July 2018 and it is
    that  refusal  which  forms  the  basis  of  these  proceedings.    The
    respondent refused the application on the basis of  the  appellant  not
    meeting the suitability  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  where  he  had
    exercised deception in relying on a TOEIC certificate obtained using  a
    proxy.  That matter is no longer live as it has been conceded  for  the
    appellant that the First-tier Tribunal's findings against  him  on  the
    issue must stand.  The respondent also considered that the  appellant's
    partner and child, both British, could be expected to relocate with him
    to Pakistan.

 8. The appellant maintains that it would not be reasonable for his son, M,
    born on 29 January 2015, to be expected to go to Pakistan.  It  is  not
    disputed that M suffers from speech delay.   This  has  caused  him  to
    become withdrawn from interaction with other children and  his  nursery
    have advised that he is exhibiting some traits of autism, shown by  his
    lack of personal, social and emotional development.  M has always lived
    in the UK.

 9. Further, it was not disputed that the appellant's wife has  experienced
    difficulties in recent years because of M's condition and as  a  result
    of two miscarriages in 2018 which were, understandably, very  traumatic
    experiences.   The  appellant's  wife,  although   from   a   Pakistani
    background, has always lived in the UK and has  limited  experience  of
    Pakistan.  She speaks only a little Urdu and cannot read or  write  the
    language.  She is very concerned about having to relocate to  Pakistan,
    considering that it would be "incredibly difficult" for M and that  she
    was vulnerable because of her anxiety  about  how  he  would  cope  and
    because of the ongoing grief following her miscarriages.

10. In all the circumstances, it is my conclusion that the evidence here is
    sufficient to show that it would not be reasonable for M to be expected
    to leave the UK, albeit this would be with his parents. He is currently
    receiving specialist support for his developmental  difficulties  which
    he could not expect to receive in Pakistan. The change of country would
    be a serious matter for him because of his developmental problems.  M's
    British nationality is a factor attracting  weight.  In  addition,  his
    mother would herself be struggling to adapt to life in Pakistan because
    of  her  limited  experience  of  the  country   and   has   additional
    vulnerabilities because of her anxiety about M and her experiences over
    the last few years. I accept that her difficulties if she went to  live
    in Pakistan would have an additional negative impact on M.

11. For these reasons, I find that it is not  in  the  public  interest  to
    remove the appellant where it is not reasonable to expect  his  British
    child to leave the UK.  I therefore allow the appeal  under  Article  8
    ECHR.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error  on  a  point  of
law and was set aside.

The appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  24  September
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





