
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16371/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th January 2020                 |On 29th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  JASON [K]
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Ms U Sood, Counsel instructed Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a  national  of  Jamaica.  His  appeal  against  a
         decision dated 6th November 2017 to refuse a human rights claim was
         dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey for reasons set out in
         a decision promulgated on 19th October 2018.


      2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan on 26th July 2019.  The  matter  comes
         before us to determine whether the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Pacey is vitiated by a material error of law, and if  so,  to
         remake the decision.


      3. In order to put matters into context, it is appropriate for  us  to
         set out in some detail the background to the respondent's  decision
         of 6th November 2017 and  the  appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Pacey.


    The background


      4. The appellant last arrived in the United Kingdom November 2003 with
         entry clearance as the spouse  of  Claudine  [M],  valid  until  21
         November 2005. He remained in the UK unlawfully when his  leave  to
         enter ended.  On 11th November 2010, the appellant was convicted of
         possession of a class B controlled drug (cannabis) with  intent  to
         supply, supplying a class A controlled  drug  (crack  cocaine)  and
         supplying a class A controlled drug (heroin).  He received a  total
         sentence of three years and six months imprisonment.  A deportation
         order was signed on 1st February 2013.


      5. The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  to  deport  the
         appellant and his appeal was dismissed for reasons  set  out  in  a
         decision promulgated by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  on  1st
         July 2013.  For present purposes it is sufficient to note  that  in
         the grounds of appeal advanced  by  the  appellant,  the  appellant
         claimed to have established an extensive family and private life in
         the UK.  The  appellant  claimed  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his long-term partner, Karine [R], and
         that he maintains a genuine  parental  relationship  with  his  son
         [RK], who was born on 23 September 2005, and with his  ex-partner's
         daughter [CK].   The appellant relied  upon  a  report  dated  26th
         April 2013 prepared by Christine Brown an independent social worker
         instructed by the appellant's solicitors.  At paragraph [59] of the
         decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer said:


             "It is argued  that  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  the
             appellant's  child  to  grow  up  without  a  father   figure.
             Regrettably the child has had his father removed from his life
             at an early stage, but that is due to the appellant's  leaving
             the family home and the further cut-off of the regular contact
             that was due to  his  lengthy  imprisonment  due  to  his  own
             criminal actions. Again we do not place as  much  credence  on
             his assertion because the separation of the appellant from the
             child has already occurred. He was arrested some time ago  and
             remained  in  detention  for   a   significant   period.   The
             deportation will be a repetition of the physical separation of
             the appellant from the  child  because  of  his  own  criminal
             actions. The principal schism has already occurred. The  child
             has  now  not  lived  together  with  the  appellant   for   a
             significant period of time. In addition the time he  had  been
             in custody had a severe limitation on  the  relationship  with
             the child."

      6. The First-tier Tribunal accepted [RK] has a relationship  with  his
         father and the  relationship  would  be  interfered  with,  by  the
         deportation.  The Tribunal noted the  child  will  continue  to  be
         looked after by his primary carer, his mother, as he was after  the
         appellant left the family home when the child was very  young,  and
         while the appellant was  in  prison.   At  paragraph  [61]  of  its
         decision, the First-tier Tribunal said:


             "Responsibility for the detrimental effect that this  has  had
             on his child rests entirely at the appellant's door.  No doubt
             the child will find it hard if the  appellant  is  removed  to
             Jamaica. However he is young and with the appropriate  support
             and counselling he will recover.  The  child  will  of  course
             continue to live in the same family unit in future as he  does
             at present  namely  with  his  mother  and  siblings.  Contact
             between the child and the appellant has been  limited  in  the
             past  following  the  appellant's  arrest,  imprisonment   and
             detention  and  the  difference  in  this   contact   by   his
             deportation will not be therefore as great as  it  might  have
             been had he been living with the child throughout."

      7.  The  First-tier   Tribunal   also   considered   the   appellant's
         relationship with Karine [R].  The Tribunal accepted the  appellant
         met Miss [R] in late 2006 and they entered into a  relationship  in
         early 2007.  At paragraph [65], the First-tier Tribunal said:


             "Miss [R] is an intelligent individual and is training to be a
             solicitor. We were somewhat surprised at her claimed  lack  of
             knowledge of the appellant's status and  drug  dealing  before
             his arrest. Despite being  a  trainee  employment  lawyer  she
             contends that she did not ask questions to the appellant as to
             his status although she was aware of his Jamaican citizenship.
             It would appear that the appellant was in a relationship  with
             Miss [R] throughout the period of his  serious  criminal  drug
             dealing but she contends that she knew  nothing  of  this.  We
             find this surprising in view of the fact that drugs were found
             at the appellant's home as was a significantly  large  sum  of
             cash. In addition the appellant now blames  the  offending  on
             mixing with the wrong crowd. Miss  [R]  was  mixing  with  the
             appellant but submits an innocence  of  the  appellant's  drug
             dealing, cash and acquaintances which we do not find credible.
             We note  that  she  was  unable  to  prevent  the  appellant's
             criminal activities in the past."

      8. It was uncontroversial that the appellant  was  in  a  relationship
         with Miss [R].  The Tribunal noted  that  on  20th  July  2012  the
         appellant  was  granted  immigration  bail  to  her  address.    At
         paragraph [70] of its decision, the First-tier Tribunal said:


             "Miss [R] has now provided her home as  the  appellant's  bail
             address and their cohabitation commenced at a  time  when  she
             knew that the respondent intended to deport the appellant; she
             was also aware of his criminal activities. We  find  that  she
             entered into this form of family life knowing that there was a
             significant prospect of deportation. We find that  she  should
             have  given  some  thought  to  the  continuation   of   their
             relationship being  subject  to  the  appellant  returning  to
             Jamaica. It is not apparent what enquiries she has made as  to
             relocating to Jamaica, for example as to  the  recognition  of
             qualifications in gaining employment in that country. We  find
             that it is not been established that it would be  unreasonable
             for Miss  [R]  to  relocate  to  Jamaica  if  she  wishes  her
             relationship with the appellant to continue.

      9. Having considered all relevant  matters,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         concluded that the public interest in deportation is not outweighed
         by the claim by the appellant that  his  deportation  would  be  in
         breach of his Article 8 rights, and his appeal was dismissed.


     10. Following the conclusion of that appeal the appellant was  detained
         in January 2014 with a  view  to  his  deportation.  The  appellant
         responded, on 30th January 2014 with an application to  revoke  the
         deportation order, and on 2nd  February  2014,  with  a  claim  for
         asylum. The claim for asylum was refused and certified  as  clearly
         unfounded and  the  appellant  was  deported  to  Jamaica  on  23rd
         February 2014.


     11. The appellant exercised his out of country  right  of  appeal,  and
         that appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  on
         14th October 2014 for reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on
         30th October 2014.  At the hearing of that appeal, the  appellant's
         partner Karine [R] gave evidence.  The  judge  noted  her  evidence
         that following the previous appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,
         she and the appellant had become engaged. She had wanted  a  proper
         wedding and arranged to  attend  a  pre-marriage  course  with  the
         Church Minister, but that was not due to start until March 2014  by
         which time the appellant had been deported. The  judge  also  heard
         evidence from Carolyn Gilmore, who told the  Tribunal  that  Karine
         [R] had found it hard to cope with the  appellant  in  prison  and,
         between his release and removal to Jamaica, the appellant  and  his
         partner came to church at least every two weeks. She gave  evidence
         that [RK] attended  Sunday  school  and  since  the  appellant  was
         removed she had seen the children at Sunday School only once.


     12. The judge addressed the appellant's asylum claim at paragraphs [52]
         to [73]  of  the  decision.   The  judge  found  the  core  of  the
         appellant's claim to be lacking in  credibility  and  rejected  his
         claim that he faces serious harm in Jamaica.  At paragraph [63]  of
         his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer said:


             "I accept that Jamaica has an  enviable  record  in  terms  of
             criminal violence. However, there  is  no  evidence  that  the
             appellant was involved in criminal activities before  he  left
             Jamaica either as a participant or as a victim.  There  is  no
             evidence that he has engaged in criminal  activity  after  his
             return and therefore would not be seen as a rival  to  any  of
             the existing gangs."

     13. The judge found, at [65], the appellant has not  provided  credible
         evidence to establish that he may be subjected  to  persecution  in
         Jamaica by "Mark" due to the alleged UK drug debt.


     14. Having rejected the core of the appellant's account as  lacking  in
         credibility and having found the appellant has not established that
         he faces serious harm in Jamaica, the Judge did not accept that  he
         has been, or will be persecuted. The judge went on to  address  the
         Article  8  claim  and  considered  the  relationship  between  the
         appellant and his son. He stated at [86]:


             "I accept that during his periods  of  liberty  the  appellant
             kept in contact with the children and participated in some  of
             their events including school  and  church  and  leisure  time
             activities. However it was a limited relationship because  the
             appellant was not living with the  children  on  a  day-to-day
             basis. There may have been some overnight stays at  his  house
             or that of his current partner, but  the  full-time  permanent
             carer of both children was their mother who had a pivotal role
             in their  care.  Quite  clearly  the  best  interests  of  the
             children were and remain for them to be with their mother  who
             has had their care and interests throughout their life."

     15. The  Judge  found  the  appellant's  son  is  in  a  stable  family
         environment with his mother and her current partner  of  some  four
         years.  The judge again considered the report of  Christine  Brown,
         the independent social worker  and  found  that  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to expect the  children  to  relocate  to  be  with  the
         appellant.   However  the  children's  day-to-day   care   is   the
         responsibility of their mother, who is their  sole  carer  and  who
         appears to be able to  provide  for  their  day-to-day  well-being,
         general development and welfare. The judge found it is  not  unduly
         harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the appellant.


     16. At paragraphs [95] to [117] of the  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Colyer  considered  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
         partner Karine [R] at  some  length.  The  judge  referred  to  the
         background to that relationship, the findings  previously  made  in
         the decision promulgated on 1st July 2013 and the further  evidence
         relied upon by the appellant and his partner.  There  was  evidence
         before the Tribunal regarding the employment of Miss  [R]  and  the
         problems that she would  face  relocating  to  Jamaica.  The  judge
         accepted that Karine [R] has a most impressive CV and has  overcome
         considerable obstacles to achieve a professional goal  of  being  a
         successful commercial solicitor in a  reputable  international  law
         firm. The judge accepted that  given  her  current  speciality  and
         desire to progress in a particular field of commercial law  in  the
         UK, that would not be practical if she were to relocate to Jamaica.
         The judge accepted that there are not the same options with  regard
         to international law firms in Jamaica.  The  judge  considered  the
         dilemma that Miss [R] expressed of remaining in the UK without  the
         appellant  but  with  her  family  and  thriving  legal  career  or
         relocating to Jamaica to be with the appellant but being forced  to
         live in poverty, suffering career detriment and living  a  secluded
         and isolated existence. The judge noted, at [106],  that  Miss  [R]
         had investigated the options of qualifying as a lawyer  in  Jamaica
         and the judge accepted the documentation that she had produced that
         she would have to qualify under their local  regulations  requiring
         further expense of time and money.  The judge also  considered  the
         impact the appellant's  actions  have  had  upon  her,  noting  the
         medical evidence that Miss [R] is very anxious and stressed due  to
         her partner's  ongoing  immigration  case  and  is  suffering  with
         erratic  sleep  and  poor  concentration  for  which  she   is   on
         medication.  At paragraph [111], First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
         stated:


             "I accept that the deportation of  the  appellant  has  had  a
             traumatic effect on Ms [R]. The relationship between  her  and
             the appellant have (sic) obviously changed as he is no  longer
             living with her. She has decided not to relocate to Jamaica to
             be with the appellant. That is her choice. She  continues  her
             life in the  UK  and  has  commenced  what  appears  to  be  a
             successful career in law. She has  no  significant  dependency
             needs of her own that  require  the  attendance  here  of  the
             appellant. She has maintained contact with the  appellant.  It
             is open to her to visit him in Jamaica when she can afford the
             airfare."

     17. At paragraphs [115] to  [116],  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
         concluded:


             "115.    Ms [R] refers to the high crime rate in  Jamaica  and
             the consequences on that to both the people of Jamaica and  to
             foreign tourists and visitors. However, visitors and  tourists
             continue to go to Jamaica. There is an operating police  force
             throughout  Jamaica.  I  accept  that  there  are  pockets  of
             considerable criminal activity, but these districts are  well-
             known and can be avoided.

             116. To echo what was said by Sedley  LJ  in  AD  Lee  v  SSHD
             [2011] EWCA Civ 348, the effect of deportation  in  this  case
             has been to break  up  this  family  forever  because  of  the
             appellant's bad behaviour. That is what deportation does.  The
             appellant did not have  the  best  interests  of  his  current
             partner or his child at heart when he embarked  on  committing
             these very serious offences. The appellant  has,  by  his  own
             serious criminal actions become  separated  from  his  current
             partner and from his child."

     18. The appellant made a further  application  for  revocation  of  the
         deportation order.  It was the refusal of that application  by  the
         respondent for the reasons  set  out  in  the  decision  dated  6th
         November 2017, that was the subject of the appeal before First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Pacey.


    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey


     19. The judge summarised at paragraph [4] of her decision, the  matters
         relied upon by the appellant in  support  of  his  application  for
         revocation of the deportation order.  The background to the appeal,
         and the appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraph [5]
         of the decision.  At paragraph [14], the judge refers to the bundle
         of documents relied upon by the appellant and confirms that she has
         read and taken the evidence into account.  The judge refers briefly
         to the evidence that was before the Tribunal at paragraphs [16]  to
         [26] of the decision.  The judge  also  refers  to  the  sentencing
         remarks made by the  Crown  Court  Judge  when  the  appellant  was
         sentenced on 26th November 2010, and the previous decisions of  the
         First-tier Tribunal.


     20. In considering  whether  the  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  the
         deportation order would be in breach of Article 8 ECHR,  the  judge
         referred to paragraph 390 and 391 of the immigration rules,  noting
         in particular that paragraph 391 of the immigration rules  provides
         that in the case of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
         conviction   for  a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation   of   a
         deportation order against the person will be the proper course,  in
         the case of a conviction for an offence for which the  person   was
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less  than  four  years,
         unless 10 years have elapsed since the making  of  the  deportation
         order. The judge noted, at [48],  that  here,  10  years  have  not
         elapsed.


     21. At paragraphs [54] to [62] of her decision, the judge addressed the
         evidence relied upon by the appellant.  At [54],  the  judge  noted
         that [RK] has been physically separated from the  appellant  for  a
         large part of his life.  The judge noted the best interests of [RK]
         have been considered by the First-tier Tribunal  on  two  occasions
         previously, and that there  is  no  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant  to  enable  the  judge  to  depart  from  the   findings
         previously made.


     22. The judge addressed the claim that Ms [R] would be unable  to  work
         in Jamaica without requalifying, at paragraph [56] of the decision.
          the judge addressed the claim that  Ms  [R]  cannot  maintain  the
         current level of expenditure  on  visits  to  Jamaica  to  see  the
         appellant at paragraph [58] of the decision.  Insofar as the expert
         evidence was concerned, the judge stated,  at  [60]  and  [61],  as
         follows:


             "60. I  have  read  the  experts  reports.  I  do  not  attach
             considerable probative weight to  that  from  Dr  Headley.  He
             states that the appellant would not be likely to  reoffend  if
             allowed into the UK. However, he states that he is  an  expert
             on Jamaica. It is unclear therefore on what basis he claims to
             be able to give a professional opinion on  anyone  reoffending
             in the UK. Further, he did not, it appears, actually meets the
             appellant although they were both in Jamaica. His  conclusions
             therefore can only be opinion not based on evidence about  the
             appellant personally.

             61.  I accept  the  evidence  provided  as  to  the  difficult
             conditions pertaining in Jamaica. However,  this  fact  cannot
             alone enable the appellant's appeal to  succeed.  I  reiterate
             that, as previous Immigration Judges have held, in  effect  he
             has brought his present predicament on himself,  by  offending
             in the UK and by marrying a UK citizen when he knew  he  would
             not be able to return to the UK."

     23. The judge noted, at [62], the  report  of  the  independent  social
         worker, Ms Brown, had been considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge previously and there is no reason to depart from the findings
         previously made.  The judge concluded that the public  interest  in
         the exclusion of the appellant is not outweighed by  other  factors
         and the decision to refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  is
         proportionate, such that the refusal is not in breach of Article 8.


The appeal before us


     24. The appellant advances a number of grounds of appeal. First, it  is
         said that although the judge states, at [14], that she has read and
         considered the material contained in the  appellant's  bundle,  the
         judge failed to  engage  with  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant. Second, the judge dismissed the experts reports  without
         any proper consideration of the matters set out in the reports. The
         appellant claims the judge rejected the report of Mr L de  Noronha,
         at [22], because his report was written on the basis  of  documents
         only, whereas Mr L de Noronha had confirmed that he  had  "recently
         returned from Jamaica in September 2017 having spent five weeks  in
         Jamaica" and set out other periods that he had spent in Jamaica and
         the research carried out by him.  The appellant  claims  the  judge
         disposed of the report of Professor Bernard Headley  in  a  cursory
         fashion because Professor Headley had expressed an  opinion  as  to
         the risk of reoffending, without having any apparent  expertise  to
         do so. That is, the appellant claims, to disregard the evidence  of
         Professor Headley as to the appellant's vulnerability, the risk  of
         reprisals and the inability of  Ms  [R]  to  obtain  employment  in
         Jamaica. Third, the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the  evidence
         regarding the ability of the appellant's partner to  requalify  and
         secure employment in Jamaica. It is said the judge  also  erred  in
         relying upon the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
         promulgated on 30th October 2014, in which it was said,  at  [115],
         that "... there are pockets of considerable criminal  activity  but
         these districts are well known and can be avoided.". The  appellant
         claims the evidence of Mr  Luke  de  Noronha  confirms  that  crime
         statistics have escalated to record levels in Jamaica in 2016, 2017
         and 2018, such that the previous conclusion of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Colyer was undermined and could no longer be relied upon.


Discussion


     25. The focus of the submissions made before us by Ms Sood has been the
         judge's treatment of the expert evidence that was before the First-
         tier Tribunal.  Ms Sood submits the judge's failure to engage  with
         the  evidence  of  Mr  Luke  de  Noronha  and   Professor   Headley
         establishes a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, such that the decision should  be  set  aside.   The
         evidence, she submits, was relevant to an assessment of whether  it
         would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's  partner  to  live  in
         Jamaica and whether there are any  exceptional  circumstances  such
         that the public interest in maintaining the deportation  order  are
         outweighed by other factors.


     26. As a general statement of law, Mr Mills accepts that a  failure  to
         engage with expert evidence is capable of amounting to  a  material
         error of law.  However, it is  now  well  established  that  it  is
         generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier   Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail  or  issue  raised  in  a  case,
         provided the judge identifies and resolves  key  conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explains in clear and brief terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost


     27. The judge stated at [14] that she had been provided a large  bundle
         of documents all of which she has  read  and  taken  into  account.
         Having made  that  clear,  an  Appellate  Tribunal  should  in  our
         judgement be slow to go behind what is said by the Judge, unless it
         is clear that there was  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  was
         material to the issues, that the judge failed to  engage,  with  or
         has overlooked.  We are quite satisfied the judge did consider  the
         evidence relied upon by the appellant.  Much of that  evidence  had
         been considered by the First-tier Tribunal In 2013  and  2014.  The
         evidence was considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey, but
         not to the extent desired by the appellant.


     28. We reject the claim that the judge failed to engage with the expert
         evidence.  At paragraphs [21] and [22] of her decision,  the  judge
         does nothing more than to  set  out,  albeit  briefly,  the  expert
         evidence of Dr Headley and Mr Luke De Noronha, that was before  the
         Tribunal.  The evidence is addressed at paragraphs [60] and [61] of
         the decision.


     29. We have carefully read the reports of Dr Headley and Mr De  Noronha
         for ourselves.  Dr Headley addresses a number  of  matters  in  his
         report that are identified in his summary.  They are


          a)  the  reality  for  deported  persons  to  Jamaica  and  their
             families;


          b) reintegration and rehabilitation of Jamaican deportees;


          c) general implications of  relocation  to  Jamaica  for  foreign
             nationals;


          d) Crime in Jamaica and the increase in murders within areas  not
             traditional (sic) known as "crime hotspots";


          e) Whether the appellant's fear of reprisal is  justified  in  my
             knowledge and experience; and


          f) My opinion on the likelihood of the appellant  reoffending  if
             granted leave to remain in the UK.


     30. For reasons that are neither explained nor apparent, despite First-
         tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  having  rejected  the  core  of  the
         appellant's asylum claim, and making adverse  credibility  findings
         against the appellant, Dr Headley was not provided with a  copy  of
         the decision of the FtT Judge and based his  consideration  of  the
         appellant's fear of  reprisals,  upon  the  account  given  by  the
         appellant.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey did not  feel  able  to
         attach considerable probative weight to the report, but that is not
         to say that the judge attached no weight to that report.   Although
         as Mr Mills accepts, the judge's consideration of the  two  reports
         is brief and it would have been preferable for the judge to set out
         in a little more detail what is said in the reports, the failure to
         do so, is not in itself a material error of law.


     31. We accept, as Mr Mills submits, the context in which  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal was reached is important.  We  have  set
         out the background to this appeal at some length in this  decision.
         This was in effect, the appellant's third appeal before the  First-
         tier Tribunal and much of that relied upon  by  the  appellant  had
         been considered previously.  The focus of the evidence set  out  in
         the experts' reports was the difficulties that may  be  encountered
         by those that are deported to  Jamaica,  and  their  families.   Dr
         Headley refers to areas of Jamaica as being  very  popular  tourist
         destinations but notes that Jamaica is  not  renowned  for  foreign
         migration to the  island  and  living  in  mainland  Jamaica  on  a
         permanent  basis  differs  materially  to  short-term  holidays  in
         tourist  resorts.  Foreign  immigrants,  such  as  the  appellant's
         partner would by their very nature belong to a small  subpopulation
         in mainland Jamaica that are stigmatised, and it is likely that the
         appellant and his  partner  would  live  a  secluded  and  isolated
         existence in Jamaica away from their family in the UK.  The  report
         of Mr De Noronha was to like effect and expressed the opinion  that
         the appellant's partner should be very wary about returning to live
         in Jamaica with her husband.  It is however clear in our  judgement
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had those matters in  mind.  She
         stated, at [61];


             "I accept the evidence provided as to the difficult conditions
             pertaining in Jamaica.  however, this fact alone cannot enable
             the appellant's appeal to succeed..."

     32. We reject the claim, that the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
         evidence regarding  the  ability  of  the  appellant's  partner  to
         requalify and secure employment in Jamaica. The Judge  accepted  at
         [56], that Ms [R] would be  unable  to  work  in  law,  in  Jamaica
         without requalifying.  The judge considered that claim in light  of
         the fact that Ms [R] was well aware that  the  appellant  had  been
         deported as a foreign criminal when she married  him.   She  should
         have reasonably been aware that there was a very strong chance that
         he would be unable to return to the UK at least  for  a  number  of
         years and that therefore their married life and attempts to start a
         family  would  have  to   be   conducted   in   Jamaica.    It   is
         understandable, that Ms [R] may not wish to give up the  successful
         career she has established in the UK, but as the judge  noted,  she
         married the appellant after he had been deported and at a time when
         it must have been plainly apparent that they  would  be  unable  to
         continue their married life together in the  UK  for  a  number  of
         years.


     33. In SSHD -v- ZP (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 1197, the  Court  of  Appeal
         held that those determining applications made by a deported foreign
         criminal under paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules to revoke the
         deportation order before the end of the prescribed period  have  to
         assess the proportionality of maintaining the order  in  place  for
         the prescribed period, balancing the public interest in  continuing
         it against the interference with the applicant's private and family
         life. They should  only  order  earlier  revocation  if  there  are
         compelling reasons  to  do  so.  At  paragraph  [24]  Lord  Justice
         Underhill said:


             "... Decision-takers will have to conduct an assessment of the
             proportionality of maintaining the  order  in  place  for  the
             prescribed period, balancing the public interest in continuing
             it against the interference with the applicant's  private  and
             family life; but in striking that balance they should take  as
             a starting-point the Secretary of State's  assessment  of  the
             public interest reflected in the prescribed periods and should
             only order revocation after  a  lesser  period  if  there  are
             compelling reasons to do so. "

     34. Here, the judge accepted the difficult conditions the appellant and
         his partner would face in Jamaica, but properly  noted  that,  that
         alone could not  lead  to  a  successful  appeal.   The  judge  was
         entitled to  find  that  the  appellant  has  brought  his  present
         predicament on himself, by offending in the UK and by marrying a UK
         citizen when he knew he would not be able to return to the UK.   On
         the findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pacey  and  by  the
         Tribunal previously in 2013  and  2014  there  were  no  compelling
         reasons  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   the
         deportation.  The judge had regard to the public interest  and  was
         not satisfied that the refusal to revoke the deportation  order  is
         in breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights.  That was a decision
         that in our judgement  was  properly  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
         evidence and facts.


     35. It follows  that  in  our  judgement  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Pacey is not tainted by a material error of law  and
         the appeal is dismissed.


     Notice of Decision


     36. The appeal is dismissed


     37. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey stands.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction.   No
    application for an anonymity direction was made before us, and no  such
    direction is made.



    Signed   Date 20th January 2020


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    We have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.



    Signed   Date 20th January 2020


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


