
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16333/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |On 27 October 2020                   |
|On 27 October 2020                   |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                               Mr Mohsin Altaf
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

 1. By a "Note and Directions No.2 (T)" signed by me on 19 August 2020  and
    served on the parties on 17 September 2020, I informed the parties that
    it was my provisional view that:

    (i)  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buckwell's  decision  to  dismiss
         the instant appeal stands  to  be  set  aside  because  he  had  no
         jurisdiction to consider the appeal substantively. This was because
         the appellant did not have a right of appeal against  the  decision
         dated 21 May 2019. I gave my reasons at paras 15-16  of  the  "Note
         and Directions No.2 (T)".

    (ii) The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  stands  to  be
         dismissed for want of jurisdiction. This is because he did not have
         a right of appeal against the decision dated 21 May 2019; and

    (iii)    The decision on the instant appeal can and should  be  re-made
         without a hearing.

 2. I then issued Directions to provide the parties with an opportunity  to
    make submissions in response to my provisional view.

 3. To date, neither party has made any submissions on the question whether
    the Upper Tribunal should proceed to consider without a hearing:

    (i)  whether Judge Buckwell's decision should be set aside for want  of
         jurisdiction;

    (ii) whether the Upper Tribunal should proceed to re-make the  decision
         on the appellant's appeal; and

    (iii)    whether the Upper  Tribunal  should  dismiss  the  appellant's
         appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 4. In view of the fact that  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal  turns  upon  whether  or  not  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    jurisdiction, that the parties have not made any submissions  objecting
    to my provisional view  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  have
    jurisdiction and having regard to  the  overriding  objective  and  the
    guidance of the Supreme Court at para 2 of its judgment in  Osborn  and
    others v Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61,  I  have  concluded  that  it  is
    appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my discretion and proceed
    to decide the issues set out at para 3 above without a hearing.

 5. For the reasons given in the "Note  and  Directions  No.2  (T)",  I  am
    satisfied that Judge Buckwell did not have jurisdiction to  decide  the
    instant  appeal.  He  therefore  erred  in   considering   the   appeal
    substantively.  He  should  have  dismissed  the  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction and without considering  the  substantive  merits  of  the
    case.  I therefore set aside his decision to dismiss the  appeal  after
    substantive consideration.

 6. I am also satisfied that the Upper Tribunal should proceed  to  re-make
    the decision on the appellant's appeal without a further  hearing,  for
    the reasons given at para 4 above.

 7. I re-make the decision on the appellant's appeal by dismissing  it  for
    want of jurisdiction. My reasons are given at paras 15-16 of the  "Note
    and Directions No.2 (T)". Paras 15-16 may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  The decision letter dated 21 May 2019 specifically stated that any
         submissions made by the appellant in relation to his  human  rights
         in his application of 6 February 2019 had not  been  considered  in
         the decision letter.

    (ii) Taking into account head-notes  (1)-(3)  and  paras  82-86  of  MY
         (refusal of human rights claim) Pakistan [2020] UKUT  00089  (IAC),
         it cannot be said that there was  a  decision  to  refuse  a  human
         rights claim.

    (iii)    Accordingly, there was no right of appeal against the decision
         dated 21 May 2019.



Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  after
    substantive  consideration  is  set  aside.  The  Upper  Tribunal   has
    proceeded to re-make the decision on the appeal. The appellant's appeal
    against the respondent decision of 21 May 2019 is dismissed for want of
    jurisdiction.


Signed   Date: 27 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
  a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such  application  must
  be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after
  this decision  was  sent  to  the  person  making  the  application.  The
  appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location  of  the
  individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision  was  sent:




2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
  United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to  appeal
  is made, and  is  not  in  detention  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  the
  appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice  of
  decision is sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
  Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7  working  days  (5  working
  days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
  the United Kingdom at the time that the  application  for  permission  to
  appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working  days,  if
  the notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
  Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
  letter or covering email

