
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16659/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 26 September 2018                |On 05 October 2018                       |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                             mr Md Murshed Alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Counsel, instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision  of  Judge  Buckwell  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the respondent dated
    21 June 2016 refusing to  grant  him  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant.  The respondent concluded he had used deception in a
    test he had taken on 17 April  2012  at  Synergy  Business  College  of
    London and that, since he had submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS on
    the strength of this test, he  stood  to  be  refused  under  paragraph
    322(2) of the Immigration Rules.  The respondent also refused him under
    paragraph 245HD(a) of the Immigration Rules as he had  not  provided  a
    valid COS reference number; and had not provided adequate  evidence  of
    maintenance.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal principally canvass  that  the  judge
    erred in his treatment of the deception issue, in failing to apply  the
    guidance given in Majumber and Qadir v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 to the
    facts of the  case  which  importantly  were  that  the  appellant  had
    diplomas awarded in July 2011 and November 2012 and had an  IELTS  test
    certificate dated 5 October 2011 taken just six months before the TOEIC
    test in question demonstrating that the appellant had scored  7.0/9  in
    the speaking test (77.9% - the highest of all his scores in that test).



3.   Having heard from both representatives I am persuaded  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law.  Pursuant to the guidance set out by the Court
    of Appeal in Majumber, two of the  facts  the  judge  was  required  to
    consider concerned whether "the Tribunal's assessment of that  person's
    English language proficiency is commensurate  with  his  or  her  TOEIC
    scores" and whether "his or her academic achievements are such that  it
    was unnecessary or illogical for them  to  have  cheated".   The  judge
    wholly failed to consider either of these factors.  I am satisfied this
    had a knock-on effect in the judge's consideration of  the  appellant's
    position  under  the  Immigration  Rules  generally  and  also  in  his
    assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules.

4.   Accordingly I set aside the decision of the judge  for  material  error
    of law.

5.   I discussed with the parties what I should do in relation  to  disposal
    of the appeal.  Both representatives were in agreement  that  the  case
    should be remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh. It is accepted by the
    parties that the appellant's case stands to be considered under the old
    appeal's provisions and that it is possible for him  to  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules and if not successful under them  to  also  argue
    Article  8  outside  the  Rules.    I  am  persuaded  by  the  parties'
    submissions that there needs to be a FtT hearing on two issues only:

    (a)   whether  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  succeed   under   the
         Immigration Rules (or on the basis of procedural unfairness); and


    (b)   whether  he  could  show  compelling  circumstances  outside  the
         Immigration Rules.


    I see no proper basis  for  remitting  the  issue  of  deception  under
    paragraph 322(5).  From the evidence before  me  I  consider  that  the
    respondent cannot be said to have  established  deception.   Given  the
    appellant's educational qualifications and in particular his IELTS test
    certificate dated October 2011, he had no need to use a proxy  for  his
    April 2012 test.  Further, his test results in the April  2012  broadly
    reflected those taken in the earlier test and  hence  the  respondent's
    concerns about his high score in his speaking test fall away.   On  the
    respondent's own evidence, although Synergy Business College  has  been
    identified as one where a significant number of tests have  been  taken
    by proxy test-takers, the invalidity figures are just under 50% and the
    appellant's explanations for why he took  the  test  there  was  in  my
    judgment a satisfactory one.   Viewing  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  I
    consider he gave a satisfactory explanation of the circumstances  under
    which he took the test.  Mr Bates did not seek to submit that I  should
    leave the issue of  deception  to  be  re-ventilated  at  the  remitted
    hearing.  Accordingly, the only issues  before  the  FtT  are  the  two
    already identified.

6.   Issue (a) arises because as the respondent is  no  longer  entitled  to
    refuse on deception grounds the appellant is arguably entitled to argue
    that he should have been granted 60 days to find another  sponsor.   In
    turn, the  issue  of  maintenance  was  not  disputed  earlier  by  the
    respondent.

7.   To conclude:-


    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law;


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Buckwell);


    The issues are confined to those identified above as (a) and (b).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 28 September 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
