
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16272/2019
                                                         & HU/16273/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2021                    |On 01 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                           (1) JEREMIAH UKPE JOHN
                             (2) DORIS UKPE JOHN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Herbert Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. S Kotas, Senior Presenting Office


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellants are national of Nigeria. They appeal decisions of the
respondent to refuse to grant them leave to remain in this country on human
rights (article 8) grounds.

Their appeals were initially considered and dismissed by Judge of the First-
tier Tribunal French by means of a decision sent to the parties on 10
December 2019. The appellant was granted permission to appeal. I determined
that the decision of Judge French contained material errors of law and so
set aside the decision on 28 January 2021.

No findings of fact were preserved.

Remote hearing

The hearing before me was a Teams video conference hearing held during the
Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at Field House. The
hearing room and the building were open to the public. The hearing and its
start time were listed in the cause list. I was addressed by the
representatives in the same way as if we were together in the hearing room.
I am satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced;
and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or interest,
it is justified as necessary and proportionate.

The appellants attended the hearing remotely.

Anonymity

By means of my decision of January 2021 I set aside a previously issued
anonymity order. No application was made by the parties for an anonymity
order to be re-issued.

Background

The appellants are husband and wife. They are nationals of Nigeria, and
presently aged 51 and 48. They have four children, presently aged 22, 20,
17 and 12. The two elder children are Nigerian nationals, and the two
younger children are citizens of the United States of America.

The first appellant trained as an engineer and has worked in several
countries including Angola and Azerbaijan as well as in Nigeria. Whilst
working in Azerbaijan his wife secured entry to the USA for medical care
during both her third and fourth pregnancies.

The first appellant entered the United Kingdom in July 2013 as a Tier 1
(General) Migrant and such leave was varied on two occasions, ultimately
expiring on 23 July 2018. An in-time application for indefinite leave to
remain was refused by the respondent on 3 January 2019, with no attendant
right of appeal. The respondent observed that the first appellant had been
absent from this country for 970 days during the qualifying period and so
concluded that he was unable to meet the continuous residence requirements
of paragraph 245AAA of the Immigration Rules ('the Rules'). The first
appellant was therefore unable to meet the requirements of paragraph
245CD(c) and (d) of the Rules.

The decision was reaffirmed on 14 February 2019 consequent to
administrative review.

The appellants applied for leave to remain on human rights (article 8)
grounds on 7 March 2019. The respondent refused the applications by a
decision dated 17 September 2019. The appellants exercised their statutory
right of appeal.

A section 120 'statement of additional grounds' was filed and served in
July 2021 with the appellants relying upon their two youngest children
having completed 7 years continuous residence in this country.

Decision

On 9 August 2021, some two days before the listed hearing date, the
respondent filed a position statement dated the same day and authored by
Mr. Kotas. The following was observed:

         '2.  By way of letter dated 15 July 2021, the appellants in
             response to the Section 120 Notice served by the respondent in
             the these cases seek to raise additional grounds of appeal,
             namely that the appellants' two youngest children are now
             'qualifying children' and that it would not be reasonable to
             expect them to leave the United Kingdom by reference to
             117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.

         3.   Firstly, the respondent does consent to this new matter being
             considered by the Tribunal - Hydar (s. 120 response, s. 85
             "new matter", Birch) [2021] UKUT 176 (IAC) (18 June 2021)
             refers.

         4.   Secondly, as to the substantive merits of the argument, the
             Upper Tribunal will be well familiar with the authorities on
             this issue so these will not be rehearsed here. In terms of
             the public interest considerations the SSHD accepts the
             appellants and their dependants are able to speak English and
             are financially independent. She further accepts the
             appellants and their children appear to have a good
             immigration history overall. The respondent, mindful as she is
             of the strong public interest in immigration control,
             nevertheless accepts that in all the circumstances it would
             not be reasonable for the appellants' daughter Joan to leave
             the United Kingdom. She has now spent 8 years in the United
             Kingdom, has been performing well academically and is now at a
             critical stage of her education and of her personal
             development and as such it remains in her best interests to
             remain in the United Kingdom which is a primary consideration.
             Theoretically she could of course resume her studies in
             Nigeria, nevertheless, having regard to all the circumstances
             in this case, the respondent accepts her removal from the
             United Kingdom would not be reasonable.

         5.   Separating any of the family appears to be neither in the
             bests interest of Joan and Michael nor a realistic proposition
             given the relative ages of all the children and their current
             educational situation and dependency on their parents. The
             respondent therefore accepts it inexorably follows the whole
             family should be granted leave to remain in the United
             Kingdom.

         6.   Accordingly, in light of the above, the respondent makes no
             further specific submission in relation to the issue of the
             appellants' other qualifying child - Michael John - and
             whether or not it would be reasonable for him to leave the
             United Kingdom.'

Mr. Karim confirmed on instruction that the appellants were content to
accept that their appeal was successful on article 8 grounds in light of
the respondent's concession.

I record Mr. Kotas' assurance on behalf of the respondent that the
appellants and their four children will be granted leave to remain. I
observe that the mechanics of such grants are a matter for the respondent
and not this Tribunal.

I take this opportunity to thank both Mr. Kotas and Mr. Karim for the help
they provided during the course of the hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of a material
error on a point of law and was set aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of
the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

The decision is remade.

The appellant's appeals are allowed on human rights (article 8) grounds.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 August 2021



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Fees were paid by both appellants.

The appellants were successful consequent to the serving of  a  section  120
notice in July 2021. In the circumstances, the respondent  acted  reasonably
when making her decision in September 2021 and so no fee award is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 11 August 2021
