

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/16736/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 20 April 2018                          |On 27 April 2018            |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE - NEDE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 KIRAN LIMBU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr S Jaisri (counsel) instructed by Sam, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lawrence,  promulgated  on  9  August
2017, which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 4 October 1990 and is a national of Nepal.  The
appellant applied to join his father who has been granted settlement in  the
UK on the basis of his service in the UK Armed Forces. On 13 June  2016  the
Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  NMK  Lawrence  ("the  Judge")  allowed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  12  February
2018 Resident Judge Appleyard gave permission to appeal stating

      3. The respondent now seeks permission  to  appeal.  The  grounds  are
      arguable. They assert inadequate reasoning in  relation  to  emotional
      dependency, how such dependency goes beyond the "normal  ties  between
      adults", failure to attach weight to the public interest and  the  use
      of speculation.


      4. Although the grounds are arguable, contrary to paragraph 5  thereof
      the Judge has clearly made a finding in  respect  of  the  appellant's
      ability to speak English. It is within paragraph 25 of his decision.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the respondent, Mr Lindsay moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told
me that there were two challenges. He took me to [9]  of  the  decision  and
told me that the Judge's findings on  emotional  dependency  are  inadequate
reasoned. He told me the Judge clearly considers  financial  dependency  did
not give reasons for concluding that there is emotional  dependency  between
the appellant and his father. He told  me  that  in  the  absence  of  those
reasons the entire decision is unsafe.

(b) Mr Lindsay told me that the test for emotional dependency and  the  test
to establish whether article 8 family life exists between  adults  are  both
set out in Kugathas[2003] EWCA Civ 31. He told me that there is  nothing  in
the Judge's decision capable of supporting the Judge's finding of  emotional
dependency.

(c)  Mr  Lindsay's  second  point  related  to  consideration  of   historic
injustice. It is not  disputed  that  historic  injustice  is  a  legitimate
factor in the article 8 proportionality assessment. He took me  to  [11]  of
the decision and told me that there the Judge does not consider  whether  an
historic injustice has occurred nor whether the sponsor would  have  brought
the appellant to the UK as a child.
(d) Mr Lindsay told me that the decision contains clear material  errors  of
law and should be set aside.

6. (a) For the appellant Mr Jaisri  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors. He told me that at [9] the Judge  makes  clear  findings
about emotional dependency. He told  me  that  the  Judge  had  taken  well-
reasoned approach and made findings based on the evidence.

(b) Mr Jaisri took me to [13], [14] and [18] of the  decision  and  told  me
that the Judge's article 8 ECHR assessment is beyond criticism. He  told  me
that the Judge correctly took guidance from Rai v Entry  Clearance  Officer,
New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

(c) Mr Jaisri told me  that  at  [17]  the  Judge  makes  clear  sustainable
findings in relation to historic injustice.  The  findings  are  brief,  but
focused and relevant and go straight to the  heart  of  the  proportionality
assessment. He told me that the decision does not contain errors  and  urged
me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7.  In PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance Officer,  Chennai  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
612 it was held that some tribunals appeared to have read Kugathas    [2003]
EWCA  Civ  31  as  establishing  a  rebuttable   presumption   against   any
relationship between an adult  child  and  his  parents  or  siblings  being
sufficient to engage Article 8. That was not correct.  Kugathas  required  a
fact-sensitive approach, and should  be  understood  in  the  light  of  the
subsequent case law summarised in Ghising (family life  -  adults  -  Gurkha
policy) [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  There  was  no
legal or factual presumption as to the existence or absence of  family  life
for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  nor  was  there   any   requirement   of
exceptionality. It all depended on the  facts.  The  line  of  case-law  was
again considered in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer,  New  Delhi  [2017]  EWCA
Civ 320 (in the context of the adult son of a former Gurkha soldier).

8. The appellant was 25 years old  at  the  date  the  respondent  made  the
decision in this case. He is now 26 years old. The Judge starts [9]  of  the
decision with  a  clear  finding  that  the  appellant  is  emotionally  and
financially dependent upon his father. The Judge then sets out  his  reasons
for that finding. After considering the financial aspect of  dependency  the
Judge  devotes  the  second  half  of  [9]  of  the  decision  to  emotional
dependency. The Judge correctly takes guidance from Rai  v  Entry  Clearance
Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

9. The only competent ground of appeal is on article  8  ECHR  grounds.  The
Judge turns to article 8 from [11] of the decision.  Before  reaching  [11],
the Judge has already found that the appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
the immigration rules. The Judge correctly  takes  guidance  from  Kugathas,
Ghising & RP(Zimbabwe) before reaching his conclusion that family  life,  in
terms of article 8, is established. He then  embarks  on  a  proportionality
assessment. At [17] the Judge succinctly makes the crucial finding  that  in
this case there has been  an  historic  injustice  because  the  appellant's
father would have settled in the UK when he was discharged from the  British
Army if he had been able to take the appellant, as a child, with him.

10. At [18] of the decision the Judge draws all of his findings together  to
take a cumulative assessment of the facts as the Judge  found  them  to  be,
after taking guidance from SSHD v HK(Turkey)[2010] EWCA Civ 583.

11. Judge  makes  clear,  reasoned,  sustainable  findings  in  relation  to
emotional dependency, in relation  to  family  life  continuing  between  an
adult child and his father, and  in  relation  to  historic  injustice.  The
Judge then factors each of those findings into an  holistic  proportionality
assessment, after taking correct guidance in law.

12. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that the  Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him.

13. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

CONCLUSION

14. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.



DECISION

15. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 26 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




