
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16211/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 7 May 2021                      |On : 26 May 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                          MUKAILA ADETOYESE BAKARE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Sultan, instructed by Bridges Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was Microsoft Teams.  A  face-to-
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all  issues
   could be determined in a remote hearing. No issues arose with  regard  to
   the proceedings.

2. The appellant appeals, with  permission,  against  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision to  refuse
   his human rights claim  following  the  making  of  a  deportation  order
   against him.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. There is an inconsistency  between
   the information provided by the respondent and by the appellant in regard
   to his age and the date and basis of his grant of leave to remain in  the
   UK, but it seems to have been accepted by all parties and accepted in the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant was born on 22 May
   1966, that he entered the UK on 25 May  1991  and  that  he  was  granted
   indefinite leave to remain on  14  years  long  residence  grounds  on  9
   October 2009.  There  is  also  some  inconsistency  in  the  information
   provided as to the appellant's previous convictions, prior to  the  index
   offence, as the  respondent  refers  in  the  various  decisions  to  two
   convictions for fraud and three for theft between 1998 and 2001,  whereas
   the sentencing judge's remarks and the PNC referred to the  appellant  as
   having no prior convictions. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  the
   appellant's  explanation  that  those  convictions  related  to  a  false
   identity he had used to find employment  and  the  convictions  were  for
   offences committed by someone else using the same identity and  therefore
   that is the basis upon which I shall proceed.

4. The index offence which gave rise  to  the  deportation  proceedings  was
   conspiracy to defraud. The appellant was arrested for that offence  on  4
   June 2015, convicted on 19 December 2016 and sentenced on 24 January 2017
   to 14 months' imprisonment. The offence involved the theft of bank  cards
   and personal details from letters the appellant was supposed  to  deliver
   as part of his job as a postman employed by Royal  Mail,  which  he  then
   passed on to his co-defendant Daryl Backry. The stolen details were  used
   to fraudulently pay for goods and withdraw cash which  amounted,  in  the
   appellant's case, to �10,262. The appellant initially lied to the  police
   about his involvement and he pleaded not guilty before a jury  who  found
   him guilty at trial.


5. On 27 February  2017  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
   appellant pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, but  that
   decision was subsequently  amended  on  two  occasions,  with  the  final
   decision being served on 10  May  2017.  The  appellant  was  invited  to
   respond. His solicitors provided a written response in a letter  dated  6
   June 2017, raising human rights grounds and relying upon the  appellant's
   family life with his four British children (three sons, born on 15 August
   1996, 5 January 2000 and 1 September 2002 and a daughter born on 3  April
   2004), his 26 years of residence in the UK and  his  medical  conditions,
   namely diabetes and hypertension, for which he required  ongoing  medical
   treatment. It was stated that whilst the appellant was separated from the
   mother of his children and did not live with his  children,  he  took  an
   active role in their welfare, education  and  development  and  was  very
   close to them.

6. On 14 November 2017 the appellant became the  subject  of  a  Deportation
   Order and on 16 November 2017 the respondent made a  decision  to  refuse
   his human rights  claim.  In  the  absence  of  supporting  evidence  the
   respondent did not accept that  the  appellant's  children  were  British
   citizens, that they were living in the UK, that  he  had  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with them or that it  would,  in  any  event,  be
   unduly harsh for them to live in Nigeria or remain in the UK without  him
   if he was deported. The respondent noted that the appellant did not claim
   to have family life with a partner and therefore considered that he could
   not meet the requirements of paragraph 399(a) and (b) of the  immigration
   rules. As for the appellant's private life, the respondent did not accept
   that he could meet the requirements of paragraph 399A since  it  was  not
   accepted that he had been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of  his
   life and it  was  not  accepted  that  he  was  socially  and  culturally
   integrated in the UK or that there would be very significant obstacles to
   his integration in Nigeria.  The respondent did not consider there to  be
   very compelling circumstances outweighing the appellant's deportation.

7. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville on 26  September  2018.  The  appellant
   gave oral evidence before the judge. His priest and  four  children  were
   also tendered but simply adopted their statements. It  was  confirmed  on
   behalf of the respondent  that  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
   children was accepted and that it was  accepted  that  two  of  the  four
   children were qualifying children (the other two being adults)  and  were
   living together as a family unit with their mother S. The judge  accepted
   that it would be unduly harsh to expect the four children to relocate  to
   Nigeria and he therefore focused on the relevant question of  whether  it
   would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to  be  separated  from  the
   appellant. Applying the guidance in KO (Nigeria) &  Ors  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53 the judge found
   that, whilst the  separation  would  cause  the  children  emotional  and
   psychological distress, it did not meet the test of being  unduly  harsh.
   The judge found further that the appellant was  socially  and  culturally
   integrated in the UK but concluded that there were  no  very  significant
   obstacles  to  integration  in  Nigeria.  In  so  concluding  the   judge
   considered that there was no evidence that the appellant would be without
   ties or support  in  Nigeria  and  concluded  that,  whilst  his  medical
   problems were serious and that his compliance with medication  was  poor,
   he would be able to access basic medication and advice with  the  support
   of his family and friends, whether in Nigeria or in the UK. He found that
   there were no very compelling  circumstances  and  that  the  appellant's
   deportation would not be disproportionate. He accordingly  dismissed  the
   appeal, in a decision promulgated on 14 February 2019.

8. The appellant sought permission to appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had contradicted  himself  in  his
   findings on the impact of deportation on the appellant's children and had
   failed to consider their evidence properly; and that he  had  misdirected
   himself on the issue of very significant  obstacles  to  integration,  by
   stating that there was no evidence to suggest that the appellant  had  no
   family in Nigeria, which in turn was relevant to his findings on  support
   in relation to his medical condition and access to treatment in Nigeria.

9. Permission to appeal was refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
   granted in a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal, in a decision  of
   Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson dated 8 February  2021.  UTJ  Jackson  found
   that the grounds did not disclose any properly arguable error of  law  in
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and stated in her decision  that
   she would have refused permission to appeal on all grounds, but  for  the
   subsequent decision in HA (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department (Rev 1) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176. UTJ  Jackson  found  a  Robinson
   obvious arguable error in the judge's decision, in the  approach  to  the
   assessment of whether the appellant's deportation would be  unduly  harsh
   on his children, which was arguably contrary to the approach as confirmed
   in HA (Iraq).

10. In a Rule 24 response dated 3 March 2021,  the  respondent  opposed  the
   appellant's appeal and stated that it was  not  accepted  that  what  the
   Court of Appeal said in HA (Iraq) fundamentally altered the test  as  out
   by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).

11. The matter then came before me. Both parties made submissions.

12. Mr Sultan submitted that the judge made irrational findings on  material
   matters. His  development  of  that  challenge  in  his  submissions  was
   difficult to comprehend but I have attempted  to  extract  some  form  of
   summary.  Essentially  he  submitted  that  the  appellant   would   have
   benefitted from HA (Iraq), that the judge had overlooked the  appellant's
   length of residence in the UK, that he had made  assumptions  as  to  the
   appellant having some form of support in Nigeria, that he had  failed  to
   give consideration to the significant obstacles which would be  faced  by
   the children, that he had failed to give paramount consideration  to  the
   best interests of the children and  that  his  decision  was  accordingly
   flawed.

13. Mr Kotas submitted that the caution expressed  by  Underhill  LJ  in  HA
   (Iraq) in regard to errors that could arise when  looking  for  something
   beyond an ordinary level of harshness, did not apply in this  appellant's
   case and that the  judge's  approach  in  practice  did  not  breach  the
   guidance in HA (Iraq).  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that,  in  any  event,  the
   evidence before the judge came nowhere near the unduly harsh threshold.

Discussion and Findings

14. Mr Sultan's  submissions  were  somewhat  difficult  to  comprehend  and
   failed, for the most part, to engage with  the  relevant  issues  in  the
   appeal. I sought on two or three occasions to direct him to the fact that
   this was an error of law hearing and to the grant of permission, which he
   assured me he understood. I was nevertheless assisted by the  grounds  of
   appeal,  the  grant  of  permission  and  the  clear  and   comprehensive
   submissions made by Mr Kotas to which Mr Sultan  had  an  opportunity  to
   respond, and in addition  I  was  able  to  elicit  some  submissions  of
   relevance from Mr Sultan.

15. In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson made it clear  that
   she was doing so on the basis of guidance in HA (Iraq) which had not been
   available at the time of the hearing before Judge Neville.  She  did  not
   find any arguable merit in the appellant's grounds of challenge  but  she
   did not exclude the grounds since they overlapped  with  the  basis  upon
   which she was granting permission.

16. Like Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson, I find there to be no  merit  in  the
   grounds of appeal as they stand and, likewise, I have  no  hesitation  in
   rejecting Mr Sultan's submissions as being no more  than  a  disagreement
   with the judge's decision and an  attempt  to  re-argue  the  appellant's
   case. There is no basis for the assertion made  by  Mr  Sultan  that  the
   judge failed to take account of the appellant's length  of  residence  in
   the UK or that he failed to give full consideration to the best interests
   of the children, when it is clear that  those  were  matters  which  were
   accorded full consideration by the judge at [30] and [32]. The grounds of
   appeal, as originally pleaded, refer to  contradictions  in  the  judge's
   findings in relation to the  appellant's  children,  asserting  that  the
   judge's references to the evidence set out in the children's  letters  as
   to the impact upon them of their father's  deportation  contradicted  his
   finding that there was no evidence of emotional or psychological distress
   beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child  faced  with  the
   deportation of a parent. However, as  Mr  Kotas  submitted,  the  judge's
   findings were consistent with the limited evidence before  him  and  with
   the absence of any independent supporting evidence  such  as  medical  or
   psychological evidence, or an independent  social  worker's  report.  The
   judge  plainly  gave  careful  consideration  to  the  letters  from  the
   appellant's children and, as he said at [25], he  did  not  diminish  the
   emotions, feelings and  reaction  of  the  children,  but  he  was  fully
   entitled to accord the weight that he did to that evidence in his overall
   findings.

17. The grounds also challenge the  judge's  findings  on  the  question  of
   "very significant obstacles to integration", but again it is  clear  that
   the judge gave full and proper consideration to the matter.  Contrary  to
   the assertion made by Mr Sultan, the judge gave full consideration to the
   guidance in the case of Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v
   Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, as is evident at [35] onwards.  He  addressed
   the question of the appellant's ties to Nigeria and  had  regard  to  the
   assertions made by the appellant's children  in  their  letters  in  that
   regard, but was nevertheless entitled to find that bare  assertions  were
   insufficient when considering the evidence as a whole. The judge went  on
   to give detailed consideration to the appellant's medical  condition  and
   to the available treatment and access to that treatment  in  Nigeria.  At
   [42] he addressed the issue of support  in  Nigeria  enabling  access  to
   medical treatment, contrary to the assertion in the grounds,  noting  the
   appellant's current lack of compliance despite the  existence  of  family
   support in the UK, and providing cogent reasons for  concluding  that  he
   would be able to access basic medication and advice in Nigeria. The  only
   submission made by Mr Sultan in that regard was that the  judge  did  not
   take the appellant's medical circumstances in his favour. Accordingly,  I
   find nothing of any merit in the grounds or in Mr Sultan's submissions.

18. I turn, therefore, to the most relevant issue, as pointed out  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Jackson, namely the lawfulness of the judge's approach  to
   the "unduly harsh" issue in light  of  the  judgment  in  HA  (Iraq).  Mr
   Sultan's only submission in relation to HA (Iraq) was that the  appellant
   would have benefitted  from  that  case  and  that  the  public  interest
   question would have been answered in his favour.  Despite  being  pressed
   for  a  more  comprehensive  response  he  was  unable  to  provide   any
   elaboration. Mr Kotas, however, made clear and helpful submissions on the
   impact of the judgment in HA (Iraq), which I found entirely persuasive.

19. As Mr Kotas submitted, the decision in HA (Iraq) did not  undermine  the
   principles set out in KO (Nigeria), upon which Judge Neville relied,  but
   Lord Justice Underhill in HA (Iraq) expressed caution when considering an
   "ordinary" level of harshness, in two  respects,  as  set  out  at  [56].
   Firstly, it was not the correct approach when considering  an  "ordinary"
   level of harshness to expect something exceptional or  rare  and  neither
   was it correct to expect something that did not fit into "some  commonly-
   encountered pattern". Lord Justice Underhill stated as follows at [56]:
      "How a child will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend on
      an almost infinitely variable range of circumstances  and  it  is  not
      possible to identify a baseline of "ordinariness". Simply  by  way  of
      example, the degree of harshness of the impact may be affected by  the
      child's age; by whether the parent lives with them (NB that a divorced
      or  separated  father  may  still  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with a child who lives with the mother); by the degree of
      the child's emotional dependence  on  the  parent;  by  the  financial
      consequences of his deportation; by the availability of emotional  and
      financial support from a remaining parent and other family members; by
      the practicability of maintaining a  relationship  with  the  deported
      parent; and of course by all the  individual  characteristics  of  the
      child."
and at [57]:
      "I am anxious to avoid setting off  a  further  chain  of  exposition.
      Tribunals considering the parent case under Exception 2 should not err
      in law if in each case they carefully evaluate the  likely  effect  of
      the parent's deportation on  the  particular  child  and  then  decide
      whether that effect is not merely harsh but unduly harsh  applying KO
      (Nigeria) in accordance with the guidance at paras. 50-53 above."
20. It was Mr Kotas's submission that Judge Neville did not fall into  error
   in the manner suggested by Lord Justice Underhill and was not looking for
   something exceptional when he considered the "unduly harsh"  question  at
   [22] to [27]. I agree with that  submission  and  agree  that  the  judge
   correctly applied the principles  in  KO  (Nigeria)  to  the  appellant's
   particular circumstances and to the circumstances and best  interests  of
   his children, taking all relevant factors into account and  that  he  did
   not fall within the "dangerous" area identified by Lord Justice Underhill
   in HA (Iraq). The judge considered each child  separately  and  carefully
   evaluated  the  impact  upon  each  one  of  them  of   the   appellant's
   deportation. He provided cogent reasons for  concluding  that  there  was
   nothing  in  the  evidence  before  him  to  show  that  the  appellant's
   deportation would reach  the  threshold  of  demonstrating  unduly  harsh
   consequences for his children. I agree with Mr Kotas that there  was,  in
   any event, nothing in the limited evidence before the judge  which  could
   have led to any other conclusion.

21. Accordingly, I find no error of law  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the
   issue and nothing inconsistent with the approach set out  in  HA  (Iraq).
   Having properly addressed  and  resolved  the  "unduly  harsh"  test  and
   provided cogent reasons for concluding that neither of the two exceptions
   to deportation were met, the judge went on to consider whether there were
   very compelling circumstances outweighing  the  public  interest  in  the
   appellant's  deportation.  The  judge,  having  given  full  and   proper
   consideration to all relevant factors including the appellant's  ties  to
   the UK and to Nigeria, his length of residence in  the  UK,  his  medical
   condition, the best interests of his children and his offending and  risk
   of re-offending, was  perfectly  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  "very
   compelling circumstances" threshold was not met and that the  appellant's
   deportation would  not  be  disproportionate.  The  judge's  decision  to
   dismiss the appellant's human rights appeal  was  accordingly  fully  and
   properly open to him on the evidence before him and the grounds and grant
   of permission disclose no errors of law in his decision.


DECISION

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law requiring the decision to be  set  aside.  The
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
   therefore stands.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Date: 10 May 2021
