

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/16547/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 November 2019                        |On 13 November 2019            |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K Z
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. FtT Judge Farrelly heard the appellant's appeal on 7 November 2018  and
    allowed it by a decision promulgated on 11 March 2019.

 3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to  the  UT  are  (1)  failing  to  attach
    correct weight to the public interest and to the  appellant's  criminal
    conviction and (2) reaching a perverse conclusion.

 4. Mr Govan's submission was along these lines.  Although the  appellant's
    case  had  not  qualified  for  consideration  on  the  "insurmountable
    obstacles" test within the rules, because  he  failed  on  suitability,
    that test remained the appropriate starting point; the  judge  had  not
    applied  that  test,  but  made  a  finding  only  of  "a  considerable
    challenge" for the appellant's wife; there were no considerations which
    rationally amounted to insurmountable obstacles; the test  outside  the
    rules was no less; the decision had to be reversed.

 5. It emerged from the submission of Mr Ndubuisi that the  FtT  was  asked
    primarily  to  hold  that  the  appellant's  conviction,  applying  the
    respondent's guidance and case law, was not such  that  he  failed  the
    suitability requirement; and that his  application  otherwise  met  the
    terms of the rules, so that he had a right on family and  private  life
    grounds to remain in the UK, and the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test
    did not apply.

 6. I indicated that the outcome would be as follows.

 7. The decision does not reflect the  case  as  it  was  put.   The  judge
    muddled together the suitability requirements  and  the  insurmountable
    obstacles test, particularly at [21], without resolving either in clear
    terms; and he reached his conclusion at [28] by  way  of  a  cumulative
    balancing exercise, on no clear legal basis.

 8. There may be errors in these respects, but they are not caught  by  the
    grounds.  The judge did attach weight both to the public  interest  and
    to  the  appellant's  conviction.   On  suitability,  the  case   might
    rationally have been decided either way.  The FtT appears from [12,  20
    & 28] to have been on the appellant's side on that point,  and  if  so,
    further considerations were irrelevant.

 9. The  respondent  might  have  shown  the  outcome  to  be  inadequately
    explained, but ground 1 is only a disagreement about weight, and ground
    2 falls short of showing the outcome to be perverse.

10. The decision should  have  explained  the  delay  between  hearing  and
    decision, but does not mention it.  The delay may be linked to the lack
    of clarity of approach.  However, the  outcome  was  within  the  FtT's
    rational scope, and the grounds do not identify error on points of  law
    by which it falls to be set aside.  The decision shall stand.

11. The FtT made an anonymity direction, without saying  why.   There  does
    not appear to be any pressing need for one, but as the matter  was  not
    addressed in the UT, this decision is anonymised.

      [pic]

      8 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




