

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16857/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28 September 2020                        |On 1 October 2020              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                CHUN HONG IP
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Mace ('the Judge') promulgated on  the  18  February
        2020 in which the  Judge  dismissed  his  appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal; the operative part of which reads:


        "I am satisfied that there is an arguable  error  of  law  in  this
        decision in that the Judge did not consider  the  guidance  in  the
        judgement in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 as to whether it was reasonable
        for the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom to apply for leave to
        enter from abroad".


     3. Following the grant of  permission  directions  were  sent  to  the
        parties indicating a provisional view reached by the Upper Tribunal
        that the question of whether the Judge had made  an  error  of  law
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal could be  determined
        without a hearing, inviting the parties to set out their views upon
        this proposal, and providing a structure in which  further  written
        submissions could be made in support of their respective cases. The
        time for complying  with  such  directions  and  the  provision  of
        additional written submissions has passed. All submissions received
        have been considered.
     4. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     6. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:


        34.-
        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.
        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.
        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.
        (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
             to-


             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);
             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
                  to rule 39, without a hearing.


     7. The grounds on which the  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal
        assert the Judge erred in law in his application of  the  decisions
        in   Chen  and  Chikwamba,  in  not  considering  Agyarko,  in  not
        considering the  respondents  Long  Residence  Guidance,  erred  in
        relation to the public interest in the proportionality  assessment,
        erred by  not  making  a  reasoned  calculation  of  the  days  the
        appellant could have discounted towards the 18  months  or  correct
        number of days required for ILR, and erred in law when  considering
        section 117B for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  application  for
        permission to appeal.
     8. The reasons it is claimed the Judge  erred  do  not  establish  the
        existence of novel, difficult, or complex points of law that  could
        only be properly  considered  by  receiving  oral  evidence.  Ample
        opportunity has been provided for written submissions  to  be  made
        and it is not established, in a case where both parties are legally
        represented, that  the  interests  of  justice  or  the  overriding
        objectives can only be met if an oral hearing takes place.
     9. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to exercise the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to be determined on the papers. Nothing has been made  out
        that makes consideration  of  the  issues  on  the  papers  not  in
        accordance with overriding objectives at this stage considering the
        Covid-19 pandemic and resultant arrangements made within the  Upper
        Tribunal.



Background


    10. The appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully  on  2  September
        2009 as  a  student.  The  appellant's  immigration  history  shows
        further leave being granted in September 2011, July 2014, September
        2015, March 2017, and January 2019. The application for  indefinite
        leave to remain, based on long residence, was made on 20  September
        2019. The Judge notes it was not disputed that  the  appellant  had
        lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom except for the  period
        between 27 January 2017 and 4 February 2017  when  he  left  United
        Kingdom without leave to remain.
    11. The Judge records a gap of eight days without lawful leave but also
        absences of 732 days from the United Kingdom during the relevant 10-
        year period.  The respondent asserted in the  reasons  for  refusal
        letter that such absences  were  for  reasons  that  could  not  be
        classed as being exceptional, as required by the guidance.
    12. Having considered the written and oral evidence the Judge sets  out
        his findings of fact from [6] of the decision under challenge.  The
        Judge specifically refers at [10] to a  schedule  prepared  by  the
        appellant which shows that he had calculated that 226 of  the  days
        he had been absent from the United Kingdom were for  medical  trips
        and what he classed as "natural  disasters",  leaving  503  absents
        which was permitted under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules.
        The Judge analyses the appellant's assertions in  relation  to  the
        periods of absence but concludes that [16]:


         16.  I am not satisfied that  the  appellant  has  demonstrated  10
             years continuous lawful residence in the UK. The  Home  Office
             guidance on long residence, October 2019,  states  that  where
             time spent outside the UK is for more than 18 months in  total
             it may be  appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  over  excess
             absences  where  compelling  or  compassionate   circumstances
             exist, for example where  the  appellant  was  prevented  from
             returning to the UK through  unavoidable  circumstances.  That
             would certainly  apply  to  the  delay  in  the  appellant  re
             returning due to the delay in the volcanic ash cloud.  However
             I do not consider that would cover the appellant's absences in
             excess of 18 months for the reasons given above.


    13. The Judge then went on to examine the appellant's claim outside the
        Immigration  Rules  setting  out   the   evidence   provided,   and
        submissions made, including references to section 117 of  the  2002
        Act. The Judge specifically records being invited to  consider  the
        decision in Chikwamba which he  does  by  reference  to  the  later
        decision of Chen, at  [22].  Having  considered  the  evidence  and
        submissions the Judge sets out his conclusions in relation  to  the
        article 8 claim at [23] in the following terms:


        23.  The appellant has made a number of applications for leave from
             Hong Kong on previous occasions and he gave  evidence  at  the
             hearing that in general it had taken on average  a  period  of
             approximately  two  weeks  for  those   applications   to   be
             considered and granted. I accept that the application he would
             make were he to return and apply  for  leave  to  enter  as  a
             partner would be in a different category to  the  applications
             he had made before. However, I find it reasonable to  consider
             that any such application would be dealt with in  a  similarly
             timely manner. Therefore, any separation between the appellant
             and his  partner  would  be  relatively  short.  Further,  the
             appellant's partner gave evidence  that  she  is  entitled  to
             annual leave. While that leave is limited and the  dates  have
             to be fixed some considerable time in advance, Miss Wing  gave
             evidence at the hearing that she has periods of  leave  booked
             over the forthcoming few months. She also stated that she  has
             not as yet made any particular plans for those periods of  her
             leave. I consider it entirely reasonable that she could return
             to Hong Kong with the appellant during at least  part  of  the
             time  he  would  be  required  to  remain  there   while   his
             application for leave was being considered. That  would  limit
             the disruption to their relationship and their private  lives.
             On that basis I do not consider that the appellant  has  shown
             that  his  Article  8  rights   would   be   interfered   with
             disproportionately by him being required to leave the UK for a
             limited amount of time in order to make an application to  re-
             enter the UK where he can then resume his  private  life  with
             his partner and seek the employment he wishes to  take  up  in
             this   country.   The   decision   does   not   constitute   a
             disproportionate interference with the rights of the appellant
             under Article 8.



Error of law


    14. The appellant asserts the Judge erred as the principles set down in
        Chikwamba and Chen also applied for the benefit of  an  application
        made outside the Rules. It is also asserted the Judge erred  as  R-
        LTRP.1.1.(e), the 5-year route, does not require an individual  who
        cannot otherwise meet  the  requirement  to  demonstrate  they  can
        overcome  paragraph  EX.1.  The   appellant   asserted   that   the
        requirements of the 5-year Partner Route were met  save  the  Judge
        requiring that an application should be made from outside  the  UK.
        The appellant is said to be able to meet the requirements for entry
        clearance under EC-P Appendix FM. The appellant  asserts  that  the
        principles in Chikwamba and Chen have moved  on  referring  to  the
        decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko.  The  Judge  is  also
        criticised by the appellant for not identifying what 'good purpose'
        will be required by the appellant having to return to Hong Kong  to
        make an application for entry clearance which  was  said  to  be  a
        mandatory requirement when assessing  the  proportionality  of  the
        decision. The alleged error is that the judge did not identify  the
        particular facet of the public interest  that  will  be  served  by
        requiring the appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom  to  make  an
        application for entry clearance.
    15.  Whilst  acknowledging  that  the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  any
        interference will be for a short period, he is  further  criticised
        for not addressing what 'good purpose' was to  be  served  by  even
        such limited interference in light of the facts of this  case.  The
        grounds argue, in the alternative, that in  the  circumstances  any
        separation would amount to  a  disproportionate  interference  when
        balanced against a need for  maintaining  an  effective  system  of
        immigration control.
    16. The appellant also argues the Judge erred in  relation  to  section
        117B as his partner is a 'qualifying partner' as she is  a  British
        citizen  and  that  the  Judge  considers  precariousness  at  [19]
        contrary to the required public interest consideration  in  section
        117B(4) which, had the Judge done so, should have led to the  Judge
        concluding that the public interest requirement was  supportive  of
        the Chikwamba principles or as part of a stand-alone test  did  not
        require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.
    17. It also claims the Judge did not provide a reasoned calculation  of
        the figure that could be discounted from the  appellant's  absences
        from the United Kingdom for medical treatment.
    18. The principles outlined in Chikwamba and Chen  are  relevant  in  a
        case such as this where  the  matter  under  consideration  is  the
        proportionality of the respondent's  decision  and,  I  find,  were
        properly taken into consideration  by  the  Judge.  The  Judge  was
        required to carry out a balancing exercise to  decide  whether  the
        proposed interference is proportionate, with due weight being given
        to the strength of public interest in removal - see R  (Agyarko)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  I  find
        this is the Judge undertook.
    19. In Agyarko previous House of Lords decisions such as Chikwamba  and
        EB (Kosovo) were upheld.  Although Lord  Reed  explained  that  the
        weight to be given to precarious family life will increase in cases
        where a spouse would qualify for leave to enter  if  they  made  an
        application from outside the  UK  or  where  family  life  develops
        during a protracted delay in  enforcing  immigration  control,  and
        added a further category of  persons  to  whom  a  "less  stringent
        approach" to precariousness might be appropriate, there is arguable
        merit in the respondent's submission that the Supreme Court did not
        introduce a legal  test  of  'good  purpose'  or  'useful  purpose'
        requiring the respondent to demonstrate in order to rebut some kind
        of presumption that the appellant  will  succeed  by  reference  to
        Chikwamba. I do not find it made out that the  basis  of  challenge
        relied upon by the appellant, categorised as a  'good  purpose'  or
        'useful purpose' test has been shown to exist in law.
    20. It is also the case that the decision in Chen referred to Chikwamba
        and it is not made out the Judge erred in law in  considering  that
        reported decision of the Upper Tribunal.
    21. The Judge noted that the appellant may be highly likely to  succeed
        if an application for re-entry was  made  from  Hong  Kong  and  in
        Agyarko [2017] UKSC 10 Lord Reed said again that if  an  applicant,
        even if residing in the UK unlawfully, was otherwise certain to  be
        granted leave to enter, at least if an application were  made  from
        outside the UK, then there might be no public interest  in  his  or
        her removal. The bare assertion in the grounds that a short  period
        of separation would itself make the need for the  appellant  return
        disproportionate does  not  establish  arguable  legal  error.  The
        obligation upon  the  Judge  was  to  weigh  up  and  consider  the
        competing interests relied upon by the Secretary of State  and  the
        appellant opposing removal and to assess  whether  an  interference
        and an accepted right was proportionate. Such an assessment is fact
        specific. It is not made out there was sufficient  evidence  before
        the Judge to show that  an  application  or  entry  clearance  'was
        otherwise certain' to succeed if made. The  language  used  by  the
        Judge  is  very  specific  'likely  to  succeed'  not  'certain  to
        succeed'.
    22. The previous Senior President of Tribunals in TZ (Pakistan) and  PG
        (India) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA
        Civ 1109, recalled Lord  Reed's  point  that  when  undertaking  an
        article  8  evaluation   outside   the   rules,   in   striking   a
        proportionality balance a tribunal must take the executive's policy
        into account and attach substantial weight  to  it  "at  a  general
        level". The  court  held  that  a  tribunal's  determination  on  a
        decision  that  is  within  the  rules  might   not   involve   the
        consideration of an article 8 element because other aspects of  the
        rules might not be satisfied, meaning that the appellant could  not
        come within the rules. On the other hand, in cases where article  8
        is engaged and consideration outside the rules is due the  tribunal
        should consider the insurmountable obstacles test within the  rules
        before considering the exceptional circumstances test  outside  the
        rules.  The   tribunal's   evaluation   of   whether   there   were
        insurmountable obstacles would  be  relevant  to  the  question  of
        exceptional circumstances.
    23. In general, the key issue will  be  whether  the  strength  of  the
        article 8 claim and the related positive obligation on the state to
        permit the applicant to remain in the UK outweigh the  strength  of
        the public policy in immigration control in any given case.  Razgar
        [2004] UKHL 27 does  not  displace  "the  need  to  undertake  this
        critical balance."
    24. That is the exercise carried out by the Judge. It is not  made  out
        that  there  were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  or   exceptional
        circumstances preventing the appellant returning to  Hong  Kong  to
        make the application.  The material relied upon  by  the  appellant
        failed to establish  that  any  temporary  interference  whilst  an
        application was made would make removal disproportionate.
    25. The Judge as part of  the  assessment  process  clearly  considered
        section 117 of the  2002  Act.  The  Judge  is  criticised  by  the
        appellant for not considering this at [19] of  the  decision  under
        challenge but this is the paragraph of the determination  in  which
        the Judge  considers  the  question  of  whether  there  were  very
        significant obstacle to reintegration into Hong  Kong  pursuant  to
        paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. There is no merit in  the  challenge
        to the Judge's analysis of this element of the case.
    26. It is not made out that the Judge has erred  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision in finding the  appellant  was  unable  to
        meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  to  enable  him  to
        succeed  in-country  under  Appendix  FM  or  the  long   residence
        provision. The analysis of the periods of absence from  the  United
        Kingdom and  reasons  why  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
        relevant period of continuous lawful residence are  fully  reasoned
        enabling the reader of the decision to  understand  why  the  Judge
        came to the conclusion he did. The inability of a person to satisfy
        the requirements of the Immigration Rules is relevant to  assessing
        the proportionality of any interference.
    27. There is merit in the Secretary of State's  response  that  as  any
        interference is likely to be for a short period of  time  it  would
        not amount to a significant interference sufficient  to  warrant  a
        reduction in the weight to be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
        immigration control.
    28. The assertion the Judge failed to consider  the  respondent  policy
        guidance on long residence fails to  specify  any  aspect  of  that
        guidance that would have made a material difference to the decision
        under challenge and fails to acknowledge the fact that at [16]  the
        Judge made specific reference to such guidance  which  was  clearly
        taken into account.
    29. Whilst the  appellant  disagrees  with  the  Judge's  decision  and
        considers that a requirement for him to return to Hong Kong to make
        an application  to  enable  him  to  re-enter  the  United  Kingdom
        lawfully is not warranted and not proportionate, the  grounds  fail
        to establish arguable legal error material to the Judge's  decision
        to  the  contrary.  The  Judge  clearly  considered  the  competing
        arguments and makes findings supported  by  adequate  reasons  that
        have not been shown to be outside the  range  of  those  reasonably
        open to the Judge on the evidence. The Judge undertook the 'balance
        sheet  exercise'  of  assessing  the  points  relied  upon  by  the
        appellant and those relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  before
        concluding  that  the   respondent   had   established   that   any
        interference was proportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration
        control. As noted above that is a fact specific assessment.
    30. It is not made out the Judges erred in law in a manner material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient to warrant the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.


Decision

    31. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    32. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 September 2020












