
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/16449/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2019                 |On 29th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     m g
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timpson of Counsel instructed by AGI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of China born on 9th March 1981.

2.   She entered the United Kingdom in September  2005  and  claimed  asylum
    which was refused.  Thereafter a number of further submissions made  on
    her behalf fell to be refused.

3.   On 31st May 2017 she made a  human  rights  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  her  family  and  private
    life. That was refused by a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  19th
    November 2017.  It was the decision of the respondent that neither she,
    nor her partner, nor indeed her children met the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, nor were there any exceptional  circumstances  which
    would render her return to China as disproportionate.

4.   The appellant appealed against that decision, which appeal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Durance on 17th December  2018.   The  Judge,
    for a number of reasons set out in the determination,  found  that  the
    appellant lacked credibility to a  significant  extent.   Her  children
    were not qualifying children  and  her  partner  was  also  Chinese  by
    citizenship.

5.   It was the finding of the Judge that the appellant  could  return  with
    her family to China and hence her appeal was dismissed.

6.   The appellant seeks to challenge that decision on the ground  that  the
    Judge failed to acknowledge or give any weight to  the  Country  Policy
    and Information  Note  of  China  and  the  Contravention  of  National
    Population and Family Planning Laws November 2018.   It  was  contended
    that such an omission was material to determine whether or not  it  was
    reasonable or proportionate to return the children to China.

7.   Leave was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge failed to properly assess the best interests of
    the children and failed to take into account the potential difficulties
    which the children would face in integrating into China in the light of
    the said Policy and Information Note.

8.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine that issue.

9.   At the hearing the appellant was represented  by  Mr  Timpson  who  had
    represented her at the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    produces the Country Policy and Information Note on China  Version  3.0
    dated November 2018 for my attention.

10.  In preparation for the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  there
    was a bundle on behalf of the appellant of 435 folios.  The bundle  did
    not contain the Country Policy and Information Note.

11.  I have read the handwritten notes of the Judge made at the time of  the
    hearing on 17th December 2018.  There was an issue about the disclosure
    of a particular document by the Home Office, which is  documented.   An
    adjournment was granted for that matter to be considered  and  resumed.
    This is not the Country policy Note.

12.  In a very full note of the evidence no record  has  been  made  of  the
    Country Policy and Information Note.  Significantly there would seem to
    have been little that has been noted as to any arguments at the hearing
    concerning that policy.

13.  Mr Timpson indicated that he raised the issue  of  the  Country  Policy
    and  Information  Note  with  the  Judge  at  an  early  stage  in  the
    proceedings.  He did not give the Judge a copy of that policy but  gave
    an electronic link  to  enable  the  Judge  to  follow  up  the  policy
    subsequently.  It was his position that in the  submissions  that  were
    made at the hearing he did make reference to  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note.

14.  The grounds of appeal  stress  the  relevance  and  importance  of  the
    Country Policy and Information  Note  in  China,  contending  that  the
    appellant, having given birth to  children  outside  the  marriage  and
    abroad, she and they would suffer adverse  consequences  on  return  to
    China  such  that  the  respondent's   decision   would   be   rendered
    disproportionate.  Such difficulties which may  flow  from  the  policy
    would be that medical insurance may not be effective for having a child
    outside the law and that some hospitals may indeed  turn  the  children
    away from treatment.   Single  mothers  it  is  said  must  pay  social
    compensation fees and  all  medical  expenses  associated  with  giving
    birth.  There may be family planning fees difficulties in education and
    recognition.

15.  A Judge in determining an appeal is often faced with many documents  to
    consider.  It seems to me that the burden must lie upon the parties  to
    clarify the issues that are involved and to ensure that the Judge fully
    understands the relevance of any documents  that  are  presented.   The
    curiosity of this particular case, as I have indicated, is  that  there
    were a very large volume of documentation  that  was  presented  as  an
    agreed bundle before the Judge and yet the document, which is  now  the
    subject of this appeal, was not  within  that  bundle.   Indeed  it  is
    perhaps surprising that if the significance of that document is  as  is
    now claimed to be high that it was not in the documents.

16.  I have no doubt, having heard Mr Timpson, that he is  truthful  in  his
    account that he invited the Judge to have  regard  to  this  particular
    Country Policy and Information Note.  It was perhaps not the best place
    to introduce  an  important  document  as  an  extra  document  at  the
    beginning of proceedings, particularly when, as was apparent there were
    other issues that were preliminary to the conduct of the appeal  to  be
    determined.

17.  It is clear from the Judge's written note of proceedings that it was  a
    full and detailed note as to what transpired at the hearing.  There are
    detailed notes as to the evidence that  was  given  and  the  questions
    asked in cross-examination.  The submissions of both  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer and of Mr Timpson were also set out in  considerable
    detail.

18.  Whilst the existence of the Country Policy  and  Information  Note  was
    mentioned to the Judge by Mr Timpson, it is far from clear to  me  that
    the significance of that policy note was made clear to the Judge.  As I
    have indicated, no copy was in fact provided and the Judge was  invited
    to read up on the report at a later stage.  Such seems to me to be  far
    from satisfactory in the course of presenting proper arguments for  and
    on behalf of the appellant.  The absence of a note of the policy  being
    introduced  in  the  Judge's  note  is  a  clear  indication  that  its
    significance was not immediately apparent to the Judge.

19.  Mr Timpson contends that he did  make  submissions  on  that  document.
    Once again, whilst accepting that he may have done so, it is  far  from
    clear that the relevance of the Policy to the issues was made clear.  I
    have no doubt that had those submissions seemed of particular relevance
    to the Judge, a record of those submissions would have been made.

20.  It is fundamental to the  fairness  of  the  process  that  Judges  are
    assisted in  considering  issues  by  the  parties  who  underline  the
    importance or otherwise of particular aspects of evidence.

21.  Mr Timpson made a number of detailed submissions, which were  noted  by
    the Judge in the  handwritten  notes  of  the  Record  of  Proceedings.
    Little if anything is recorded as to the policy  which  is  now  relied
    upon.  I find it surprising that if the Judge made  detailed  notes  on
    most matters, the Judge would have omitted to make note on this  matter
    had  its  significance  been  clearly  presented.   The  focus  of  the
    submissions, which seem to be recorded as arising out of  the  hearing,
    was the conduct of the appellant and her partner and the fact that  the
    children were approaching  the  age  to  be  considered  as  qualifying
    children.  There  is  little  in  the  notes  to  highlight  particular
    concerns upon their return to China.

22.  Once again, whilst accepting that Mr Timpson did  indeed  make  mention
    of the policy in his submissions, the significance of what  he  had  to
    say on that matter did not seem to have gone into the consciousness  of
    the Judge otherwise, as I so find, the Judge would have  recorded  what
    was said in some detail.

23.  Clearly were the Judge  to  have  overlooked  an  important  aspect  of
    evidence, that could amount to an error of law providing that there was
    a materiality to that piece of evidence.  The appellant was represented
    by Mr Timpson and the respondent was also represented at that  time  by
    Mr McBride the Home Office Presenting Officer.  The Judge was entitled,
    in my consideration to expect the parties to highlight the relevant and
    important aspects for consideration.  That this particular document was
    not in the bundle as prepared but was introduced  by  way  of  a  "side
    wind" does not assist in the task.   There  was  no  skeleton  argument
    provided. Thus the nature of the submissions made are  those  reflected
    in the Judge's notes.  It does not seem to me to be a matter capable of
    amounting to an error of law for the Judge to overlook a  matter  where
    little assistance or significance was attributed to it.  Mr Timpson did
    not highlight its significance in such a way  as  to  bring  the  issue
    clearly to the notice of  the  Judge.  In  that  regard  is  perhaps  a
    shortcoming that falls to the advocacy  rather  than  to  the  judicial
    determination.

24.  Mr Timpson indicates that he relied in particular upon paragraph  5.8.1
    that reads as follows.  The Telegraph reported in a 2016 article that:

         "In the case of unmarried couples, it can be avoided if the  mother
         and father of  the  child  marry  within  60  days  of  the  birth.
         Alternatively, they must pay a penalty that can range  from  a  few
         thousand to tens of thousands of pounds depending on where you live
         and how much you earn.  For a single woman  with  few  connections,
         little money, and no support, just the process leading  up  to  and
         after birth - not to mention the hardship of the actual labour  can
         be painful."

25.  Noting first of all that this is a report of 2016  which  is  very  far
    out of date and is directed essentially to  women  giving  birth.   The
    appellant has already given birth to her children in the United Kingdom
    and so the complications of  health  insurance  and  support  for  that
    process do not arise.  The appellant, who was found to lack credibility
    in many ways, was found to be in a relationship  with  another  who  is
    also a Chinese citizen.  Consideration of return to China  was  on  the
    basis  that  she,  he  and  the  children  would  return.    In   those
    circumstances it is difficult to consider that she is a  single  woman.
    Mr Timpson relies upon the 60-day requirement for marrying  within  the
    birth.  It seems to me to put an  extraordinary  narrow  interpretation
    upon the policy, when it would be entirely open to  the  appellant  and
    her partner to marry if that were to secure advantages in  registration
    and health and education in China.

26.  5.10.3 is also relied upon quoting from  a  2017  USSD  Report.   Again
    that passage seems to focus upon the birth planning policy rather  than
    to look at the matter from the standpoint of support to a family  where
    the children are already firmly established as part of that family.

27.  I note for example in paragraph  2.4.16  that  many  children  born  of
    single or unmarried parents had been denied  a  household  registration
    document  (HUKOU)  preventing  them  from  accessing  public  services,
    medical treatment and education.   However  it  is  recorded  that  the
    government has stated that it is  making  it  easier  for  illegitimate
    children to  be  registered.   Certain  figures  were  quoted  in  that
    paragraph on the 2010 national census.  Whether the appellant  and  her
    partner are to remain unmarried or could marry, whether the policy that
    is now in place is more flexible or not is  really  not  made  entirely
    clear from the policy note.  I  note  for  example  in  5.6.3  that  in
    September 2018 The Daily China  had  reported  that  three  departments
    responsible for implementing family planning policies had been  removed
    from the new structure of the National Health Commission.   These  were
    departments that used to enforce family planning policies  and  such  a
    removal has triggered the public conjecture that the government may  be
    planning to scrap longstanding limits on the  number  of  children  its
    citizens can have.

28.  It was noted in paragraph 38 of the determination  that  the  appellant
    could be returned to China without difficulty.  This is her home  where
    she has spent the majority of her life.  She and her partner speak  the
    language and Judge found  that  they  will  face  no  very  significant
    obstacles in returning to their country of origin.  It was  noted  that
    the children spoke both English and Mandarin.  They  were  both  within
    the primary school sector and bilingual.  It was  found  it  reasonably
    likely that the appellant and her  partner  did  have  family  ties  in
    China. Given the deception of the appellant little weight was given  to
    her assertion that she lacked such ties in China.

29.  It is difficult, without detailed consideration, to assess what  weight
    should indeed be given to the Country Policy and Information Note.   In
    certain paragraphs the draconian policy of lack of benefits to a couple
    who contravene the earning policy would seem to be stressed.  On  other
    occasions there would seem to be a relaxation of such requirements.  In
    general terms the policy seems to be focused  more  on  the  aspect  of
    pregnancy and giving birth than it does to the  situation  of  families
    where the children have already  been  born  some  time  ago.   Certain
    passages seem to suggest the difficulties with registration that  would
    be faced by the appellant and her family whereas other  passages  would
    seem to indicate a more tolerant approach.  It is  indeed  a  document,
    which if relied upon at the hearing, should have been  the  subject  of
    careful critique and legal argument as to its significance and event. I
    find little indication that such a comprehensive argument was  made  in
    respect of it.  No doubt if it is contended that its contents  makes  a
    material difference to the outcome of return, that is a matter that can
    be raised with the respondent as a fresh claim.

30.  The narrow issue before me is whether or not the  Judge  has  erred  in
    the approach or consideration of that document.  Given that I find that
    its significance was not properly made clear to the  Judge,  I  do  not
    find that even, if it had been produced to the Judge,  that  the  Judge
    was in error in failing  to  consider  it.   In  any  event  given  the
    internal inconsistencies or changes within the policy  I  do  not  find
    that it can reasonably be said that it would be material to the outcome
    of return in any event.  In those circumstances the appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of the Judge shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date26th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
