
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16013/2018
                                                HU/15959/2018, HU/15960/2018
                                                HU/15961/2018, HU/15963/2018
                                                               HU/15964/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th June 2019                        |On 22nd July 2019                  |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  I) A K E
                                   II) O O
                                III)  J E A E
                                  IV) G T e
                                  V) V D e
                                 VI) A A B e
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Sadiq (Solicitor), Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated on 16th March 2019, following  a  hearing
    at Manchester on 5th March  2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The first Appellant is a male, and was born on 25th September 1973, and
    is a citizen of Ghana.  The second Appellant, his partner, was born  on
    1st June 1978; the third Appellant, their eldest  child,  was  born  on
    12th July 2009; the fourth Appellant was born on 29th July 2013, and is
    their next child; the fifth Appellant was born on 30th June  2012,  and
    is the child born after that; and the final Appellant was born  on  9th
    April 2018 and is the youngest child.  All  of  them  are  citizens  of
    Nigeria (with the exception of the first Appellant who is a citizen  of
    Ghana).

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
    their family and private life.  The essence of their claim is that  the
    first Appellant entered the UK in 1998, in 2012 he made an  application
    for leave to remain on the basis of his private life, which was refused
    and he  was  served  with  a  notice  in  2014  of  his  liability  for
    deportation  as   an   illegal   entrant.    He   then   made   further
    representations about his  relationship  with  his  partner  and  three
    children under Article 8 in that same year  and  these  representations
    were rejected.  The Appellant was appeal rights  exhausted  in  January
    2015.  In October and November 2016 removal directions  were  set.   In
    March 2018 the Appellant's solicitors made further representations.  In
    June 2018 the Appellant was encountered  working  illegally.   He  then
    produced further evidence in support of  his  claim.   The  Appellant's
    partner, the second Appellant, was herself issued  with  a  visit  visa
    valid from 7th March 2009 to 31st January 2010, but refused entry.  She
    successfully appealed that decision and entered  the  UK  on  7th  June
    2009.

 4. In this appeal  the  claim  of  the  first  and  second  Appellants  is
    principally based upon the rights of their four children, all  of  whom
    were born in the United Kingdom and the eldest of whom has  spent  nine
    years in this country, so that it is argued that it is  in  their  best
    interests to remain in this country, and not to be removed  with  their
    parents.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The judge held that "it is generally accepted that the  best  interests
    of a child are best served by that child remaining with their  parents"
    (paragraph 27).  That being so, the judge observed that, "I have to say
    that the first two Appellants have been in  a  precarious  position  in
    relation to their status in the UK since their arrival"  and  that  "it
    can never have been in their contemplation that they would be  able  to
    automatically remain in the UK and they have known since 2014 that they
    have no right to be in this country" (paragraph 27).

 6. The judge then went on to consider the position  of  the  children  and
    observed that:

         "In the context of this case, however, there are  certain  features
         which mean I do not find that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect
         the children to leave the UK and I find  that  there  are  powerful
         reasons why removal is appropriate.  The family would be leaving as
         a unit and therefore would remain together, which is clearly in the
         children's best interests." (Paragraph 28).

 7. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in having  regard
    to irrelevant considerations and by failing to consider Section 117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act, and in  failing  to  consider  submissions  about  the
    application of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705; as  well  as  wrongly
    applying the Supreme Court decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.

 9. On 17th April 2019, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    it was arguable that the judge did not give adequate  reasons  for  the
    finding  that  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  third
    Appellant, who is a qualifying child, to leave the United Kingdom.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 11th June  2019,  Mr  Sadiq,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellants, made the following fundamental  point  before
    me.  He asserted that, although there was case law to the  effect  that
    with very young children, their best interests are invariably served by
    their remaining with their parents, that did not mean to say  that  the
    children's position, with respect to what serves their best  interests,
    is not deserving of a separate  consideration,  without  any  influence
    upon that consideration of the position of the parents.

11. In this case, however, the judge appears to  have  conflated  the  fact
    that the first two Appellants had,  "appalling  immigration  histories"
    (see paragraph 17) with the requirement to  have  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the children as a  primary  consideration.   He  submitted
    that there were two revealing statements by the judge in  this  regard.
    First, the judge, although entitled to consider  the  position  of  the
    children in "the real world circumstances" (paragraph  25),  had  posed
    the question before the Tribunal as follows: "The ultimate question  is
    whether it is reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent, with
    no right to remain, to their country of origin" (see paragraph 24).  Mr
    Sadiq submitted that this was not the ultimate question.  The  ultimate
    question was what was in the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a
    primary question.  Second, he submitted that the  judge  was  wrong  to
    have concluded on the basis that "it is  generally  accepted  that  the
    best interests of a child are best served by that child remaining  with
    their parents", because there was no established  rule  that  this  was
    "generally accepted" in that each case had to  be  looked  on  its  own
    specific facts and then a decision reached as to what would be  in  the
    children's best interests.

12. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that this was a case where  the  judge
    had throughout been cognisant of the  fact  that  the  children's  best
    interests had to be considered (see paragraph 24 onwards).   The  judge
    had applied the relevant case law of MT and ET (see paragraph 26).   He
    had dutifully followed the latest Supreme Court case  of  KO  (Nigeria)
    [2018] UKSC 53 (see paragraph 24)  and  it  was  simply  incorrect  for
    whoever drafted the grounds of application to suggest that the case  of
    KO (Nigeria) was materially different because it involved  cases  where
    the parents had committed criminal offences, because  of  jurisprudence
    with respect to the position of the children, was not confined to cases
    where a criminal offence had been committed by the parents.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007 such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision.
     My reasons are as follows.

14. First, this is not a case where the judge has given specific  attention
    to the position of the eldest child, the third  Appellant,  who  was  a
    "qualifying" child, in terms of what would be in his "best  interests".



15. Second, what is in the "best interests" of the children is well set out
    by the judge himself (at paragraph 18) where he observes "it is clearly
    the case that the best interests of the children is to  remain  in  the
    UK, a country in which all were born and one had spent  nine  years  of
    his life here", particularly as the school reports of the children  are
    such that: "It is apparent that all of the children have  an  excellent
    attendance record and the teachers all speak very highly  of  them,  as
    individual pupils.  It is also apparent that  the  school  records  and
    evidence that the children are well-integrated and are doing well", and
    the head teacher had actually said  of  the  eldest  child,  the  third
    Appellant, that he is 'a model pupil'.  He is polite, kind and  caring.
    He tries very hard with his work and takes  part  in  various  sporting
    activities" (paragraph 18).

16. It has to be recognised that the judge, in  so  explaining  matters  in
    relation to the children also had said that "none of the  children  are
    at what can be  described  as  a  crucial  stage  of  their  education"
    (paragraph 18).  Be that as it may, when it came to a consideration  of
    how the balance of considerations fell to be  applied,  the  judge  was
    wrong to proceed on the basis that "it is generally accepted  that  the
    best interests of a child are best served by that child remaining  with
    their parents"  (paragraph  27),  when  he  had  already  observed  (at
    paragraph 18) that the best interests of the children was to remain  in
    the UK, and especially one of them, namely, the  third  Appellant,  who
    was a "qualifying child", but with respect to whom the  judge  did  not
    give any individuated separate consideration as a  child  who  now  had
    that status.

17. From the premise that the judge adopted, it was then stated that,

         "I find that there are powerful reasons why removal is appropriate.
          The family would be leaving as a unit and therefore  would  remain
         together which is clearly in the children's best interests.   Given
         the school reports and  the  high  regard  the  teachers  hold  the
         children in there is nothing to suggest that with  the  support  of
         their family, they would  be  unable  to  adapt  to  the  child  in
         lifestyle" (paragraph 28).

18. This last observation, in fact, takes what was in the  "best  interests
    of the children, namely, to remain in the UK where they were doing very
    well at school, and to conflate it with  the  public  interest  in  the
    removal of the parents, and this proposition has not been made out.  It
    is not made out because the onus is upon the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State.  This is confirmed by the fact that the Supreme  Court  decision
    in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 concluded that in assessing  whether  it
    was "reasonable to expect" a qualifying child such as  the  Appellants'
    children to leave the UK, a court or Tribunal was not to  engage  in  a
    balancing exercise, weighing the impact  upon  the  child  against  the
    public interest.  On the other hand, the  effect  of  KO  (Nigeria)  in
    relation to the proper interpretation of Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act as set out in paragraphs 17 to 19, is  to  disprove  the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


19. The position now is in that in assessing whether it is  "reasonable  to
    expect" a  qualifying  child  to  leave  the  UK,  the  focus  must  be
    exclusively upon the position of the child, and whereas this has always
    been the established position to date,  the  immigration  status  of  a
    parent may be relevant in assessing "in the real  world  the  impact  a
    parent's removal may have on child's 'best interests', even though  the
    focus must remain on the position of the child".


20. What ultimately requires  the  judge's  attention  is  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction: Family Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section  1.0b
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes
    August 2015.  The guidance that is given here is to the effect that:

         "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the seven years  immediately
         proceeding the date of the application, recognises that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK.
         ...".

21. The guidance goes on to say that  in  these  circumstances,  where  the
    balance swings more in  favour  of  a  child  such  that  it  would  be
    generally unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK,  the
    position is that "Strong reasons would be required in order to refuse a
    case with continuous UK residence  of  more  than  seven  years".   The
    matter, accordingly, ought to  have  been  approached  on  this  basis.
    Accordingly, the judge fell into error taking  the  approach  that  was
    taken in this case.



Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal amounted to  an  error  of  law
    such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the  decision  of  the
    original judge.  I remake the decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Lloyd-Smith, pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b)  of
    the Practice Direction.

23. An anonymity order is made.

24. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss             12th July 2019
