
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16484/2017
                                                               RP/00155/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2019                     |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                  LORD UIST
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     a a
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection and child  welfare  issues.  We  find  that  it  is
appropriate to continue the order. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bobb, Solicitor of Aylish Alexander Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  dated  21  September
    2017 to cease  refugee  status  and  a  subsequent  decision  dated  01
    December 2017 to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of
    deportation proceedings.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 30 November 2018.

3.    The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on   the
    following grounds:

    (i)  The judge erred in his assessment of Article 1C(5) of the  Refugee
         Convention. In particular, he failed  to  consider  adequately  the
         content of the letter from UNHCR  dated  31  August  2017  and  the
         relevant UNHCR guidelines. He failed to consider whether there  had
         been a significant and non-temporary change in the circumstances in
         Turkey.

    (ii)  The  judge  failed  to  conduct  a  holistic  assessment  of  the
         circumstances that were relevant to a proper assessment of  Article
         8. In particular, he failed to make any findings  relating  to  the
         best interests of the children.

    (iii)    The judge failed to address  the  arguments  relating  to  the
         respondent's exercise of discretion under paragraph 322(5)  of  the
         immigration rules.

Decision and reasons

4.   Having considered the submissions made  by  both  parties  we  conclude
    that there are material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and that it must be set aside.

5.   First, in relation to the assessment  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    whether the appellant's refugee status had  ceased,  whilst  we  accept
    that the judge mentioned the UNHCR letter, we conclude that the  judge,
    as a matter of fact, failed to properly engage with evidence  that  was
    relevant to the assessment under Article 1C(5).

6.   Similarly, although the evidence relating to risk on return  in  Turkey
    at the current time does not seem to have been particularised, and  the
    findings that the judge made about the individual  facts  of  the  case
    were likely to be open to him, whether the appellant as  an  individual
    could return in safety  still  required  a  proper  assessment  of  the
    background evidence, and it is that analysis which is missing from  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.

7.   Secondly, in relation to the Article 8 assessment, we find  that  there
    was a failure to consider relevant matters.  The judge's findings  were
    confined to the conclusions he came to at [41]  of  the  decision.  The
    judge  failed  to  consider  the  fact   that   the   very   compelling
    circumstances test should be a holistic and cumulative  assessment.  It
    might include matters that come within the exceptions as  well  as  any
    other matters that are of relevance.

8.   While we accept Mr  Avery's  submission  that  this  was  an  extremely
    serious offence and that in most cases a sentence of twenty years would
    outweigh any private and family life that a person has in the UK, there
    were unusual facts in this case, which included  the  passage  of  time
    since the appellant was released from prison, which  was  considerable,
    and during that time there is no evidence to show  that  the  appellant
    committed any further offences or was a danger to anyone in the UK.

9.   The grounds  list  matters  that  were  argued  to  be  relevant  to  a
    cumulative assessment of the appellant's circumstances.  We  find  that
    the judge failed to conduct a holistic assessment to ascertain  whether
    those  circumstances,  as  a  whole,  amounted  to   'very   compelling
    circumstances' that might outweigh the public interest in  deportation.
    The decision is devoid of any assessment of the best interests  of  the
    children who are still under 18 years old. We accept that this  was  an
    important decision that required anxious scrutiny and  that  the  judge
    failed to consider a  large  number  of  matters  that  may  have  been
    relevant to that assessment.

10.  The third point relating to paragraph 322(5) is irrelevant in light  of
    our other findings. It is difficult to see why the  respondent  thought
    it necessary to rely on that aspect of the rules in  the  human  rights
    decision dated 01 December 2017 when the  decision  was  already  being
    made in the context of deportation proceedings.

11.  For these reasons we conclude that the decision involved the making  of
    errors of law that may have made a material difference to  the  outcome
    of the  appeal.   The  nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
    necessary in order for the decision to be re-made is such that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before a different judge.

Signed   [pic]                  Date 09 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
