
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/16198/2018
                                                HU/16200/2018, HU/16204/2018
                                                               HU/16206/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 8 August 2019            |On Wednesday 21 August 2019          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   1) R N
                                   2) S G
                                   3) A N
                                   4) S N
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmood, Counsel instructed by Greystone
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  I
continue the anonymity direction because the case involves  minor  children.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       French promulgated on 11 April 2019 ("the Decision") dismissing their
       appeals against the Respondent's decision dated 16 July 2018 refusing
       their human rights claim made in the context of proposed  removal  to
       India.

    2. The Second Appellant came to the UK first as a student in  2011  with
       the  First  Appellant  (her  husband)  and  Fourth  Appellant  (their
       daughter born in September 2004) as her dependents.  Their  son,  the
       Third Appellant, was born in the UK in July 2013.  As at the date  of
       the hearing before Judge French, the Third and Fourth Appellants were
       aged five and fourteen respectively.

    3. The family overstayed following the expiry of the Second  Appellant's
       leave in December 2014.  Their  evidence  is  that  they  planned  to
       return to India following the expiry of their leave and even went  so
       far as to book flights in August 2016  but,  having  seen  the  upset
       caused, in particular to the Fourth Appellant, they decided not to go
       and have remained in the UK unlawfully.

    4. The focus of the appeals is the position  of  the  Fourth  Appellant.
       Judge French found that there were no very significant  obstacles  to
       the family's integration in India.  He found that their  family  life
       could be continued there.  He was also satisfied that the welfare  of
       the children could be maintained in India as well as in the  UK.   He
       concluded that it was not unreasonable for the family  to  return  to
       their home country.

    5. The Appellants raise two grounds.  First, they say that the Judge has
       failed to consider the relevant public  interest  considerations,  in
       particular Section 117B (6) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
       2002 ("Section 117B (6)").  Second, and allied to that first  ground,
       they say that the Judge has adopted a flawed approach to the test  of
       reasonableness as set out in MA (Pakistan) and others v Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 ("MA (Pakistan)")

    6. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted by First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Keane on 4 July 2019 in the following terms:

           "The  appellants  applied  in-time  on  identical  grounds   for
           permission to appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-
           tier Tribunal French promulgated on 11 April 2019 in  which  the
           Judge dismissed the appeals on human rights (Article 8) grounds.
            The grounds disclosed arguable errors of law but for which  the
           outcome of the appeal might  have  been  different.   The  judge
           explicitly acknowledged at paragraph 8 of the decision that Miss
           [SN] was a qualifying child within  the  definition  of  Section
           117D(1) of Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the
           2002 Act).  However, the judge did not refer in his decision  to
           Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act nor was  it  possible  to  infer
           from the judge's decision that he took into account  the  public
           interest did not require [RN]'s removal from the United Kingdom.
            The judge arguably failed to take  into  account  an  important
           consideration.  Further, the judge arguably did  not  adequately
           or at all consider whether it would be reasonable to expect Miss
           [SN] to leave the United Kingdom.  The judge's assessment was to
           be found at  paragraph  8  of  his  decision  where  he  stated,
           "However in the present case, [SN] had lived the first  half  of
           her life in India.  She still had ties in India, as evidenced by
           the fact that she spoke to her grandmother by telephone".   Such
           was arguably  not  that  comprehensive  assessment  of  relevant
           considerations urged by the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 39 of PD
           and Others (Article 8  -  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri  Lanka
           [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) to  which  the  author  of  the  grounds
           referred at paragraph 8 of  the  grounds.   The  judge  did  not
           explicitly or tacitly accord weight to  Miss  [SN]'s  period  of
           residence in the United Kingdom, a period of residence in excess
           of seven years at the date of the hearing.  The application  for
           permission is granted."

    7. The matters come before me to consider whether the Decision  contains
       a material error of law and if I conclude that it does, either to re-
       make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for
       redetermination.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

    8. The criticism of the Decision made in the grant  of  permission  that
       Judge French's consideration of the position of [SN]  is  limited  to
       what is said at  [8]  is  somewhat  harsh.   In  fact,  most  of  the
       consideration of her position and that of her brother is contained in
       [7] of the Decision where the Judge deals with  the  children's  best
       interests.  Those paragraphs read as follows:

           "[7]  I was conscious of the requirement to ensure that s.55  of
           the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009,  had  been
           adhered to.  However I was satisfied  that  a  return  to  India
           would not be detrimental to the welfare of the  children.   [SN]
           had lived in India until she was six  and  had  attended  school
           there.   She  had  learned  Hindi  and  Punjabi  as  her   first
           languages.  It was my view that she would be able to  become  in
           these [sic] languages again and it was likely  that  [SN]  would
           have adequate knowledge of Hindi and Punjabi so as to be able to
           cope in a state school.  I was satisfied  that  there  was  good
           quality  education  available  in  India.   [SN]   (the   fourth
           appellant) was now 14 years old and  therefore  she  might  have
           some friends in the UK.  I was aware of the various certificates
           which had been produced to show that  [SN]  was  doing  well  at
           school, in the UK but as a bright child with supportive parents,
           she was likely to achieve  academically  wherever  she  went  to
           school.  It was also noted that [SN] had been active in a  youth
           group at her church and was a  good  friend  of  Reverend  [O]'s
           daughter.  However there was no reason to suppose that she could
           not become involved in a similar group in  India  and  make  new
           friends.  She had lived in India before,  so  it  would  not  be
           totally unfamiliar to her and she  would  have  the  benefit  of
           support from the wider family.  There had been mention  of  [SN]
           having a health problem, but it transpired that her  stress  was
           because of the uncertainty of the family's situation.  (This had
           been confirmed by the consultant psychiatrist in a letter  dated
           27/03/19).  Once the situation had been resolved  there  was  no
           reason to suppose that she would continue to  be  stressed.   In
           that sense a refusal of this appeal  would  not  jeopardise  her
           health.  However if she continued to  experience  mental  health
           problems, after she returned to India, then I was satisfied that
           she would be able to receive appropriate treatment in India.  As
           far as [A] was concerned, he was only 5 years old and would  not
           have formed any close bonds outside his  immediate  family,  who
           would be returning to India with him.  At that young age, it was
           reasonable to suppose that he would learn the language  quickly.
           Whilst being aware of the requirements of s.55, I was  satisfied
           that the welfare of the children could be maintained in India as
           well as in the UK.

           [8]   I was conscious that when the parents came to the UK, they
           knew that they had limited leave to remain.  They  had  built  a
           family in UK despite this.  The applications for extended  leave
           to remain had been refused in 2014, but yet they remained in the
           UK.  Having said that however I was conscious that "a child must
           not be blamed for which [sic] he or she is not responsible, such
           as the conduct of  a  parent".   I  accepted  that  [SN]  was  a
           "qualifying child" because she had been in the UK for  7  years,
           and therefore consideration had to be given  to  276ADE  of  the
           Immigration Rules.  I noted that in MA (Pakistan)  2016  it  was
           stated that the fact that a child has been here for seven  years
           must be given significant weight.  I  was  aware  of  the  Upper
           Tribunal's  emphasis  on  "reasonableness".   However,  in   the
           present case, [SN] had lived the  first  half  of  her  life  in
           India.  She still had ties in India, as evidenced  by  the  fact
           that she spoke to her grandmother by telephone.  In my view,  it
           was not unreasonable to conclude that family  and  private  life
           could be enjoyed outside the UK.  Having weighed the  merits  of
           the public interest  of  managing  immigration  as  against  the
           individual rights of the Appellants to respect  for  family  and
           private life, I was satisfied that the scales were in favour  of
           confirming the decision  of  the  Respondent  and  refusing  the
           appeals."

    9. Those findings also have to be read  in  the  context  of  the  other
       findings made at [6] of the Decision and the Judge's  record  of  the
       evidence at [3] and [4] of the Decision particularly  what  is  there
       said about [SN]'s language skills and medical treatment for her.  The
       Judge did not accept the First Appellant's assertion  that  [SN]  did
       not understand the languages spoken in India not  least  because  the
       Second Appellant confirmed that she did and also confirmed  that  she
       would be able to obtain medical treatment in India.  That evidence is
       the foundation of the Judge's conclusions  at  [7]  and  [8]  of  the
       Decision.

   10. Mr Mahmood sensibly and realistically focussed his submissions not on
       whether the Judge had adopted the  right  test  but  whether  he  had
       properly considered the evidence.  He submitted first that there  was
       no reference to the letter written by [SN] explaining  why  she  does
       not want to go back to India.  He also pointed out that, contrary  to
       what is said by the Judge at [7] of the  Decision,  the  psychologist
       did not say that [SN]'s  mental  health  problems  stemmed  from  the
       uncertainty about the family's immigration status  but  because  that
       uncertainty meant that she might have to return to  India.   He  also
       submitted that the Judge had failed to identify what are  the  strong
       reasons required to displace the weight to  be  given  to  the  seven
       years which [SN] has spent in the UK.

   11. Having heard Mr Mahmood's submissions, Mr Walker  also  sensibly  and
       correctly conceded that there was an error of  law,  particularly  in
       relation to the Judge's analysis of the  psychologist's  report.   He
       accepted that this was a material error.

   12. I accept that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
       analysis of whether it is reasonable to  expect  [SN]  to  return  to
       India.  The Judge accepted at [8] of the  Decision  that  [SN]  is  a
       qualifying child and also that her period of residence must be  given
       significant weight.   He  accepted  that  the  relevant  question  is
       whether it is reasonable for [SN] to return.  However, in considering
       that issue and by adopting reasoning taken from [7] of  the  Decision
       which  is  itself   flawed,   particularly   in   relation   to   the
       interpretation to be placed on the psychologist's report,  the  Judge
       did not take account of all the evidence when  assessing  whether  it
       was reasonable for [SN] to return to India.

   13. I therefore set aside the Decision.  Mr Mahmood invited me to re-make
       the decision based on the documentary evidence.  As he  pointed  out,
       the crux of the case is the position of [SN] who is a  teenage  child
       with some mental health issues.  It would not be appropriate for  her
       to give oral evidence.  As he also pointed out, there was  apparently
       no dispute as  to  the  facts  or  evidence.   It  was  a  matter  of
       assessment of that evidence against the law.  I accept that to be the
       position.  Since I am not hearing oral evidence from [SN]'s  parents,
       however, I preserve [3] and [4] of the Decision which  records  their
       evidence.  I now turn to re-make the Decision.

RE-MAKING

   14. As indicated above, the Appellants' cases stand or fall with the case
       of [SN].  It is  therefore  in  that  context  that  I  consider  the
       evidence.

  Legal Framework

   15. Paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")

           "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life


           276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
           to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at
           the date of application, the applicant:

                (i)    does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
                Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5.
                in Appendix FM; and

                (ii)   has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                ...

                (iv)    is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                continuously in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any
                period of imprisonment) and it would not  be  reasonable  to
                expect the applicant to leave the UK;

                ..."




           "Section 117B, Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

           ...

           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal  where
           -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom."

   16. The question of whether it is reasonable to expect a child to  return
       to his or her home country was considered by the Supreme Court in  KO
       (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2018] UKSC 53.  The relevant paragraphs are as follows:

           "[16] It is natural to begin with the first  in  time,  that  is
           paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed  solely  to
           the position of the child.  Unlike  its  predecessor  DP5/96  it
           contains  no  requirement  to  consider   the   criminality   or
           misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor.  It is  impossible
           in my view to  read  it  as  importing  such  a  requirement  by
           implication.

           [17]   As  has  been  seen,  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
           substance of the rule without material change, but this time  in
           the context of the right of the parent to remain.  I wold  infer
           that it was intended to have  the  same  effect.   The  question
           again is what is 'reasonable' for the child.  As Elias J said in
           R (MA (Pakistan) Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
           [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in  the  subsection
           to import a reference to the conduct  of  the  parent.   Section
           117B sets out a number of  factors  relating  to  those  seeking
           leave to enter or remain, but criminality is not  one  of  them.
           Subsection 117B(6)  is  on  its  face  free-standing,  the  only
           qualification being that the person relying on it is not  liable
           to deportation.  The list of relevant factors set out in the IDI
           guidance (para 10 above) seems  to  me  wholly  appropriate  and
           sound in law, in the context of section 117B(6) as of  paragraph
           276ADE(1)(iv).

           [18]  On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
           seems to me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider
           where the  parents,  apart  from  the  relevant  provision,  are
           expected to be, since it will normally  be  reasonable  for  the
           child to be with them.  To that extent the record of the parents
           may become indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing  to
           have a right to remain here, and having to leave.   It  is  only
           if, even on that hypothesis, it wold not be reasonable  for  the
           child to leave that the provision may give the parents  a  right
           to remain.   The  point  was  well-expressed  by  Lord  Boyd  of
           Duncansby in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
           Department 2017 SLT 1245, para 22:

                'In my opinion  before  one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
                whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
                one has to address the question, 'Why  would  the  child  be
                expected to leave the United Kingdom?'  In a  case  such  as
                this there can only be one answer: 'because the parents have
                no right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in
                any  other  way  strips  away  the  context  in  which   the
                assessment of reasonableness is being made'.

           [19]  He noted (para 21) that Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar
           point in considering the "best interests"  of  children  in  the
           context  of  section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
           Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v  Secretary  of  State
           for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [58]:

                'In my judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
                interests of the children must be made on the basis that the
                facts are as they are in the real world.  If one parent  has
                no right to remain, but the other parent does, that  is  the
                background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   If
                neither parent has the right to remain,  then  that  is  the
                background against which the assessment is conducted.   Thus
                the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable  to  expect
                the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  in
                the country of origin?'

           To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise  in  MA
           (Pakistan) [2016] 1 WLR 5093,  para  40,  I  would  respectfully
           disagree.  There is nothing  in  the  section  to  suggest  that
           "reasonableness" is to considered other than in the  real  world
           in which the children find themselves."

   17. Reference is there made to the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  MA
       (Pakistan).  In that case, Elias LJ giving the lead judgment had made
       clear  that  he  would  have  wished  to  adopt  the   interpretation
       eventually  favoured  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  but
       considered that he ought to follow the Court of Appeal's judgment  in
       MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
       Civ 450.  The approach in that latter judgment was overturned by  the
       Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).   However,  he  went  on  to  say  the
       following about the correct approach to Section  117B  (6)  whichever
       interpretation of the reasonableness test was adopted:

           "46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
           that a child has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
           significant  weight  when  carrying  out   the   proportionality
           exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published  guidance  in
           August 2015 in the form of Immigration Directorate  Instructions
           entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life:
           10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that  once  the
           seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there  need  to
           be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave  (para.  11.2.4).  These
           instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
           appeal were determined, but in my view they merely confirm  what
           is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After  such  a
           period of time the child will have put down roots and  developed
           social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is
           likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required to leave
           the UK. That may be less so when the  children  are  very  young
           because the focus of their lives will be on their families,  but
           the disruption becomes more serious as they get older. Moreover,
           in these cases there must be a very strong expectation that  the
           child's best interests will be to remain  in  the  UK  with  his
           parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
           primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

           47.   Even if we were applying the  narrow  reasonableness  test
           where the focus is on the child alone, it would not in  my  view
           follow that leave must be  granted  whenever  the  child's  best
           interests are  in  favour  of  remaining.  I  reject  Mr  Gill's
           submission that  the  best  interests  assessment  automatically
           resolves the reasonableness question. If Parliament  had  wanted
           the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of  the  leave
           application, it  would  have  said  so.  The  concept  of  "best
           interests" is after all a well established one. Even  where  the
           child's best  interests  are  to  stay,  it  may  still  be  not
           unreasonable to require the child to  leave.  That  will  depend
           upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in
           the UK and in the country where it is proposed he should return.
           What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct  and
           immigration history of the parents.

       48. In EV (Phillipines) Lord Justice  Christopher  Clarke  explained
           how a tribunal should apply the proportionality test where wider
           public interest considerations are  in  play,  in  circumstances
           where the best interests of the child  dictate  that  he  should
           remain in the UK (paras. 34-37):

                '34.   In determining whether or not, in a case such as  the
                present, the need for immigration control outweighs the best
                interests of the children, it is necessary to determine  the
                relative strength of the factors which make it in their best
                interests to remain here; and also to take  account  of  any
                factors that point the other way.

                35. A decision as to  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                children will depend on a number  of  factors  such  as  (a)
                their age; (b) the length of time that they have been  here;
                (c) how long they have been in  education;  (c)  what  stage
                their education has reached; (d) to what  extent  they  have
                become distanced from the country to which  it  is  proposed
                that they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it
                may be; (f)  to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
                medical or other difficulties in adapting to  life  in  that
                country; and (g) the extent to  which  the  course  proposed
                will interfere with their family life or  their  rights  (if
                they have any) as British citizens.

                36.    In  a  sense  the  tribunal  is  concerned  with  how
                emphatic an answer falls to be given to the question: is  it
                in the best interests of the child to remain? The longer the
                child has been here, the more  advanced  (or  critical)  the
                stage of his education, the looser his ties with the country
                in question, and the more deleterious  the  consequences  of
                his return, the greater the weight that falls into one  side
                of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly in the  child's  best
                interests that he should not return, the  need  to  maintain
                immigration  control  may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
                contrast if it is in the child's best interests  to  remain,
                but only on balance (with some factors  pointing  the  other
                way), the result may be the opposite.

                37.    In the balance on the other side there  falls  to  be
                taken into account the strong weight to be given to the need
                to maintain immigration control in pursuit of  the  economic
                well-being of the country and the fact that,  ex  hypothesi,
                the  applicants  have  no   entitlement   to   remain.   The
                immigration history of the parents may also be relevant e.g.
                if they are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully.'

       49. Although this was not in fact a seven year case,  on  the  wider
           construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply
           in such a case. However, the fact that the child has been in the
           UK for seven years would need to be given significant weight  in
           the proportionality exercise for  two  related  reasons:  first,
           because of its relevance to determining the nature and  strength
           of  the  child's  best  interests;  and   second,   because   it
           establishes as a starting point that  leave  should  be  granted
           unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary."

  The Evidence

   18. Although, as I have indicated, the Appellants' cases stand  and  fall
       with that of [SN], it is necessary for me first to say  a  few  words
       about the position of the First and Second Appellants as, as was said
       in KO (Nigeria), the best interests of [SN] (and her brother) have to
       be considered in the "real world" which encompasses  the  immigration
       status of the child's parents.  In this regard, I do not consider  it
       necessary to reconsider the evidence.

   19. I take into account the history of the First and  Second  Appellants'
       stay in the UK and circumstances  in  India  as  recounted  in  their
       evidence at [3] and [4] of the Decision which led to  Judge  French's
       conclusions on this aspect:

           "[3]  In his oral evidence the first appellant [NG] said that he
           had come to the UK in 2011, together with his daughter [SN] as a
           dependent of his wife, who entered as a Tier 4  student  take  a
           business  studies  course  at  Bedford  University.   This   was
           originally expected to be a one year course.  He  accepted  that
           he knew that his expectation had to be that  he  would  have  to
           return to India at some stage.  However at the end of his wife's
           original course, she had applied for further leave to remain  to
           undertake a post-qualification studies.  This was granted  until
           2014.  He was asked as to why he had not returned to India  with
           the family, after their visas had expired in 2013.   He  replied
           that he had been  concerned  that  it  would  have  caused  [SN]
           distress.  However at that stage [SN] had only been  in  the  UK
           for 2 years, and might have found  it  stressful  to  return  to
           India.  The first appellant was then asked why, since  they  had
           not returned to India, at the end of his  wife's  first  course,
           they did not return there after  the  conclusion  of  her  post-
           qualification studies in 2014.  He said that by then, the family
           was 'settled' in the  UK.   However  when  the  visas  were  not
           expended [sic] in 2014, neither [RN] nor [SG] were permitted  to
           work, and from then on had been reliant upon charity.  It was in
           these circumstances  despite  the  first  appellant's  expressed
           reluctance to return to India, the family had booked tickets  to
           fly there on 30/08/16.  It  had  taken  that  long,  because  of
           delays in obtaining new  Indian  passports.   In  the  end  they
           changed their minds, because of concern about how [SN] would  be
           affected.  He said that he was still in contact with his  mother
           and sister in India, but claimed that if he returned  to  India,
           he would be unable to live with is  mother  because  the  former
           family home had been repossessed. He  confirmed  that  he  spoke
           Hindi and Punjabi but claimed  that  [SN]  spoke  only  English,
           which as surprising because she had attended school in India and
           did not come to the UK until she was 6.  He  said  that  he  had
           worked as a teacher in India, as had his wife,  but  she  was  a
           degree entrant into teaching.  He conceded that his  wife  might
           be able to find  employment  in  India,  although  he  expressed
           concern that potential employers might query the gap in her work
           history.  He said that aside  from  teaching,  he  had  some  IT
           knowledge.  [RN], told me that his wife had a sister  in  India,
           but they were not on the best of terms,  because  his  wife  had
           converted from Hinduism to Christianity when  she  married  him.
           He said that in the UK they had no association with  the  Indian
           community.  All their friends were English.  He was asked as  to
           why his wife had chosen to come to  the  UK  to  study  business
           studies, when she already had a degree in India, and bearing  in
           mind that a business studies qualification would be unlikely  to
           advance her career.  He replied that he thought that a UK degree
           would have more status than one gained in India.

           [4]   [SG] (the second appellant) had a degree in India and  had
           worked as a teacher.  She agreed  that  she  would  be  able  to
           obtain a teaching job if she returned to India but said that she
           thought that returning to India would be  disruptive  for  [SN].
           However [SG] said that [SN] would be able  to  have  appropriate
           medical treatment  in  India  and  would  have  access  to  good
           education.  There was an issue about [SN]'s language skills.  It
           was accepted by her however that  [SN]  had  learned  Hindi  and
           Punjabi,  when  she  lived  in  India.   The  First  and  Second
           Appellant had continued to speak to those languages  within  the
           household.  [SG] conceded that [SN]  might  be  able  to  become
           fluent in those languages again.  She  was  asked  what  contact
           [SN] had with family in India and she replied  that  [SN]  would
           speak with her grandmother on the  telephone.   There  was  also
           evidence from Reverend O'Neill, who said  that  the  family  had
           been attending his church for the past 3  years,  and  they  had
           been involved in various community projects."

   20. Judge French considered the parents' position at [6] of the Decision.
        That paragraph of the Decision was not challenged by the  Appellants
       and I therefore adopt what is there said as follows:

           "I was satisfied there were not any insurmountable obstacles  to
           the family returning to India.  The first and second  appellants
           had lived most of their lives in India and  were  familiar  with
           life there.  They both spoke the language.  The first  appellant
           admitted that he continued to have family living there, and that
           both he and his wife would be likely to obtain employment there.
            He had worked as a teacher and had expertise in IT.   His  wife
           had a degree and also her qualification in business studies.  It
           was my view that both [RN] and [SG]  would  be  able  to  obtain
           lucrative employment.  In the circumstances I concluded that the
           first and second appellants could maintain and  accommodate  the
           children, whether or not their families could assist.  I saw  no
           reason why it would not be possible to continue family  life  in
           India.  I reflected on the fact that Article 8 does not give  an
           automatic right to pursue family life in the UK."

   21. As is apparent from the foregoing, there  are  no  obstacles  to  the
       First and Second Appellants returning to India.  They would  be  able
       to find work.  They both speak the languages spoken  in  India.  They
       have at least some family members  with  whom  they  retain  contact.
       There  are  certainly  no  very  significant   obstacles   to   their
       integration in their home country which would enable them to succeed.
        They have no basis of stay within the Rules independently of [SN].

   22. I turn then to the evidence as to the impact of return  to  India  on
       [SN].  As will be noted from the above extracts  from  the  Decision,
       [SN] did not leave India until she was  aged  six  years.   She  will
       therefore have some  appreciation  of  the  customs  there.   It  was
       conceded that she speaks the languages spoken in  India  as  she  was
       educated there in her early years, she  continues  to  speak  to  her
       grandmother who still lives in India (and I very  much  doubt  speaks
       fluent English) and her parents speak those languages at home.  It is
       however her early years of  education  and  her  experiences  of  the
       system in India which lie at the heart of the  reason  why  she  says
       that she cannot return to that country.

   23. [SN]'s evidence is to be found in a handwritten letter  from  her  at
       [AB/13-17].  She provides the following evidence about her transition
       from school in India to education in the UK as follows:

           "My first ever school was ... lower  school  (Bedford  ...).   I
           loved the school because everyone was so nice, kind and  caring.
           I was really scared well because in India in my nursery all  the
           teachers were very horrible to us.  We had to  bring  8-10  very
           heavy text books in our bags to carry to school every single day
           and if we ever did something wrong they would get a cane and hit
           our hands.  But if we did something very bad they would send  us
           out and would have to wait for these two ladies to come and they
           would take us away and beat us up  and  then  take  us  back  to
           lesson.  We would be crying so much because of the pain we  went
           through.  I remember this because it was one of the  most  worst
           times in India school.  I don't really  remember  anything  else
           from school in India other than the fact I used to cry endlessly
           every morning in school.  So my first day of England school  was
           pretty terrifying because I didn't want to go through  all  that
           pain again but to my surprise it was my best school time every."

   24. I appreciate that, at the young age that [SN] was before she came  to
       the UK, she was probably impressionable and that bad experiences  may
       have stayed with her and been exaggerated over  time  into  something
       much worse than the reality.  It may also be the case  that  she  was
       simply unlucky  enough  to  be  put  into  a  school  with  a  strong
       disciplinary regime which went beyond what is acceptable.  I  do  not
       suggest for a moment that I accept that all schools  in  India  treat
       children in the way which [SN]  describes.    However,  that  is  the
       memory which has stuck in [SN]'s mind and explains  her  reaction  to
       possible return to India.

   25. In that regard, [SN] describes in her letter how she  felt  when  she
       was faced with return to her home country:

           "But before we moved to Luton. We were at Bedford...towards  the
           end of the summer holidays my parents told me had to go back  to
           India my heart stopped for a second  making  sure  I  heard  the
           right things.  I was shocked after all the things we did to stay
           here we had to go back to India.  I didn't like  that  place  at
           all the food, clothes and environment also  the  climate.   That
           was the place I had to go.  My heart  sank  to  the  bottom.   I
           blinked a few times to check if  it  was  a  bad  dream  but  it
           wasn't.  Putting a child where they didn't like was like ripping
           wings of a butterfly so he/she can't fly or cutting of the lions
           mane to make him lose his pride or it felt  like  you  were  put
           into a horror movie that was never ending.  My parents had tears
           in their eyes but were holding them  back.   Before  I  knew  it
           tears started to tumble down my cheeks one by  one.   I  had  to
           leave the place that made me feel like home.  The same  place  I
           actually learned things at school rather than crying my eyes out
           until they were sore.  The place  I  made  friends.   The  place
           where I would plan my future.  The place that made me  see  good
           sides of things.  The place that made me who I am today and that
           place was getting ripped away just  shattered  me  like  when  a
           hammer just hit a glass hard as possible.  Mostly I felt so  bad
           for my brother because he  was  born  here  he  didn't  have  to
           experience to schools in India and I'd do anything in  my  power
           to make sure he never went through a horrible time.  He  doesn't
           even know how to speak our language nor do I.  He would have  to
           start everything from scratch.  I  was  crying  and  crying.   I
           stopped eating.  I had  temperature  and  I  was  sick  so  many
           times."

   26. I realise of course that this letter  is  written  by  a  child  aged
       thirteen years who is likely to be more affected by  change  than  an
       adult in the  same  situation  and  is  likely  to  react  with  more
       intensity and some exaggeration of her emotions.  A child of that age
       may adapt over time and her instant reaction to what I  accept  would
       be a significant change for her is not necessarily any  indicator  of
       how she would fare if she was actually removed with her  parents  and
       brother.  However, in this case, the impact of the threat of  removal
       has manifested itself in mental health  problems.   The  evidence  of
       those problems is contained in two letters dated 6 December 2018  and
       18 March 2019 written respectively by Natalia Switon, Systemic Family
       Psychotherapist, and Dr  March  Van  Roosmalen,  Consultant  Clinical
       Psychologist.

   27. I turn first to the letter of Natalia Switon which is  the  first  in
       time.  Her letter follows a meeting which she had with [SN]  and  her
       father on 29 November 2018.  She records the following:

           "[RN] explained that  the  parents  have  been  concerned  about
           [SN]'s low mood for a few years,  however  particularly  in  the
           last year.  They have noticed that she  has  lost  concentration
           when she is studying.  She has lost weight a few months ago  due
           to appetite problems.   She  has  been  tearful  often  but  she
           doesn't like to talk about the reasons for her distress.   Also,
           they know that told her grandmother that she is questioning  the
           purpose of her life and worries that she might be suicidal.

           [SN] scored her mood at 5 out of 10, on a scale  where  0  means
           low mood and 10 feeling happy.  She said at school her mood goes
           up slightly, as she tries to forget about  the  family  problems
           there.  There are times when her mood is much lower.   At  those
           times she has had thoughts of taking her life.  She said she has
           such thoughts rarely, maybe once in 2-4 months.   She  tries  to
           avoid them.  She said she doesn't think she would act on them as
           thoughts about her family would stop  her.   I  understood  that
           worries about the family future  trigger  these  thoughts.   She
           didn't want to elaborate on whether she has any  plans  of  what
           she could do if she was feeling very low.

           [SN] denied ever self-harming.

           She reported problems falling asleep.   As  learning  is  really
           important to her she tries to go to bed early - at around  8.45-
           9pm, however falls asleep around 10pm.  She often  lies  in  bed
           and thinks about her worries.   She  said  during  the  day  she
           imagines she is in a fantasy world where everything  is  ok  and
           she is like her peers, but at night when it is quiet the worries
           come rushing back.   [RN]  said  she  at  times  needs  parental
           'counselling' to be able to fall asleep.

           [SN] said she often doesn't have appetite to eat.  [RN]  said  a
           few months ago she lost some weight due  to  this,  however  put
           some back since.  Now she has periods of eating less and periods
           of eating ok."

       There then appears to be a page missing as the second page starts mid-
       sentence.  Ms Switon then sets out her treatment plan which  includes
       recommendations that sharp objects and  medication  are  kept  locked
       away in case [SN] should become suicidal and that she should be taken
       to A&E immediately if there are immediate concerns about her  safety.
       Ms Switon recommends that [RN]  seek  support  from  Luton  Wellbeing
       Service.

   28. The letter from Dr  Van  Roosmalen  indicates  that  CAMHS  had  been
       supporting [SN] and her family since late 2018.  The service provides
       support for young  people  with  moderate  to  severe  mental  health
       problems.  He reports as follows:

           "[SN]'s mental health has deteriorated over the past  year,  and
           particularly since November 2018, when she was referred  to  our
           service.  She has lost her appetite, is  sleeping  very  poorly,
           and is experiencing suicidal thoughts and thoughts of self-harm.
            She has lost interest in her normal daily  activities  and  has
           become withdrawn, quiet and listless, with  low  energy  levels.
           She becomes frustrated and  angry  easily  and  becomes  tearful
           quickly and regularly.

           The deterioration in her mental health seems directly related to
           the unresolved legal status  of  her  and  her  family  in  this
           country over a considerable period of four years, which has  had
           an insidious and cumulative impact on her  mental  health  which
           over the four months has deteriorated significantly.  She admits
           that her suicidal thoughts are related to the threat of her  and
           her family being deported back to India.  The  constellation  of
           mental health symptoms indicates the  presences  of  depression,
           together with thoughts of self-harm and suicidal ideation.   She
           is due to have a psychiatric assessment on 26th March 2019  with
           my colleague Dr Mahesh Kulkarni, Child &  Adolescent  Consultant
           Psychiatrist."

       Although a follow-up appointment is  there  indicated,  there  is  no
       further medical evidence and no application was made to  adduce  more
       recent evidence.

   29. [RN]'s statement signed on 25 March 2019, says  the  following  about
       [SN]'s condition from January 2018 onwards when it appeared that  the
       family would have to return to India:

           "[24] After that day, [SN]  started  behaving  strangely  again.
           Even though we didn't mention it to her but she is  fully  aware
           now because of her age, as what is happening and sensed that  in
           a few weeks time we could be going back to India.  She has  lost
           her appetite and has become  very  moody  and  temperamental  as
           well.  She has  lost  weight  too,  we  have  noticed.   We  are
           observing her now and might take her to the doctors  soon.   Her
           mental health is not good.  She told her mum once that  I  can't
           see the purpose of my life.  I want to  go  to  Jesus.   We  are
           extremely worried about her physical, mental  and  psychological
           state.  These suicidal thoughts have started creeping up in  her
           mind.  We really dread that refusal this time could really break
           her down and render severe psychological effect on her.   Please
           refer to her letter.

           [25]  On 7 Feb 2018, she fell off at school  while  getting  off
           trampoline  in  the  PE  class  and  badly  sprained  her  ankle
           thankfully no broken bones.  She said that she is  finding  hard
           to focus and concentrate on her  studies  and  other  day-to-day
           activities because of the fear in heart all the time.  She could
           not go to school for two days because of her physical and mental
           stress before they  broke  for  half  term.   This  grieved  and
           frustrated her even  more.   She  never  misses  her  school  in
           present or in past from her school, unless otherwise out of  her
           control.  It's very worrying  and  heart  breaking  to  see  our
           beautiful, young,  so  intelligent  girl  falling  prey  to  our
           current situation.  Seeing this is really so heart breaking  for
           us parents."

   30. In spite of her mental health problems, [RN]'s  statement  and  other
       documents in the bundle suggest  that,  fortunately,  those  problems
       have not so far impacted on her educational achievements.  [RN]  says
       at [27] of his statement that [SN]  wants  to  be  a  doctor  and  he
       believes she has the potential to achieve that goal.   He  says  that
       her teachers "commend her  for  her  sincerity,  diligence  and  hard
       work".  That is borne out by the certificates, reports,  e-mails  and
       commendations in the Appellants' bundle.  As  well  as  her  academic
       work, the documents also show that she  is  talented  at  sports  and
       participates in other extra-curricular activities.   The  reports  in
       the bundle also indicate that she has a lot of friends and is a happy
       child.  The evidence confirms her  positive  attitude  to  schooling.
       Those reports also show how [SN]'s academic performance has  improved
       over time.  The reports which report on her behaviour at school  end,
       however, in 2014 and it is therefore difficult to assess  from  those
       whether and to what extent her attitude  and  performance  have  been
       impacted by the threat of removal more recently.

   31. Even the letters from [SN]'s schoolfriends at [AB/93-99]  comment  on
       her commitment to her studies.  They  also  indicate  the  extent  to
       which [SN] considers herself to be British - they  say  for  instance
       that she speaks with a British accent and likes eating  only  British
       food.  The letters also confirm the upset felt by [SN]  about  having
       to return to India.

   32. Although [AN] is not a qualifying child, I also have to consider  his
       best interests and it is therefore necessary to say  something  about
       the evidence in relation to him.  His school  progress  reports  also
       show that he is a bright child who is performing  above  expectations
       for a child of his age.  Some of the letters  also  speak  about  his
       attachment to the UK and to his schooling.

   33. The family are committed Christians and a number of  letters  in  the
       bundle attest to their faith and contribution  to  church  and  other
       community activities.   I also note what [RN] says in  his  statement
       about his and his wife's wish to work if they are permitted  to  stay
       and how, since they have been prevented from working here, they  have
       committed to doing voluntary work.

   34. The bundle contains a large number of letters  of  support  with  the
       common theme that the family make a valuable  contribution  to  their
       community, are well-mannered and that the children are settled in the
       UK, doing well at school and would be upset by having  to  return  to
       India.  They would find it difficult to adjust to life there.

  Discussion and Conclusions

   35. I begin with consideration of the children's best interests.  [AN] is
       now aged six years.  [SN] is aged nearly fourteen  years.   Both  are
       still of an age where they require the care of their parents.  It  is
       therefore self-evidently in their best interests to remain with their
       parents. The issue is whether their best interests are  served  by  a
       return to their country of nationality or by remaining in the UK.

   36. [AN] was born in the UK.  He has never lived in India.  He apparently
       has never visited that country either.  However, both his parents are
       of Indian nationality and could help him to adapt to what would be at
       first a strange country.  Moreover, the family have  other  relatives
       in India including the children's grandmother who could help them  to
       assimilate to  the  culture.   The  evidence  is  that  the  children
       continue to have regular telephone contact with her.   I  have  found
       based on the previous evidence and findings that both  children  have
       some familiarity with the languages spoken in India via that  contact
       and that their parents still speak those languages.  [AN] is not  yet
       at a crucial point in his education. The evidence shows  that  he  is
       doing well at school but, I find, could  do  so  if  he  returned  to
       India.   There is limited evidence  as  to  any  friendships  he  has
       formed independently of the family unit which is  unsurprising  given
       his age.  His best interests are to remain in the  UK  as  a  country
       with which he is more familiar and where he has lived for  the  first
       six years of his life, but only marginally so.

   37. The position in relation to [SN] is  very  different.   Although  she
       spent the first six years of her life in India and will therefore  be
       more familiar with the culture and way of life  there,  she  has  bad
       memories of being in education there and the evidence shows that  the
       thought of having to return to India is having a negative  effect  on
       her mental health.  I accept that the evidence shows  that,  to  some
       extent, it is the development of anxiety about return over time which
       has caused a deterioration in her mental health.  I also accept  that
       the reality of return may be different to her expectation.   She  was
       after all only six years old when  she  came  to  the  UK.   Her  own
       personality as well as the situation  in  India  is  likely  to  have
       changed in that time.  She  may  also  be  exaggerating  the  reality
       (although I do not suggest deliberately).  The evidence  particularly
       her letter indicates that she is  an  emotional  and  emotive  child.
       However, there is no doubt that her mental health has been negatively
       affected by the prospect of return.  Moreover, she is at a  stage  of
       her education which is critical to her future  career  plans  as  she
       will be selecting her course subjects for  her  first  set  of  major
       examinations in a few years' time.  She apparently wishes to become a
       doctor.  She is doing well at school  here  and  has  also  developed
       close friendships.  Her best interests strongly favour her  remaining
       in the UK.

   38. The  children's  best  interests  are  a  primary  although  not  the
       paramount  consideration.   I  turn  then  to  consider  whether  the
       decision to remove the family is proportionate.  As  I  have  already
       indicated, the answer to that question lies in the position  of  [SN]
       and whether it is reasonable to expect her to return to India.  If it
       is not, then she would  be  entitled  to  remain  applying  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.  Her parents would then  be  entitled  to
       remain applying Section 117B (6).

   39. I do not repeat what I say above about [SN]'s  best  interests  which
       are strongly to remain in the UK.  I have regard to what is  said  in
       KO (Nigeria) concerning the need to assess  [SN]'s  position  in  the
       "real world", that is to say  by  considering  where  [SN]'s  parents
       would be if not for her.  I have already adopted the findings made in
       the First-tier Tribunal concerning the family's situation.  There are
       no very significant obstacles to  their  return  to  India.   Indeed,
       leaving aside the effect of return on [SN], her parents  accept  that
       they ought to and probably would return to  India.   They  have  made
       arrangements to do so in the past, but  then  postponed  that  course
       because of the upset caused to [SN].  Neither parent has the right to
       remain in the UK.  They have had the right to do so in the  past  but
       always on a precarious basis.  The family has had no right to  be  in
       the UK for over four years.  If I were considering only the  position
       of the parents, therefore, there  would  be  no  question,  but  that
       removal is the appropriate  course.   The  maintenance  of  effective
       immigration control weighs in  favour  of  the  public  interest  and
       against the First and Second Appellants as a result of their unlawful
       presence and  inability  to  meet  the  Rules.   As  I  have  already
       indicated, the best interests of the  children  are  to  remain  with
       their parents.

   40. However, against that position, I have to weigh the reasonableness of
       [SN] returning to India.  As was said in MA (Pakistan), the fact that
       [SN] has been in the UK for seven years  must  be  given  significant
       weight in the  proportionality  assessment  and  strong  reasons  are
       needed to refuse her leave.

   41. Although the First and Second  Appellants  have  a  poor  immigration
       history more recently, they came here  lawfully  with  [SN]  and  had
       leave for the first few years.  It is also to their credit that  they
       gave serious consideration to returning to India  after  their  leave
       expired.  There was some delay after their leave expired  and  before
       they made plans to return.  That was apparently  caused  by  problems
       with passports.  They did, however, go so far as to buy tickets to go
       back.  It was only as a result of [SN]'s reaction to return that they
       cancelled those tickets and remained for a further period unlawfully.

   42. Other than overstaying their leave, none of the  Appellants  has  any
       criminal history.  Although the public interest weighs  against  them
       due to their unlawful presence, there is no other  reason  to  refuse
       them leave.  They speak English.   They  have  not  had  recourse  to
       public funds.  The First  and  Second  Appellants  have  expressed  a
       strong desire to work if given permission to do so.  They have filled
       their spare time whilst not able  to  work  by  contributing  to  the
       community through voluntary work for charitable causes.  There are no
       strong reasons to refuse  [SN]  leave  on  account  of  the  family's
       immigration history.

   43. In short, therefore, having regard to  the  best  interests  of  [SN]
       which strongly favour her remaining in the UK, that she has lived  in
       the UK for seven years from the age of six, has settled into life  in
       the UK and her education here, is now at  a  critical  point  in  her
       schooling and has been negatively affected mentally by  the  prospect
       of return to her home country, I conclude that it is  not  reasonable
       for [SN] to return to India.  It follows  that  she  is  entitled  to
       remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.

   44. The First  and  Second  Appellants  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       parental relationship with [SN].  I have concluded  that  it  is  not
       reasonable for her to return to India.  It follows that the First and
       Second Appellants are entitled to remain applying Section 117B (6).

   45. It is in [AN]'s best interests to remain with  his  parents  wherever
       they are living.  At his young age, he needs their care.  It  follows
       that it would be disproportionate to remove him also.

CONCLUSION

   46. For the above reasons, the appeals succeed.  The Fourth Appellant  is
       entitled to leave to remain  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
       Rules as she has  spent  seven  years  in  the  UK,  and  it  is  not
       reasonable to expect her to return to India.  For  that  reason,  the
       First and Second Appellants succeed applying section 117B(6) as  they
       are in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with [SN].  The
       Third Appellant is their younger child, aged  six  years.   His  best
       interests are to remain with his  parents.   It  would  therefore  be
       disproportionate to remove him.  I therefore allow all the appeals.



DECISION

I allow all appeals on the  basis  that  removal  of  the  Appellants  would
breach Section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 (based on Article 8 ECHR).

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 19 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
