
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16041/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|And given extempore on               |On 16th September 2019               |
|3rd September 2019                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Knightsbridge Solicitors and Mr Brown of Counsel
                    appears on their behalf
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan who  was  born  on  4th  March,
    1979.  He entered the United Kingdom on 4th August 2014 with leave as a
    student until 31st October, 2005.  That leave was later extended on two
    occasions and finally until 31st January, 2010.

2.   On 28th January 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis  of  his  family  and  private  life.   The
    application was refused on 9th June 2016 and the appellant appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Peter John S White at Taylor House on 31st January, 2019.

3.   The judge had before him medical reports indicating that the  appellant
    was suffering from a life  threatening  illness  and  required  regular
    dialysis.   The  judge  failed  to  deal  with  the  question  of   the
    appellant's integration on return to Pakistan in the terms of paragraph
    276ADE.  The judge was concerned that the matter was a new matter  that
    had not previously been raised with the respondent,  but  as  Mr  Bates
    pointed out to me this, was something that could have been  dealt  with
    either by him speaking to another Presenting Officer in the building on
    the day of the hearing or simply by standing  over  the  matter  for  a
    brief adjournment so that the  Home  Office  could  send  a  Presenting
    Officer on the next occasion.

4.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has materially  erred
    in  law  and  I  set  aside  his  determination.   The  appellant   has
    effectively been denied a fair hearing and I remit it to the First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing before a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Peter John  S  White.   An  Urdu  speaking  interpreter  will  be
    required for the hearing and two and a half hours should be allowed.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                Date: 10th September 2019
