
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16902/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 March 2018                              |On 10 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Miss Barton, instructed by Sabz Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, PA, is a female citizen  of  Chile  who  was
    born in 1975.  She entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in June 2015
    and in August 2015 married her  British  partner,  JW.   The  appellant
    applied for leave to remain as the  spouse  of  JW  who  is  a  British
    citizen.  Her application was refused by a decision of  the  respondent
    dated 31 March 2016.  She appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Turnock) which, in a decision promulgated on 10 July 2017, allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds (Article  8  ECHR).   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge accepted that the appellant and JW had formed a  relationship
    at a time when JW's immigration status  was  precarious.   However,  JW
    suffers from schizophrenia.  He is unable to work.  He receives  a  war
    disablement pension and Personal Independence Payment (PIP).  The judge
    accepted that the appellant and JW would be able to  live  together  in
    the United Kingdom without  recourse  to  public  funds.   The  parties
    accept  that  the  human  rights  appeal  turned  on  the  question  of
    insurmountable obstacles.  The Secretary of State had submitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal that JW, upon arrival in Chile, would  be  able  to
    rely on private health insurance  and  that  there  would  be  adequate
    healthcare facilities available for him.  The judge accepted [45]  that
    there was, "no evidence  produced  by  the  appellant  with  regard  to
    healthcare provision in Chile nor with regard to  the  availability  of
    the medication he is currently receiving.   I  find  that  although  it
    would be possible for him to obtain  insurance,  it  is  unlikely  that
    there  would  be  adequate  support  in  respect  of  the  pre-existing
    condition which Mr Walker would have to declare in seeking  insurance".
    The judge went on at [48] to make the following finding:

         "I conclude that, there would be  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the
         couple continuing their married life in Chile.  I am satisfied,  on
         the basis of the medical evidence produced by the appellant that Mr
         Walker is likely to face very significant difficulties in regard to
         his health in the event that he was obliged to relocate  to  Chile.
         He cannot speak Spanish and would not be able to look for  or  find
         work.  He would lose continuity of care and he  has  a  history  of
         serious mental health issues.  I am satisfied that the consequences
         would be  a  serious  adverse  impact  on  his  mental  health.   I
         conclude, therefore, that he does  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         [Immigration] Rules."

 3. The  judge  acknowledged  [49]  that  the  appeal  was  not  under  the
    Immigration Rules but in respect of Article 8 ECHR.  He went on to  set
    out at length the various relevant legal provisions  including  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act (as amended).  He also cited Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC
    11 [59].

 4. There was discussion at the Upper Tribunal hearing as to whether or not
    there had been  evidence  which  might  indicate  that  the  particular
    medication which JW receives is available in Chile.  That investigation
    appears to me to be pointless.  The medical evidence does  not  address
    the question of the  availability  of  what  appeared  to  be  standard
    schizophrenia medicines  in  Chile  nor  has  the  Secretary  of  State
    produced any evidence although an assertion  is  made  in  the  refusal
    letter [page 3 of 8] that the medicine would be available.  I  have  to
    say that I consider it highly unlikely that such medication  would  not
    be available in Chile albeit that JW would have to pay for  it.   There
    is, however, no contradiction in the judge's findings at [45] and [48].
     The judge correctly observed  at  [45]  that  there  was  no  evidence
    regarding the availability of the medication but that was not the basis
    upon which he founded his decision that there would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to prevent the couple continuing their married life in Chile.
     Rather, the judge refers at [38] to the "loss of continuity  of  care"
    and to the evidence (which was before him from JW's doctor) that  there
    would be a serious impact on the mental health  of  a  person  who  has
    suffered serious mental health issues for some time.

 5. I find that the finding which I have identified above was open  to  the
    judge on the evidence.  It was clear from  the  medical  evidence  that
    there had been problems with JW taking the necessary medication in  the
    past and, whilst I find that the appellant  has  not  proved  that  the
    medication would not be available  in  Chile,  it  is  clear  from  the
    medical evidence that the  mere  fact  of  relocating  to  an  entirely
    foreign jurisdiction would, in the view of  the  medical  professionals
    assisting JW in the United Kingdom, be likely to  have  a  serious  and
    adverse effect upon his mental health.  I am satisfied that it was open
    to the judge, on the evidence, to reach his finding at [48].  I do  not
    say that that finding was inevitable; indeed,  another  judge,  on  the
    same facts, may have reached a different conclusion.  However, that  is
    not the point.  The judge's finding cannot  be  described  as  perverse
    whilst the judge has reached that finding by considering  the  relevant
    evidence and applying relevant jurisprudence.  The judge has not  given
    excessive or inadequate weight to particular items of evidence; indeed,
    I find his analysis in general to be even-handed and thorough.   It  is
    not the role of the Upper Tribunal to interfere with  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  which  has  had  the  advantage  of  hearing  the
    evidence and considering it in considerable depth.  The availability or
    lack of availability of particular medication  is,  as  I  have  stated
    above, not a relevant feature in this case whilst the medical  evidence
    does support the judge's  findings.   In  consequence,  I  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
