
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16681/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|conference on 12 May 2021            |on 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                                   ALI CIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     No appearance
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 07 May  2019  to
    refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R.  Sullivan  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 04 February 2020. Her reasons  were  summarised
    at [2-4] of the Upper Tribunal's error of law decision  promulgated  on
    03 March 2021 (annexed). The First-tier Tribunal's findings relating to
    the immigration rules were preserved. The  only  issue  identified  for
    remaking was the potential  impact  on  the  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8 of the respondent's delay between 2002-2006 in  deciding  the
    appellant's marriage application, and whether it might have  prejudiced
    his chance to apply for settlement before his marriage broke  down,  as
    he claimed, in 2006.

3.   The appellant did not attend the error of  law  hearing.  Mr  Ward,  of
    James and Co. Solicitors, argued that the case should be listed  for  a
    resumed hearing to allow the appellant to attend to give  evidence  and
    to produce further evidence  relating  to  this  issue.  The  case  was
    adjourned and a resumed hearing listed.

4.   The respondent filed and served further evidence by  email  on  07  May
    2021. The evidence included a copy of a letter dated 11 May 2006 asking
    the appellant to provide updated evidence to show that the marriage was
    subsisting before a decision was  made  in  relation  to  the  marriage
    application. The  respondent  also  filed  copies  of  her  GCID  notes
    covering the period from 10 May 2006 to 13 February 2007.  On  12  July
    2006 the notes record that the appellant sent letters and utility bills
    to show that he was still co-habiting with  his  wife.  Based  on  this
    evidence he was granted 12 months leave to remain until 18 July 2007.

5.   On 20 December 2006 the notes record:

         "Third party fax dated 12-10-2006 received from Mrs  N  Guler  that
         she is no longer with Mr Ali Cil and have been  separated  for  the
         past 3 years and been in the court since March 2006.  Now  divorced
         and he trying for a British passport by false  information  to  his
         lawyer."

6.   On 05 February 2007 the notes record:

         "Pls see previouse (sic)  cid  notes.  It  appears  that  applicant
         acquired LTR by deception. As applicant  leave  is  less  than  six
         months therefore unable to curtail leave, but informed WICU. Please
         do not grant FLTR with out off file. (sic)"

7.   On 13 February 2007 the notes record:

         "Please see previouse (sic) case notes. Applicant ex-spouse  stated
         on her fax dated 12.10.06 that they were separated for  last  three
         years and divorced. It appears LTR gained by  deception.  Pls  take
         action and removed (sic) under setion (sic) 10 of the 1999 Act,  as
         amended for having gained leave by deception."

8.   In light of this evidence the appellant's  legal  representative  wrote
    to the Upper Tribunal on 12 May 2021 to say:

         "We advised that having receive (sic) the further  evidence  served
         on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  we  are  instructed  by  the
         Appellant to offer not (sic) further evidence or  submissions  this
         matter.

         We would ask that the Tribunal re-make the decision on the basis of
         the evidence and submissions already filed."

Decision and reasons

9.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to private  and
    family life. However, it is not an absolute right and can be interfered
    with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law  that  the
    state has a right to control immigration and that rules  governing  the
    entry and residence of people into the country are "in accordance  with
    the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference with the  right
    to private or family life must be for a legitimate reason and should be
    reasonable and proportionate.

10.  Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ('NIAA
    2002') applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to  determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a  person's
    right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention.

11.  The appellant does not meet the  20  year  long  residence  requirement
    contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules nor  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The First-tier Tribunal  judge
    found that there would not  be  'very  significant  obstacles'  to  his
    integration in northern Cyprus given that he continues to have familial
    connections there and is capable of working to support himself.

12.  The appellant says that he has lived in the UK since 2002. No  evidence
    has been produced as to his English language ability although there  is
    some evidence to suggest that he has worked without permission  in  the
    UK and is capable of supporting himself.  However,  those  factors  are
    neutral in the balancing exercise. Little evidence has been produced to
    indicate the strength of any ties he might have developed in the UK. In
    any event, little weight can be placed on his private life when it  has
    been developed at a time when his status was precarious or unlawful.

13.  The appellant made an in time application for leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of his marriage at the end of 2002.  The  respondent  delayed  in
    making a decision on the application until 2006, but the evidence shows
    that by that stage the appellant had been separated from his  wife  for
    three years and may have been divorced. Despite being asked to do so by
    the First-tier Tribunal judge, and indicating  that  he  would  produce
    evidence in this appeal, the appellant has never confirmed the date  of
    the divorce. A reasonable inference can be drawn from  his  failure  to
    produce such easily obtainable evidence i.e. that it is likely that  he
    was divorced before he was granted leave and he  wanted  to  avoid  the
    fact becoming known.

14.  Although the Upper Tribunal does  not  have  a  copy  of  the  evidence
    submitted in response to the letter dated 11 May  2006,  the  appellant
    has offered no  evidence  in  response  the  allegation  that  he  used
    deception in the marriage application. I am  satisfied  that  the  GCID
    notes are sufficient to discharge the respondent's  burden  of  proving
    that he falsely claimed to be in a subsisting marriage in 2006, when in
    fact the relationship had broken down three years before. In  light  of
    the evidence produced by the respondent there is nothing to  show  that
    the delay in decision making  prejudiced  the  appellant's  chances  of
    settlement. The information received from his former wife suggests that
    the relationship broke down sometime in 2003, less than  a  year  after
    the marriage application was made.

15.  Far from creating a compelling circumstances that  might  outweigh  the
    public interest in  maintaining  an  effective  system  of  immigration
    control, the fact that the appellant used deception in 2006 is a matter
    that  lends  weight  to  the  public  interest  in  removing   him   in
    circumstances where he has remained in the UK without  leave  for  many
    years and does not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules.  It
    is unclear why the respondent did not take action to remove him in 2007
    or whether the appellant absconded to avoid detection. Nevertheless, he
    remained in the UK in the knowledge that he had no permission to do  so
    once the leave obtained by deception expired on 18 July 2007. No  other
    compelling or compassionate circumstances have been identified. For the
    reasons given above I conclude that  removal  would  not  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  right  to  private
    life under Article 8 of the European Convention.

16.  I have no doubt that the  appellant's  legal  representative  acted  in
    good faith on the instructions that he was given. The appellant must be
    aware that his obfuscation on the issue of his  marriage  and  divorce,
    and the pursuance of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal on  this  point,
    has wasted hearing time and public resources. It is a  matter  for  the
    respondent to decide what steps she takes next, and how quickly, but if
    the appellant were to make any other applications for leave  to  remain
    no doubt his conduct will be taken into account.

17.  I conclude that removal would not be unlawful under section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.



DECISION

The appeal is DISMISSED on human rights grounds


Signed   M. Canavan    Date 13 May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email


ANNEX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16681/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by              |Decision Promulgated                 |
|video conference 11 February 2021 (V)|                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                   ALI CIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P. Ward of James & Co. Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 07 May  2019  to
    refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  R.  Sullivan  ('the  judge')  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 04 February 2020. The judge  listed
    a number of facts that she accepted [14].  She  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant entered the UK on 03 July 2002 with a  visa  that  was  valid
    until 28 December 2002 (the decision states 2012 but  this  must  be  a
    typographical error). The appellant married in the United Kingdom on 11
    December 2002 when he was  only  18  years  old.  He  made  an  in-time
    application for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his  marriage.  The
    respondent accepted that there was a delay in deciding the application.
    The appellant was granted leave to remain on 18 July 2006 until 18 July
    2007.  First, the judge noted that the delay most likely led to a  more
    entrenched private life in the United Kingdom. Second, it also  delayed
    the start of the two-year probationary period before he could apply for
    Indefinite Leave to Remain. Third, the delay denied  the  appellant  of
    his passport so that he could not travel to maintain ties  with  family
    and friends in Northern Cyprus [14(d)].  The  judge  acknowledged  that
    there was some force in the submission that if the 2002 application had
    been considered within a reasonable period of time it was  likely  that
    the appellant would have completed the two-year probationary period  as
    a spouse and would have been eligible to apply for settlement. She made
    no findings as to how much weight she placed on this issue  given  that
    she acknowledged that the point 'had some force'. The judge only  noted
    that the appellant had not filed a copy of the decree absolute with the
    evidence [14(d)].

3.   The judge noted that the appellant's parents still lived in Cyprus  and
    observed that there was little evidence to show  the  strength  of  any
    private life ties with friends or relatives in the United Kingdom.  She
    recorded the appellant's earnings and noted that there was no  evidence
    to indicate that he had claimed public funds. She was satisfied that he
    spoke English. Whilst she accepted that he worked as a chef she was not
    satisfied that the evidence of his earnings was sufficient to show that
    he would be financially independent. She concluded the  list  of  facts
    and findings by stating that the appellant did not come within Appendix
    FM of the immigration rules  regarding  any  familial  relationship  he
    might have with siblings in the United Kingdom [14(n)].

4.   The judge found that the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  for  leave  to  remain  on  grounds  of  long
    residence because he had lived in the United Kingdom for less  than  20
    years at the date of the application [15].  She  concluded  that  there
    were no 'very significant obstacles' to  him  integrating  in  Northern
    Cyprus for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The judge took  into
    account the factors put forward on behalf of  the  appellant  but  also
    noted that he spoke Turkish,  was  educated  in  Northern  Cyprus,  and
    continued to have close family connections there. There was no evidence
    to suggest that they  would  not  be  willing  to  support  him  if  he
    returned. He had relevant experience that would assist him to find work
    in Cyprus [17]. The judge went on to  weigh  factors  relating  to  the
    public interest in  maintaining  an  effective  system  of  immigration
    control against the appellant's  personal  circumstances  but  did  not
    mention what weight she might have placed on the issue relating to  the
    potential loss of a route to settlement arising from the  Secretary  of
    State's delay in considering his application for leave to remain  as  a
    spouse [19-20]. The judge concluded that there was no evidence to  show
    the decision would lead to unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    appellant. She concluded that his removal would be proportionate [21].

5.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

      i)  The  judge  misdirected  herself  on  the  appellant's  length  of
         residence at the date of the application,  which  was  in  fact  16
         years and 27 days and not 14 years and 27 days as stated at [15].

     ii) The judge erred in failing to identify what weight to place on  the
         respondent's delay in deciding the application for leave to  remain
         as a spouse having acknowledged that there was 'some force' in  the
         submission that it may have led to him missing the opportunity  for
         settlement.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission to  appeal  on  the
    second ground only. Quite rightly, he pointed out that the first  would
    have made no material difference to the outcome  given  that  20  years
    residence is required at the date of the  application  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.

Decision and reasons

7.   Having considered the grounds of appeal and the oral  submissions  made
    by both parties  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law in relation to the narrow  issue
    identified.

8.   Many of the judge's findings were open to her to make on the  evidence.
    However, she failed to make findings relating to a material matter  and
    failed to give adequate reasons to explain how much weight  she  placed
    on other issues. Having noted at [8] that there was 'some force' in the
    submission that the delay in decision making between 2002-2006 may have
    led to a lost opportunity for settlement, the judge failed  to  explain
    what  weight  she  placed  on  the  issue  when   she   came   to   the
    proportionality assessment at [19-20].

9.   At [12] the judge noted that the appellant was given an opportunity  to
    file a copy of the decree absolute to confirm the date of  divorce.  At
    [14(e)] she observed that the appellant failed to do so but  failed  to
    make any findings as to what impact that  failure  might  have  on  the
    issue. The appellant's evidence was that his  marriage  broke  down  in
    2006 but the judge made no findings as  to  whether  she  accepted  his
    evidence  having  had  the  opportunity  to  assess   the   appellant's
    credibility at the hearing.

10.  At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal I noted that  the  application
    form contained in the respondent's bundle appeared to indicate  that  a
    copy of the decree absolute was sent with the application for leave  to
    remain. Mr Ward accepted  that  the  cover  letter  from  James  &  Co.
    Solicitors dated 07 August 2018 did not make reference  to  the  decree
    absolute in the list of enclosures and confirmed that the document  was
    not in fact sent to the respondent. The appellant  had  instructed  him
    that he made efforts to obtain a copy of the decree absolute after  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing, but he had been unable to provide  a  copy
    of the document.

11.  The judge made a bare statement that the appellant had failed  to  file
    a copy of the decree absolute but failed to explain  how  or  why  this
    might affect her assessment of the issue. Even if  the  judge  did  not
    have evidence  to  confirm  the  exact  date  of  the  divorce  it  was
    reasonable to infer  that  the  respondent  was  likely  to  have  been
    satisfied that the appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting  marriage
    when leave to remain was belatedly granted  in  July  2006.  The  judge
    failed to consider the import of this information.

12.  Mr Clarke argued that it was for the appellant to  prove  that  he  was
    still in a genuine marriage at the date he was granted leave to remain.
    On closer inspect of some of the CID notes that were available to  him,
    but  not  in  evidence,  he  accepted  that  the  respondent's  records
    indicated that there was a request for updated  evidence  before  leave
    was granted. However, he pointed out that  there  was  some  scope  for
    disingenuous information to be provided to the respondent at that  time
    if the appellant admits that the marriage broke down shortly after. The
    suggestion being that  it  might  have  broken  down  well  before  the
    appellant says.

13.  For the reasons given above I conclude that the decision  involved  the
    making of errors of law. The decision is set aside and will need to  be
    remade at a resumed hearing.  The  judge's  findings  relating  to  the
    immigration rules are  preserved.  Remaking  will  be  confined  to  an
    overall assessment of where a fair balance should be struck in relation
    to Article 8.  The  circumstances  surrounding  the  breakdown  of  the
    appellant's relationship  with  a  British  citizen  will  need  to  be
    explored in more detail and findings made on the import of the delay in
    decision making.

DIRECTIONS

14.  The parties are granted permission to  produce  up  to  date  evidence,
    which must be filed and  served  at  least  14  days  before  the  next
    hearing.

15.  The parties agreed that the decision could be remade fairly by  way  of
    a remote video hearing. The appellant speaks English and would be  able
    to give evidence without any significant impairment  by  that  mode  of
    hearing.

16.  The parties are at liberty to apply to amend  these  directions  should
    they have significant practical difficulties in complying.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and will be remade at a  resumed  hearing  in  the
Upper Tribunal

Signed   M. Canavan    Date 02 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
