

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/16976/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 September 2019                         |On 13 September 2019          |
|Prepared on 5 September 2019                |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, from Edward Alam & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  a  child,  who  is
           enrolled in full-time education in the UK.  He  entered  the  UK
           lawfully in March 2013 on a family visit visa with his  parents,
           but was left as a member of the household of his aunt and  uncle
           (in fact, the husband of the aunt) when his parents returned  to
           Bangladesh a few weeks later. On 31 May 2018 an application  was
           made for a grant of ILR as the child of settled  relatives,  but
           this was refused. Instead, a grant  of  discretionary  leave  to
           remain outside the Immigration Rules was made which  expired  on
           20 March 2018, when he was 16.
        2. The Appellant made an in-time application for a variation of his
           leave, which was refused on  31  July  2018  with  reference  to
           paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The Appellant's human
           rights appeal against that decision was heard on 7 March 2019 by
           First-tier Tribunal Judge I M Scott, and allowed in  a  decision
           promulgated on 14 June 2019.
        3. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal by a decision of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis, dated 25 July 2019, on the basis
           it was arguable the approach of the First-tier Tribunal  ["FtT"]
           to the public interest in the Appellant's removal was flawed.
        4. There is no  cross-appeal  from  the  Appellant  that  seeks  to
           challenge any of the adverse credibility findings  made  by  the
           FtT. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to the  grant
           of permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to
           Rule 15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.  Thus,
           the matter came before us.


      The findings of the FtT
        5. The Appellant entered the UK as a child of 11. He has  lived  in
           the UK ever since as a member of the household of his  aunt  and
           uncle, and he has  been  enrolled  in  full-time  education  the
           throughout. He sat his GCSEs in June 2018, and in September 2018
           enrolled with the Newham Sixth Form College on a two-year course
           that would lead to the award of Level 3 BTEC in Sports  Science;
           so he is today  at  the  mid-point  of  that  course,  about  to
           commence the second year. He is  today  17  years  old.  As  FtT
           found, and Mr Bramble accepts, the Appellant's  education  is  a
           significant part of his "private life" in the UK.
        6. As a result of the Appellant's membership of  the  household  of
           his aunt and uncle, the FtT was satisfied that the Appellant had
           demonstrated that he had established "family  life"  in  the  UK
           with those relatives. The  evidence  as  to  who  they  are  was
           somewhat  opaque,  but  eventually  Mr  Hussain   confirmed   on
           instructions that besides the Appellant,  his  aunt  and  uncle,
           there was their adult daughter and her  husband,  and  a  cousin
           whose parents may also  live  outside  the  UK.  As  Mr  Bramble
           accepts, the grounds offer no  challenge  to  the  finding  that
           membership of this household constitutes "family life".
        7. The FtT was also satisfied that the Appellant and his  aunt  had
           failed to tell  the  truth  when  they  had  asserted  that  the
           Appellant faced a real risk of harm at  the  hands  of  his  own
           father. To the extent that the Appellant had tried to  pursue  a
           false claim through his own evidence, both written and oral,  Mr
           Bramble argued that it was a matter that should  be  weighed  in
           the  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the   Appellant's
           removal. To the extent that his aunt had sought to do so in  the
           course of her evidence, he accepted that this was not  something
           for which the Appellant, as a child, could be held  responsible.
           The usual inference would however be that it was the  adults  in
           the child's life who had decided that the false claim  would  be
           pursued, and that it was the child who had been persuaded to  go
           along with that, in which case it would not  be  something  that
           would carry any material adverse weight.
        8. The FtT also found as a fact  that  the  reality  was  that  the
           Appellant had remained in a  continuing  relationship  with  his
           parents, and sister, which a  social  worker  had  described  as
           involving "good contact". They were  important  figures  in  his
           life. Although this is not perhaps set  out  as  clearly  as  it
           might be, the only possible conclusion to  be  drawn  from  this
           finding is that "family life" between the Appellant as a  minor,
           and his sibling and parents continued.
        9. The FtT went on to find that the Appellant was brought to the UK
           by arrangement between his parents and his aunt  and  uncle,  so
           that he might secure an education in the UK at public expense.
       10. Mr Bramble accepted that since he was at all  material  times  a
           child, the Appellant was not to be presumed  to  be  responsible
           for the decisions of his adult relatives that  had  resulted  in
           this situation. Thus, although the natural  consequence  of  the
           FtT's finding was that the ECO had been deceived as to the  true
           purpose of the family's visit to the UK, he accepted that  there
           was no enhanced public interest in the removal of the  Appellant
           as a child resulting from that deception. On the other hand,  Mr
           Bramble did put the Respondent's case on  the  basis  that  this
           deception was a matter that the  FtT  should  have  "taken  into
           account" in the assessment of proportionality. It  is  extremely
           difficult to see how that was  to  be  done,  if  there  was  no
           enhanced public interest in removal arising from that deception.


      The challenge
       11. The challenge set out in the grounds is that the FtT  failed  to
           identify why the Appellant's removal from the UK would  lead  to
           unjustifiably harsh consequences, with no reason given as to why
           the uncle and aunt in the UK could not help with  the  costs  of
           education in Bangladesh,  and  no  finding  concerning  why  the
           Appellant could not  reasonably  be  expected  to  continue  his
           education in Bangladesh.
       12. In short, Mr Bramble  argued  that  the  FtT  had  unjustifiably
           elevated the "family life"  enjoyed  with  the  members  of  the
           household of the uncle and aunt, over the "family life" that  he
           had always enjoyed with his sister and  parents.  The  Appellant
           was not a "qualifying child", and did not meet the  requirements
           of paragraph 276ADE. He could return to Bangladesh in safety and
           resume his place in the household of his parents, retaining  the
           benefit of the relationships  he  had  formed  with  the  family
           members in the UK. Should he wish to study in the  UK,  then  he
           could make the appropriate application for entry clearance.
       13. Mr Hussain submitted that there were no errors of law.  The  FtT
           had carried out a balancing exercise, and after giving  adequate
           reasons, had reached conclusions that were open on the evidence.


      Error of Law?
       14. On any view, the Appellant had been a member of the household of
           his uncle and aunt from the age of 11 to 17. They were  not  his
           parents, but the FtT was perfectly entitled to  find  that  they
           were discharging the day to day parental role, and that they had
           done so through key years in this young  man's  development  and
           passage towards adulthood.  We  accept  that  the  finding  that
           "family life"  existed  between  the  Appellant  and  the  other
           members of this household was entirely open to the  FtT  in  the
           circumstances, and indeed any other conclusion would  have  been
           perverse. We do not in any  way  seek  in  the  course  of  this
           decision to belittle, overlook, or  undermine  the  genuine  and
           committed  relationships  that  undoubtedly  exist  between  the
           Appellant and the other members of the household  of  his  uncle
           and aunt; we too would give  very  significant  weight  to  that
           "family life".
       15. Where the FtT erred, however, was in failing  to  recognise  the
           full consequences of the decision to reject  the  evidence  that
           the Appellant had severed his ties to his parents and sibling as
           a result of domestic violence, and to reject the claim  that  he
           was in any way at risk from them, or  in  Bangladesh  [40].  The
           finding that (as his social worker had noted in January 2018) he
           retained "good contact" with his  parents  and  sister  [40(e)],
           meant inevitably that the de facto "family life" created between
           the members of his immediate family upon his birth continued  to
           the date of the hearing. Its character had not altered, even  if
           the Appellant's ability to enjoy its benefits  day  to  day  was
           limited by the fact of geographical separation, as a  result  of
           the decision to bring him to the UK in  2013.  The  decision  to
           bring him to the UK for the purposes of gaining a free education
           at public expense did not terminate that "family life".  Nowhere
           in the decision does the FtT recognise this, or weigh it in  the
           balancing exercise, and we are satisfied that  this  significant
           consequence must have been overlooked.
       16.  In  the  circumstances  we  are  satisfied  that  the  FtT  did
           materially  err  in  the  approach  taken  to   the   issue   of
           proportionality, and that the decision must as a result  be  set
           aside and remade.


      The decision remade
       17. The Appellant has deployed no evidence to show proper  enquiries
           have been made as  to  the  availability  of  education  in  the
           Appellant's chosen field of sports science,  within  Bangladesh.
           The assertion is simply made that there was no  suitable  course
           to which he could transfer,  or  upon  which  he  could  embark.
           Although this was  not  rebutted  with  any  evidence  from  the
           Respondent, a moment's pause suggests that it is highly unlikely
           to  be  true  given  the  international  sporting   profile   of
           Bangladesh.  Ultimately,  and  whether  or  not  the  Respondent
           provided evidence on the point, the burden of proof rested  with
           the Appellant to adduce evidence on  relevant  matters,  one  of
           which certainly  included  educational  provision  in  his  home
           country. He has clearly failed to discharge that burden.
       18. A proper disclosure of the financial circumstances of the family
           members living in the household of his uncle and aunt has  never
           been  attempted  on  the  Appellant's  behalf.  Indeed,  it  can
           reasonably be said that this appears to  have  been  consciously
           avoided; a tactical stance that we would deplore,  and  one  for
           which Mr Hussain had no explanation. Instead, there was  a  bald
           assertion that the Appellant's aunt  was  in  receipt  of  state
           benefits, supported with a bank statement for an account held in
           her name for the one month of January 2018. There was  no  other
           disclosure of her financial position, disclosure of the  uncle's
           income, or, of their net asset position. There was  no  evidence
           of the financial position of the Appellant's  parents,  or,  the
           financial disclosures that had been made in relation to them  in
           the course of the 2013 entry clearance applications.  There  was
           no comment upon the financial position of his aunt  and  uncle's
           adult daughter and her husband.
       19. Accordingly, whilst it is undoubtedly true that the  Appellant's
           aunt received in January 2018 a number of payments from the DWP,
           the applications she had made for benefits that generated  these
           payments were not  disclosed.  Moreover  the  payments  received
           during this month is the  only  concrete  financial  information
           that has ever been disclosed in the course of this appeal  about
           the financial circumstances of either the family living  in  the
           UK, or,  the  family  living  in  Bangladesh.  That  failure  to
           disclose material evidence must in our judgement be placed  into
           the proper context of a family that used deception to bring  the
           Appellant into the UK in 2015, and then sought to use  deception
           in the course of the appeal in order to justify his remaining in
           the UK. Although  the  FtT  accepted  at  face  value  the  bald
           assertion  that  the  Appellant's  parents  are  poor,  and  the
           Respondent has not  challenged  this  finding,  the  failure  to
           disclose the full and true financial positions of  the  extended
           family means in our judgement that it can carry little weight.
       20. As a consequence of the foregoing,  the  Appellant  has  in  our
           judgement clearly failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof  of
           satisfying the Tribunal that funds are not available within  the
           extended family to finance  whatever  educational  path  he  may
           choose to follow, now, or in the future.
       21. Whilst we note the FtT's assessment of the best interests of the
           Appellant as being to remain in the UK within the  household  of
           the uncle and aunt and to continue the course of education  upon
           which he is enrolled, we are satisfied that this  assessment  is
           flawed for  three  reasons;  (i)  it  took  no  account  of  the
           continuing  "family  life"  with   his   immediate   family   in
           Bangladesh, (ii) it assumed in the absence of reliable  evidence
           to that effect  that  no  education  in  his  chosen  field  was
           available in Bangladesh, and, (iii) it assumed in the absence of
           reliable evidence to that effect that the  extended  family  did
           not have the financial ability to fund education outside the UK.


       22. We undertake our own best interests assessment, having regard to
           ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  and  section  55  of  the  Borders,
           Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.  Given  the  continuing
           family life between the Appellant and his parents, together with
           our finding  that  an  absence  of  adequate  financial  support
           (either  from  his  parents  or  relatives  in  the  UK,  or   a
           combination of both) has not been made out, we conclude  in  the
           first  instance  that  his  best  interests,  at  least   to   a
           significant extent, lie in his being reunited  with  his  mother
           and  father  and   sibling   in   Bangladesh.   As   a   primary
           consideration, this factor would weigh significantly  in  favour
           of the Appellant's removal.
       23. Even if we were to conclude that the Appellant's best  interests
           did lie in remaining in the UK with his uncle and aunt, so  that
           he  could  pursue  his  current  course  of  education  to   its
           conclusion, this would not carry significant weight as a primary
           consideration, given the facts of this case. We accept that  the
           years spent as a child in the UK are of importance, and that the
           period from age 11 to age 17 would be of more significance  than
           the period from age 4 to age 11. However the period spent in the
           UK does not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE,  and,
           falls short of the 7-year threshold set out  in  the  Rules  and
           section 117B(6). The Appellant has been able  to  sit  his  GCSE
           examinations, and has acquired a  fluency  in  English,  thereby
           achieving an educational platform which is highly likely  to  be
           of assistance to him if he were returned to Bangladesh.  It  has
           not been shown that he would  in  reality  be  deprived  of  the
           ability to continue  his  education  in  Bangladesh  within  his
           chosen field, or indeed any other.  In  addition,  the  evidence
           before us discloses no medical problems.
       24. Looking at the competing "family  life"  relationships,  we  are
           unable  to  identify  any  cogent  evidence  as   to   why   the
           relationships  with  the  members  of  the  household   of   the
           Appellant's uncle and aunt should be preferred  over,  or  given
           greater weight  than,  the  relationships  he  enjoys  with  his
           parents and sister. There is no reliable  cogent  evidence  that
           would permit such a conclusion, because of the tactical decision
           to deploy the dishonest claim that he had no  relationship  with
           his parents and sister. We note Mr Hussain's argument that there
           would be a significant effect upon the Appellant's aunt who  has
           treated him as a son over a number of years, but  we  also  note
           that her witness statement did not make this claim. We  consider
           that in the circumstances of  this  case  we  can  place  little
           weight upon this claim.
       25. Finally, even if it could properly be said that the  Appellant's
           best interests lie in remaining in the UK, we  remind  ourselves
           that this could only be a primary consideration, and must not be
           elevated to the status of a "trump card".
       26. Bearing in mind the guidance to be found in KO (Nigeria)  [2018]
           UKSC 53, we remind ourselves as noted  above,  that  Mr  Bramble
           accepted that  there  is  in  this  appeal  no  enhanced  public
           interest in the removal of the Appellant  as  a  result  of  the
           deception employed by either his parents or his aunt. We make it
           clear that we do not in any way seek to visit the misconduct  of
           his parents, or his aunt, upon the Appellant himself.
       27. That is not to say however that there is no public  interest  in
           the Appellant's removal.  Parliament  has  clearly  stated  that
           there is: see sections 117A-B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act, as  amended.  The  overall  public  interest  in
           maintaining effective immigration control, as set out in section
           117B(1), is a significant factor on the Respondent's side of the
           balance sheet. So too is the fact that the Appellant  is  unable
           to satisfy any of the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for
           a grant of leave to remain.
       28. We note that the Appellant's "private life" in the UK was formed
           at a time when, although he enjoyed  a  discretionary  grant  of
           leave, his status was "precarious". Thus,  in  principle  little
           weight should be given to  it;  see  section  117B(5).  We  take
           account of the fact that  the  Appellant  is  a  minor.  We  are
           however satisfied that the precarious nature of the  Appellant's
           status in the UK throughout must  reduce  the  weight  that  the
           "private life" that he has established might otherwise attract.
       29. We bear in mind that the Appellant does speak  English.  As  set
           out in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  260  (IAC)  and  Rhuppiah
           [2018] UKSC 58, the effect of section 117B(2) is that this  does
           not  weigh  positively  in  his  favour  -  it  is   a   neutral
           consideration.
       30. The Appellant is not  financially  independent,  but  given  his
           minority this is of little surprise and represents a factor over
           which he has little or no control. Equally  he  cannot  be  held
           responsible for that fact that he has been  educated  at  public
           expense as the result of the decisions made on his behalf by the
           adults with responsibility for him. Having had regard to section
           117B(3), we conclude that we should  treat  this  as  a  neutral
           consideration.
       31. We stand back to look at  the  evidence  and  all  the  relevant
           factors on a cumulative basis and to ask ourselves how  a  "fair
           balance" should  be  struck  between  the  competing  individual
           interests and the public interest, applying the  proportionality
           test; see Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11.  If  the  Appellant's  best
           interests lie in him returning to  live  with  his  parents  and
           sister in Bangladesh, then the balance  is  self  evidently  and
           overwhelmingly in the Respondent's favour. Even if  we  were  to
           proceed on the basis that the Appellant's best interests lie  in
           him remaining in the UK, then we are satisfied that the  factors
           on the Respondent's side of the balance sheet outweigh those  in
           his favour.
       32. We conclude therefore that the Respondent's decision  to  refuse
           to grant leave to remain does not represent  a  disproportionate
           interference with the Appellant's "private life" and/or  "family
           life" in the UK. The  Respondent's  decision  is  therefore  not
           unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.  It
           follows that the Appellant's appeal must be dismissed.



DECISION


The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  14
June 2019 contained a material error of law in the  decision  to  allow  the
Appellant's human rights appeal which  requires  that  decision  to  be  set
aside and remade.


Upon remaking the decision, we dismiss the human rights appeal.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 5 September 2019
