
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16262/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2019                             |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   mrs p s
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who made an application to the
    Respondent for entry clearance to the United Kingdom under Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).  The  Respondent  did  not
    accept that she met  the  eligibility  relationship  requirement  under
    Paragraph E-ECP.21 of the Immigration Rules because her Sponsor was not
    a British citizen, was not present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom
    and nor was he in the United Kingdom with refugee leave or humanitarian
    protection. The Respondent did not accept that there  were  exceptional
    circumstances which would have amounted to a breach of her rights under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The Appellant appealed and following  a  hearing,  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 14 August  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  J
    Macdonald, dismissed her appeal.

 3. She sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal L Murray on 7 February 2019. Her reasons for so  granting
    were: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         Decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  MacDonald,  who  in  a
         Decision and Reasons promulgated on 14 August  2018  dismissed  her
         human rights appeal.


         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in concluding that the
         appeal could not succeed because the Appellant had not made a valid
         application under the Immigration Rules.  It  is  argued  that  the
         Judge should have applied the appropriate Rules (paragraph 410) and
         concluded that the requirements were met.


         3.   It is arguable that the Judge erred in concluding that because
         the Appellant's solicitors referred to the term 'settlement' in the
         application that paragraph 410 could not be considered as  a  valid
         application had not been made. It is arguable that  the  fact  that
         the Appellant otherwise satisfied the  Immigration  Rules  was  not
         adequately considered in the balancing exercise."


 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Chowdhury began by relying on  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal and immediately referred me to question 48  of  the  Appellant's
    application for United Kingdom entry clearance where he  was  asked  to
    confirm his nationality and replied "STATELESS (1954 CONVENTION)".  The
    purpose of this reference was to highlight the asserted material  error
    of the Judge at paragraphs 40 to 45 of his decision where he finds that
    the Appellant has not made a "valid application". Mr Chowdhury's simple
    submission is that the Appellant made use of the correct form and  that
    the Judge has erred in coming to the conclusion that he did. In  short,
    that the Appellant had made a valid application under  the  appropriate
    Immigration Rules.

 6. That being the case it  was  then  open  to  the  Judge  to  apply  the
    appropriate Immigration Rules (paragraph 410)  and  conclude  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were accordingly met.  The  Judge
    has materially erred as the Appellant's Solicitors referred to the term
    "settlement" in the application. Accordingly,  the  Judge  should  then
    have considered paragraph 410 of the Immigration Rules and not followed
    the entry clearance officer's decision who concluded that the Appellant
    had  not  applied  under  paragraph  410  and  paragraph  411  of   the
    Immigration Rules because an application for limited leave to remain in
    accordance with those rules had not been made.

 7. In asserting that this is a material misdirection Mr Chowdhury urged me
    to accept that the Judge could have considered  and  taken  this  issue
    into account when looking at Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights or under the principles of Robinson [1997] EWCA  Civ  3090
    where Lord Woolf said:-

         "... If there is readily discernible an obvious point of Convention
         law which favours the applicant although he has not taken it,  then
         the special adjudicator should apply  it  in  his  favour,  but  he
         should feel under no obligation to prolong the  hearing  by  asking
         the parties for submissions on points which they have not taken but
         which could be properly categorised as merely "arguable" as opposed
         to "obvious". Similarly, if when the  Tribunal  reads  the  Special
         Adjudicator's decision there is an obvious point of Convention  law
         favourable to the  asylum-seeker  which  does  not  appear  in  the
         decision, it should grant leave to appeal. If it does  not  do  so,
         there will be a danger that this country will be in breach  of  its
         obligations under the Convention. When we refer to an obvious point
         we mean a point which has a strong prospect of  success  if  it  is
         argued. Nothing less will do. It follows that leave  to  apply  for
         judicial review of a refusal by the  Tribunal  to  grant  leave  to
         appeal should be granted if the judge is of the opinion that it  is
         properly arguable that a point not raised in the Grounds of  Appeal
         to the Tribunal had a strong prospect of success if leave to appeal
         were to be granted."


 8. The grounds refer me to the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in  PD
    (Grounds-implied variation - section  86(3))  Sri  Lanka  [2008]  UKAIT
    00058 and the headnote which states: -

         "(1) The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is in all  cases  limited  to
         the grounds of appeal, as varied before the Immigration Judge, plus
         any grounds  contained  in  section  120  statements  and  Robinson
         obvious points. The tribunal is not empowered by section 86 of  the
         2002 Act to allow an appeal on some other basis. Grounds of  appeal
         cannot be varied by implication."


 9. The Judge further erred in finding that the Entry Clearance Manager was
    correct in asserting that the Appellant could not make  an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain under part 14  (Immigration  Rules  407-
    408), because that rule only applies to a person who is  stateless  and
    not for their family. The Judge should have allowed  the  appeal  under
    different Immigration Rules  as  he  meets  the  criteria  set  out  in
    paragraph 411.

10. The Judge again erred at paragraph 65 of his decision when he concluded
    that the Appellant was entitled to make a  fresh  application,  if  she
    considers it appropriate, for limited leave  to  enter  as  the  family
    member of a stateless person and that that application  could  then  be
    considered under part 14 of the Immigration Rules.

11. Mr Whitwell referred me to the Entry Clearance  Officer's  refusal.  It
    states that on 6 September 2017 the Appellant made an  application  for
    entry clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  under  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of her family life with the Sponsor. The
    application was considered  under  those  Immigration  Rules  and  with
    reference to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    decision was  made  on  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to  meet  the
    eligibility relationship requirement as the Appellant stated she wished
    to join her spouse who was a stateless person under Article  1  of  the
    1954 Convention and has been issued with a Home Office travel  document
    with leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 3  February  2019.  As
    the Appellant's Sponsor is  not  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom  the  decision  was  made  to  refuse  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules. This inability to meet those Immigration  Rules  was
    accepted by the Appellant's representatives as recorded in the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal. Mr Whitwell referred me to paragraphs 410
    and 411 of the Immigration rules and submitted that there  was  nothing
    Robinson obvious about the position  given  that  consequent  upon  the
    Appellant's limited leave she cannot meet the requirements of paragraph
    411 of the Immigration Rules as she has not made a valid application to
    the Secretary of State for leave to  enter  or  remain  as  the  family
    member of a stateless person. The Appellant was invited to  reapply  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager and that is  the  course  she  should  have
    adopted. The Judge was never the primary decision maker. The  Appellant
    was unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Appendix
    FM does not apply in this appeal and  these  were  factors  taken  into
    account by the Judge when considering Article 8 and the proportionality
    of the Respondent's decision. It was open to the Judge to come  to  the
    conclusion that he did. There is here no material error.

12. There is no material error of law within Judge Macdonald's decision.  I
    accept the submission of  Mr  Whitwell  and  the  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 65 of his decision that the Appellant's appropriate remedy is
    to make a fresh application. The Judge fully considered the issues that
    the grounds now seek to argue once more. He found that the Sponsor  had
    been granted leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  stateless
    person and that Appendix FM could not be met.  The  Sponsor  is  not  a
    British citizen, is not present and settled in the United  Kingdom  nor
    is he  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
    protection. The Sponsor  is  a  stateless  person.  The  Judge  rightly
    concluded at paragraph 40 of his decision that the starting point under
    Rule 411 is that the Appellant has made a valid application  for  leave
    to enter or remain as a  family  member  of  a  stateless  person.  The
    Appellant has not applied for limited leave to  enter  because  in  her
    application  form  she  has  applied  for  "settlement"  and  thus  for
    indefinite leave to remain. It was open to the Judge to  conclude  that
    Appellant had not made a valid  application.  Consequently,  the  Judge
    went on to consider Article 8 before coming to  conclusions  that  were
    open to be made on the evidence. His reasons for dismissing the Article
    8 claim are adequately reasoned.

13. The grounds disclosed no material error of law whatsoever.


Notice of Decision

In those circumstances the decision of Judge Macdonald is not set aside.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date   26   March
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
