
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/16169/2017
                                                               hu/16172/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                           [Z R] (first appellant)
                          [T r] (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Lember instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are nationals of Afghanistan.  They  applied  for  entry
    clearance under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules  to  join  their
    brothers, who are British nationals, in the United Kingdom.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer refused their applications on 11th October 2017.  The
    Appellants' appeal against these decisions was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence in a decision promulgated on 4th December
    2018.  The Appellants now appeal with permission granted by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 31st December 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellants  claim  that  they
    have three brothers in the UK, the first of whom entered the UK in 2007
    ([F], the Sponsor), the second brother ([W]) joined the  first  brother
    in 2010 and the third brother ([S]) subsequently joined the  others  in
    the UK.  It is the Appellants' case that both  sisters  were  separated
    from the family when the family home was attacked when they were  young
    and that the two sisters were taken into the mountains by a man engaged
    in the attack and were used as slaves and abused for a number of years.
     They claim that they were brought to Kabul and found  out  that  their
    brothers were alive.  The Sponsor said that he was made aware that  his
    sisters were alive towards the end of 2016/beginning of 2017.   He  has
    been to see them in Kabul.  They are residing with a family friend  and
    they are receiving financial support from their brothers in the UK.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the applications on the basis  that
    he was not satisfied that the Appellants were related to  the  Sponsors
    in the UK.  The Entry Clearance Officer considered that  there  was  no
    evidence of any serious,  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances.
    The Entry Clearance Officer also considered the financial evidence  and
    was not satisfied  that  the  funds  put  forward  would  be  genuinely
    available for the maintenance and accommodation of  the  Appellants  in
    the UK without  recourse  to  public  funds.   Accordingly,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer refused the application under paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  firstly  considered  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 297 of the Rules.  The judge noted that  the  Appellants  had
    provided DNA evidence to show  that  they  were  siblings  of  [F]  but
    considered that there was no evidence to  connect  them  to  [W].   The
    judge took into account a previous determination in relation to [S] who
    claims to be a brother of [F] and [W] but noted at paragraph 8 that the
    first Appellant stated that [S] is a cousin.  The judge then  concluded
    that the basis upon which [S] secured his appeal was a false one,  that
    [F] and [W] lied to the Tribunal and that the  representative  who  had
    also represented [S] in his appeal had misled the Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. The conclusion at paragraph 8 is centred on paragraph 2 of the  witness
    statement of the first Appellant.  There she said "I confirm  that  [F]
    and [W] [R] are my brothers and they are currently living  in  the  UK.
    We also have my cousin, her family and younger brother  [S]  living  in
    the UK".  It is contended in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  judge
    misunderstood this sentence.  It is accepted in the grounds that  there
    was some ambiguity regarding the phrasing of this paragraph which might
    have suggested that [S] was the Appellants'  cousin's  younger  brother
    rather than her younger brother.  However, it is  contended  that  that
    ambiguity was insufficient to displace the prior findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal in the decision in relation to [S]'s  appeal  where  that
    judge had found that [S], [F] and [W] were brothers.  It  is  contended
    that, to the extent that that ambiguity was considered by the judge  to
    have undermined the entirety of the case, he erred in  failing  to  put
    that point to the parties during the course of the hearing.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy accepted that this  ground  had  been
    made out.  He accepted that the judge's doubts about the interpretation
    of paragraph 2 of the first Appellant's witness statement  should  have
    been put to the parties during the hearing.   Mr  Duffy  also  accepted
    that there were some issues with the way in which the decision had been
    drafted.

 7. The Appellants' bundle for the First-tier Tribunal contains a  decision
    in relation to [F]'s appeal at H4 where First-tier Tribunal Boylan-Kemp
    considered [S]'s appeal and found that [F] [W] and [S]  were  brothers.
    In accordance with the decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702  this
    should have been the  starting  point  for  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lawrence.  Judge Lawrence referred to that decision at paragraph 7  but
    concluded  at  paragraph  8  that,  because  there  was   an   apparent
    discrepancy between the judge's findings in [S]'s appeal and the  first
    Appellant's witness statement, [F] and [W]  lied  to  the  Tribunal  in
    their evidence.  This is a very significant finding. I  agree  with  Mr
    Duffy's concession that the judge  erred  in  not  ensuring  that  this
    apparent discrepancy was put to the parties.  It  is  clear  that  this
    apparent discrepancy was crucial in the judge's subsequent conclusions.
     The judge reached the conclusion that the brothers were not  witnesses
    of truth based on this apparent discrepancy.  The judge also considered
    that this discrepancy cast doubts upon  the  representative's  capacity
    also.  At paragraph 14 the judge attached  little  weight  to  the  DNA
    evidence because he considered  that  [F]  and  [W]  are  witnesses  of
    falsehood noting that [F]  lied  twice  to  the  Tribunal,  firstly  in
    support of his own appeal and in support of [S]'s appeal, this too  was
    connected to the finding at paragraph 8.  The judge again  referred  to
    his concerns about the role of the representative and his intention  to
    refer her to the solicitor's regulatory authority at paragraph 18.   It
    is clear that these significant adverse findings against the Appellants
    were based  on  the  judge's  reading  of  paragraph  2  of  the  first
    Appellant's witness statement and in my view it is clear that the judge
    erred in failing to put this to the Appellants and erred in failing  to
    raise this at the hearing.  In these  circumstances  I  find  that  the
    judge made a material error of law  in  the  decision  and  I  set  the
    decision aside.

 8. I indicated that I would proceed to remake the decision at the hearing.
     I gave the parties time to prepare and Mr Duffy time to  consider  the
    further  documentary  evidence  submitted  as  well  as  the  documents
    submitted in connection with the appeal.

Re-Making the Decision

 9. Mr Duffy accepted at the outset that the maintenance and  accommodation
    provisions of paragraph 297 were satisfied on the basis of the evidence
    of support from  the  Sponsors  and  the  third  party.   In  his  view
    therefore only paragraph 297(i)(f) was at issue. Paragraph 297  of  the
    Immigration Rules sets out the requirements  for  indefinite  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  a  parent,  parents  or  a
    relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement  in  the
    United Kingdom. Paragraph 297(i)(f) applies where;
         "(f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and
         there are serious and compelling family or other considerations
         which make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care"

10. Mr Duffy accepted that in this case there are two young girls living in
    Afghanistan with a family friend in circumstances where they previously
    were held as slaves and subject to abuse.  He  accepted  that  the  DNA
    evidence and all of  the  evidence  including  the  previous  decisions
    indicated that their three brothers are in the UK  and  have  all  been
    granted status in the UK.  He accepted that there were  no  significant
    arguments to be put forward to suggest that in these circumstances they
    did not meet the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f).  He accepted that
    the Sponsors had attended the hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  and  were
    available for cross-examination but he did not consider it necessary to
    cross-examine them and indicated that he was content for me  to  remake
    the decision on the basis of the papers.

11. Mr Lemer submitted that there was sufficient evidence to show that  the
    Appellants met the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f).  He referred to
    the previous decisions of the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  the
    appeal of [S] and of [F] where the brothers' evidence was found  to  be
    credibile. Mr Lemer referred to the evidence in the Appellants'  bundle
    in relation to the mental health of the two Appellants.  In  particular
    evidence that they have been receiving  treatment  and  medication  for
    mental health issues. Mr Lemer referred to the documents in  Section  D
    of  the  Appellants'  bundle  including  evidence  of  remittances   to
    Afghanistan to support  the  two  Appellants  and  photographs  of  the
    Sponsor with the two  Appellants.   Mr  Lemer  further  relied  on  the
    decision in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT  00088  (IAC)
    and contended that the guidance there should be followed  in  assessing
    this case.

12. In remaking the decision I have considered the provisions of  paragraph
    297.  I accept Mr Duffy's concession in relation to the maintenance and
    accommodation provisions of 297(iv) and (v).

13. I accept Mr Duffy's  positive  obervations  in  relation  to  paragraph
    297(i)(f).  I accept on the basis of the DNA evidence which was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and the new  DNA  evidence  submitted  for  the
    hearing before me that [F], [W] and [S] are all brothers and  that  the
    two Appellants are their siblings.  There is no dispute that all  three
    brothers are settled  in  the  UK.   There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    credibility of the claim by the first and second  Appellant  that  they
    were taken away by a man who was engaged on an  attack  on  the  family
    home and grew up as slaves with his family and were  abused  physically
    and mentally until they escaped.  I  accept  that  the  two  girls  are
    living with a family friend and being supported by the Sponsors in  the
    UK.   I  accept  that  they  are  living  in  particularly  challenging
    circumstances  in  Afghanistan.   They  have  no  family  remaining  in
    Afghanistan.

14. In my view there is sufficient evidence to show that there are  serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of
    the Appellants undesirable.   I  find  that  the  Appellants  meet  the
    provisions of paragraph 297.  This paragraph is compatible with Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and a  weighty  factor  in
    assessing the  proportionality  of  the  refusal  decision.   In  these
    circumstances I find that the appeal should be allowed on human  rights
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.  I remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  Appellants'
appeals.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and had considered whether to make  a  fee  award.
I have decided to make no fee award in light of the fact that  most  of  the
evidence which has enabled me to allow the appeal  was  produced  after  the
decision was made by the Entry Clearance Officer.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

