
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16798/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2019                |On 17th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                MR SHAHAN [D]
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Howorth, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  On 11th April  2018,  he  was
         notified that s32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 places  a  duty  on
         the respondent to make a deportation order against  him  unless  he
         can demonstrate that one or more of the  specified  exceptions  set
         out in s33 of the Act, apply to him. The respondent noted that  the
         appellant is a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a  period
         of imprisonment of at least 12 months and as such, his  deportation
         is conducive to the public good. In response,  the  appellant  made
         representations dated 27th April 2018 setting out why he should not
         be deported. On 15th August 2018 the  respondent  refused  a  human
         rights claim made by the appellant. The appellant's appeal  against
         that decision was dismissed for the reasons set out in the decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence ("the judge") promulgated  on
         21st August 2019.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence


      2. The judge  summarises  the  appellant's  immigration  and  criminal
         history at paragraphs [2.1] to [2.9] of his  decision.   The  judge
         heard evidence from the appellant and his partner, Ms [S].


      3. The judge considered the appellant's relationship with  Ms  [S]  at
         paragraphs [58] to [68] of his decision.  At paragraph [66] of  his
         decision, the judge accepted that there  was  no  obvious  lack  of
         credibility in the oral evidence given by  Ms  [S].   At  paragraph
         [67], the judge refers to a letter that is to be found at  page  11
         of the appellant's bundle  in  which  the  appellant  describes  an
         incident that appears to have taken place in or about 2015 when  he
         claims that he and his girlfriend '[M]',  were  attacked  in  their
         home while they were sleeping.  The judge noted the account set out
         in that letter did not sit easily with the claim that the appellant
         and Ms [S] had become romantically involved in 2011 and  that  they
         were engaged to marry in  2015.  The  judge  noted  that  Ms  [S]'s
         claimed lack of knowledge  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with
         '[M]' had emerged in her oral evidence, and could suggest a lack of
         knowledge on Ms [S]'s part of  the  appellant's  lifestyle  at  the
         time, and the level of commitment to Ms [S]  on  the  part  of  the
         appellant at the time.  At paragraph [68], the judge stated:


             "Considering the evidence in the round, and  bearing  in  mind
             the  approach  I  consider  that  I  ought  to  take  to   the
             appellant's  evidence,  I  consider  that  the  appellant  has
             established to the  appropriate  standard  that  he  enjoys  a
             genuine relationship of marriage with Ms [S] that engages  the
             family life limb of Article 8 of the ECHR, but I find that the
             duration of  that  genuine  relationship,  and  therefore  the
             family life, is relatively short, having  existed  only  since
             they were married in 2018."

      4. The judge addressed the Article 3 claim at paragraphs [69] to  [73]
         of the decision.  At paragraphs [70] to [72], the judge states:


             "70. It was conceded by the respondent in AAH (Iraqi  Kurds  -
             internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), a person
             who does not possess a CSID and is unable to obtain one, would
             face a real risk of destitution in all parts of Iraq such that
             Article 3 ECHR would be engaged. The  Upper  Tribunal  in  AAH
             found moreover that a person without a CSID would be likely to
             face significant obstacles  in  trying  to  make  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR),  Baghdad
             being considered to be the destination to which the Respondent
             would remove a returnee who is of Kurdish  ethnicity  and  who
             did not originate from the IKR, and the IKR being considered a
             place to which such a returnee might  reasonably  relocate  to
             avoid a breach of Article 3 ECHR  and/or  other  rights,  such
             that he would not otherwise be lawfully returnable.

             71.  The difficulty with the Appellant's case  that  he  would
             not be able to obtain a CSID is that he has failed  to  adduce
             evidence that is capable of discharging the burden on  him  of
             establishing that he could not  do  so.  As  is  indicated  at
             2.7.15 of the CPIN, the onus is on the  appellant  to  provide
             documentary evidence to substantiate  his  claim  that  he  is
             unable to obtain the necessary documentation, for  example  by
             letter from the Iraqi Embassy confirming what was submitted by
             the person to verify their identity but  that  their  identity
             and/or documentation could not be confirmed or issued.

             72.  Following the guidance in AAH, the assessment of  whether
             an Iraqi national returnee could obtain a new CSID at all,  or
             within a reasonable timeframe, will include the  consideration
             of  such  factors  as  whether  he  has  any  other  form   of
             documentation, information about the location of his entry  in
             the  civil  register,  the  location  of  the  relevant  civil
             registry  office  and  whether  it  remains  operational.  The
             appellant has not adduced evidence in relation to the  utility
             of  the  form  of  identification  he  is  known  to  possess,
             described as 'Iraqi identity cards' in the appellant's  bundle
             index, he has not explained why the information he  has  about
             his National Identity Card in Iraq would be insufficient to be
             able to locate his entry in the  register  (see  7.37  of  the
             screening interview record at A13 of the respondent's  bundle)
             and he has not evidenced whether the registry  office  in  his
             home area is operational.  He  relies  on  his  ethnicity  and
             religious denomination and  the  claimed  lack  of  family  or
             contacts in Iraq, but  those  are  not  determinative  factors
             under the country guidance or the respondent's policy."

      5. The judge found at [73], that the  appellant  has  not  established
         that he would be unable to obtain a CSID, whether before  or  after
         his deportation  to  Iraq.  The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant
         deportation would not be in breach of Article 3.


      6. Having considered the Article 8 and Article  3  claims,  the  judge
         referred to the relevant statutory considerations set out in Part 5
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The  judge
         noted that the appellant has not been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of four years or more, and thus  the  public  interest
         requires his deportation unless  Exceptions  1  or  2  set  out  in
         s117C(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act apply.  The Judge found, at  [78],
         that Exception 1 does  not  apply  to  the  appellant  because  the
         appellant has not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for
         most of his life.  As to Exception 2, the judge stated at [81]


             "I do not consider that the  evidence  before  me  establishes
             that the deportation of the appellant to Iraq  would  have  an
             unduly harsh effect on Ms [S].  I have found that the duration
             of her proven genuine and mutually committed relationship with
             the appellant is relatively short, having existed  since  they
             were married in 2018, which is a period  of  around  one  year
             only. There are no established factors that would suggest that
             her separation from the appellant  by  the  deportation  would
             have unduly harsh consequences for her. Exception 2  does  not
             therefore apply to the appellant."

The appeal before me


      7. The appellant advances  three  grounds  of  appeal.  Permission  to
         appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  on  28th
         October 2019. The matter comes before me to determine  whether  the
         decision of the judge is infected by a material error of  law,  and
         if so, to remake the decision.


      8. Miss Howorth adopted the  grounds  of  appeal  in  her  submissions
         before me. First, in considering whether  the  deportation  of  the
         appellant would be in breach of Article 3, she submits,  the  judge
         has failed to properly apply the relevant country guidance, and  in
         so far as the judge deviates from that country guidance, he does so
         without giving reasons  for  adopting  that  course.  Miss  Howorth
         submits the judge does not adequately address whether the appellant
         can obtain a CSID in his home area  by  reference  to  the  Country
         Guidance.  She accepts the appellant  has  the  identity  documents
         that are referred to at paragraph [72] of the  decision,  but,  she
         submits, the appellant does not know the volume or page relating to
         his or her family, and there is no finding  by  the  judge  of  any
         patrilineal family  in  Iraq  that  could  assist.   The  appellant
         confirmed in his screening interview that the only remaining family
         that he has in Iraq is a sister, but the judge fails  to  make  any
         finding as to whether the appellant has any family in Iraq.


      9. Miss Howorth submits that although it is correct that there was  no
         evidence as to whether the registry office in the appellant's  home
         area is operational, it is clear from the country guidance in  AAH,
         (at paragraph 13) that the town from which the appellant comes,  is
         one  from  which  tens  of  thousands  of  Kurdish  civilians  were
         displaced with their homes and shops  being  allegedly  looted  and
         destroyed by GoI troops. She submits the area is one of  the  worst
         in Iraq, and the information available is indicative as to  whether
         the civil registry  office  is  likely  to  be  operational.   Miss
         Howorth submits that although  the  judge  refers  to  the  country
         guidance, the judge fails to properly apply the country guidance.


     10. Second, the judge failed to consider whether the appellant faces  a
         real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence  amounting
         to  serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of   the
         Qualification Directive.  Miss Howorth submits  the  Article  15(c)
         risk was referred to in the appellant's skeleton argument, and  the
         issue is not addressed at all by the judge in his decision.


     11. Finally, the judge repeatedly highlights that the burden is on  the
         appellant, but the  standard  of  proof  applied  in  reaching  the
         decision, is not apparent. The appellant cites the approach adopted
         by the Judge to the evidence regarding the relationship between the
         appellant and Ms [S].  Miss  Howorth  submits  the  judge  accepted
         there was no obvious lack of credibility in the evidence  given  by
         Ms [S], but contrary to her evidence and the evidence in  the  form
         of photographs of the couple dating back a considerable time, found
         that the duration of the relationship is relatively short, and  has
         only existed since they were married in 2018. She submits it is far
         from clear that the judge considered  the  Article  8  claim  on  a
         balance of probabilities, and the Article  3  claim  to  the  lower
         standard.


     12. In reply, Ms Fijiwala submits there are no material errors  of  law
         in the decision  of  the  FtT.   She  submits  the  judge  properly
         directed himself at paragraph [70] onwards, to the country guidance
         decision in AAH and the CPIN that were set out in  the  appellant's
         bundle.  She refers to headnote 1(i) in AAH that states:


               1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national  returnee
                  (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do
                  so within a reasonable time  frame,  will  depend  on  the
                  individual  circumstances.  Factors   to   be   considered
                  include:

                   i) Whether P has any other  form  of  documentation,  or
                      information about the location of his  entry  in  the
                      civil  register.  An  INC,  passport,  birth/marriage
                      certificates or an  expired  CSID  would  all  be  of
                      substantial assistance. For someone in possession  of
                      one or more of these documents the process should  be
                      straightforward.  A  laissez-passer  should  not   be
                      counted for  these  purposes:  these  can  be  issued
                      without any other form of ID being available, are not
                      of any assistance in 'tracing  back'  to  the  family
                      record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

     13. Ms Fijiwala submits the judge  properly  addresses  the  matter  at
         paragraph [72] of the decision.  The judge was entitled to consider
         the fact that the  appellant  has  an  Iraqi  identity  card.   She
         submits that is a form of documentation that would  be  capable  of
         assisting the appellant secure a  CSID.  She  submits  in  AAH,  at
         paragraph 29, the Tribunal noted the evidence of Dr  Fatah  that  a
         person could delegate the task of attending the office of the civil
         registrar to a relative or trusted friend, assuming of course  that
         he was in possession of the relevant documents and/or  information.
           Alternatively, Dr Fatah agreed that it was theoretically possible
         that a person could engage a lawyer and grant him or her  power  of
         attorney. Ms Fijiwala submits it was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
         evidence before the Tribunal, and  properly  applying  the  country
         guidance, to find that the appellant has failed to  establish  that
         he would not  be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID  before  or  after  his
         deportation to Iraq, and his deportation would not therefore be  in
         breach of Article 3.


     14. Ms Fijiwala accepts there is no express reference in  the  decision
         of the FtT  to  any  Article  15(c)  risk.   She  submits  that  is
         immaterial  because  the  CPIN  'Iraq:  Security  and  humanitarian
         situation,  version  5.0  of  November  2018',  that  was  in   the
         appellant's bundle confirms that the security situation has changed
         since the decision in AAH. She refers to paragraph  2.3.10  of  the
         CPIN which confirms that "According to the IOM, as of August  2018,
         nearly 4 million people  have  returned  to  their  home  areas,  a
         continuing upward  trend,  particularly  to  ...Salah  al-Din  ...,
         explained by improvements in the security situation, although there
         is some secondary displacement....".


     15. Finally, Ms Fijiwala submits that although the Judge does not refer
         to the standard of proof, the judge  properly  considered  all  the
         evidence.  The judge addresses the concerns that he  had  regarding
         the duration of the relationship between the appellant and Ms  [S],
         at paragraph [67].  The judge accepted the relationship, and in the
         end, it was open to the Judge to conclude that he did not  consider
         the evidence establishes that the deportation of the  appellant  to
         Iraq would have an unduly harsh effect on Ms [S].


Discussion


     16. Although there  is  some  force  in  the  submissions  made  by  Ms
         Fijiwala, upon a careful reading of the decision of the FtT  judge,
         I am satisfied that there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
         decision.


     17. The appellant is from Tuz Khurmatu, a town in Salah al-Din.  As  to
         the  assessment of the risk upon return,  it  is  correct  that  AA
         (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) as amended  by  the
         Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944,  confirmed  that
         there is a state of internal armed conflict  in  certain  parts  of
         Iraq, involving government security  forces,  militias  of  various
         kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The intensity of  this
         armed conflict in the so-called "contested areas", comprising inter
         alia Salah al-Din, is such that, as a  general  matter,  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned there,
         solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a  real  risk
         of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious
         harm within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.


     18. The Court of Appeal stated that regardless of  the  feasibility  of
         the person's return, it will be necessary  to  decide  whether  the
         person has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one,  reasonably  soon
         after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in order for an
         Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance  from   the   authorities;
         employment; education;  housing;  and  medical  treatment.  In  the
         subsequent decision in AAH, section C of Country  Guidance  annexed
         to the Court of Appeal's decision in  AA  (Iraq)  was  supplemented
         with the following guidance:


             "1.  Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee
                  (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do
                  so within a reasonable time  frame,  will  depend  on  the
                  individual  circumstances.  Factors   to   be   considered
                  include:

                   i) Whether P has any other  form  of  documentation,  or
                      information about the location of his  entry  in  the
                      civil  register.  An  INC,  passport,  birth/marriage
                      certificates or an  expired  CSID  would  all  be  of
                      substantial assistance. For someone in possession  of
                      one or more of these documents the process should  be
                      straightforward.  A  laissez-passer  should  not   be
                      counted for  these  purposes:  these  can  be  issued
                      without any other form of ID being available, are not
                      of any assistance in 'tracing  back'  to  the  family
                      record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

                  ii) The location of the relevant civil  registry  office.
                      If it is in an area held, or formerly held, by  ISIL,
                      is it operational?

                 iii) Are there male family members who would be  able  and
                      willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because
                      the registration system is  patrilineal  it  will  be
                      relevant to consider whether the relative is from the
                      mother  or  father's  side.  A  maternal   uncle   in
                      possession of his CSID would be  able  to  assist  in
                      locating the original place of  registration  of  the
                      individual's mother, and from there the  trail  would
                      need to be followed to the  place  that  her  records
                      were transferred upon marriage. It must also be borne
                      in mind that a significant number of IDPs in Iraq are
                      themselves undocumented; if that is the  case  it  is
                      unlikely that they could be of assistance.   A  woman
                      without a male relative to assist with the process of
                      redocumentation would face very significant obstacles
                      in that officials may refuse to deal with her case at
                      all.

     19. Headnote 1(i) of AAH follows from what is said in paragraph [24] of
         AAH;


             "An individual who is without a CSID must therefore obtain one
             as a matter of urgency. In his main report Dr Fatah  sets  out
             means by which this might be  possible.  The  ideal  would  be
             production of an old or damaged CSID. This  would  enable  the
             Registrar to quickly and easily locate your family  record  in
             the ledger. Absent a CSID or copy thereof there are  a  number
             of  other  ways  in  which  the  Registrar  could  locate   an
             individual's  details.  If  that  individual  had   an   Iraqi
             passport, an INC or a PDS card these  could  all  be  used  to
             'track back' through layers of bureaucracy in order to  locate
             the original record."

     20. Although the judge refers to the  relevant  country  guidance,  the
         judge does not appear to have undertaken the fact specific analysis
         required to establish whether the appellant is able to obtain a new
         CSID within a reasonable timeframe.  Although it  is  correct  that
         the appellant has some form of Iraqi identity card, that  does  not
         appear to be one of the documents identified in  headnote  1(i)  of
         AAH as being a document that would be of substantial assistance and
         a document that would mean the process should be straightforward.


     21. The judge simply  states  that  the  appellant  has  not  evidenced
         whether the registry  office  in  his  home  area  is  operational,
         without having regard to the background material and what  is  said
         about Salah al-Din, in the country guidance.  The  judge  does  not
         make any findings as to the family that the appellant may  have  in
         Iraq, and the assistance that he may be able to  seek  either  from
         family, or as Ms  Fijiwala  submits,  by   engaging  a  lawyer  and
         granting him or her power of attorney.


     22. I have in mind the importance of having a CSID particularly  where,
         on the basis of the Country Guidance as it is, the appellant  would
         be at risk in his home Governorate and  may  be  unable  to  enlist
         family assistance. Cogent reasons must be  given  for  a  departure
         from Country Guidance.  The judge might well have been  mindful  of
         the change in the security situation as set out in  the  CPIN,  but
         the difficulty is that the judge  does  not  in  fact  address  the
         security situation or the Article 15(c) risk at all, and  gives  no
         reasons for preferring anything that is said in the  CPIN  to  that
         set out in the country guidance.


     23. In considering the Article 3 claim the judge does not identify  the
         standard of proof that  he  has  applied.   Although  the  decision
         should be read on the assumption that, unless he  has  demonstrated
         the contrary, the judge knew how he should  perform  his  functions
         and the standard of proof to be applied,  upon a careful reading of
         the decision I cannot be satisfied that the judge applied the lower
         standard in his assessment of the Article 3 claim.


     24. Having carefully considered the decision of the  FtT  judge,  I  am
         persuaded by Ms Howorth that the judge has failed to properly apply
         the relevant country guidance and in  any  event,  as  Ms  Fijiwala
         accepts, has failed to have any regard to the  Article  15(c)  risk
         upon return  in  reaching  his  decision.    In  my  judgment,  the
         decision of the FtT contains a material error of law and should  be
         set aside.  As I cannot be satisfied that  the  judge  applied  the
         proper standard of proof to the issues he was  considering,  in  my
         judgement the appropriate course is for  the  decision  to  be  set
         aside with no findings preserved.


     25. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the FtT, or to re-
         make the decision myself.  Having considered paragraph 7.2  of  the
         Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September  2012,  the
         nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding  necessary  will  be
         extensive. The parties will be advised of the date  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


    NOTICE OF DECISION


     26. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence  promulgated  on
         21st August 2019 is set aside.


     27. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing,
         with no findings preserved.



    Signed                                  Date 12th December 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    I have remitted the matter to the FtT for hearing afresh and there  can
    be no fee award.



    Signed                                  Date 12th December 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


