
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/16614/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for business       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 18 November 2020                       |On 10 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     FP
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr M.  Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant, a citizen of India, appeals with permission  against
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mensah) (hereinafter
         referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed her human rights appeal in
         a decision promulgated on the 23 January 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of a third party and  other
         proceedings. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise
         the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. Permission to appeal was issued and on 9 January 2020 permission
         was refused by FtTJ Easterman, but granted on reconsideration by
         UTJ Sheridan on the 30 July 2020 for the following reasons:

             "At paragraph 24 of the decision the judge stated it was clear
             to her that the appellant "is a rather domineering young
             woman". This conclusion appears to be based entirely on the
             appellant's conduct during the hearing. The judge also stated
             in paragraph 24 that the appellant's confidence during the
             proceedings was "not consistent with a vulnerable oppressed
             woman."
             It is arguable that the judge found the appellant
             "domineering" only because of her demeanour and the weight
             placed on this was inconsistent with SS (Sri Lanka) R, on the
             application of v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1391. The judge also
             arguably erred by finding that because the appellant appeared
             confident at the hearing she was less likely to be a victim of
             domestic violence when there was no evidence before the FtT
             indicating that women who appear confident in formal settings
             like a tribunal are less likely to be victims of domestic
             violence."

      4. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

      5. The hearing took place on 18 November 2020, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

      6. I am grateful to Mr Greer  and  Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  and
         helpful oral submissions.

Background:

      7. The history of the appellant is set out in the decision letter  and
         the decision of the FtTJ.  The appellant is a citizen of India.  On
         19 December 2017 she married her husband and on 19  July  2018  was
         issued with a 33- month partner visa is valid until 19 April 2021.

      8. On 16 August 2018, the appellant entered the United Kingdom.

      9. On 8 September 2018, her relationship with her  spouse  broke  down
         and they began  living  apart.  The  FtTJ  recorded  [8]  that  the
         appellant gave evidence that her  marriage  effectively  ended  the
         weekend of 8 September 2018 where her husband and  in-laws  dropped
         off at a brother's home and within days her  husband  informed  her
         that he did not want to continue with the marriage.  The  appellant
         never returned to her home and it appears  she  had  little  or  no
         contact with her husband thereafter.

     10. On 22 November 2018, the appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain
         under the domestic violence  concession  and  was  granted  limited
         leave outside the rules on 4 December 2018 until 3 March 2019.

     11. On 6 February 2019, the appellant sought indefinite leave to remain
         in the UK on the basis of her former marriage to a British  citizen
         as a victim of domestic violence.

     12. Her husband applied for and was granted an annulment which was made
         final on 19 July 2019.

     13. In a decision taken on 18 September 2019,  the  respondent  refused
         her application under paragraph D-DVILR 1.3 of Appendix FM.

     14. The decision  letter  set  out  the  requirements  to  be  met  for
         indefinite leave to remain as a victim  of  domestic  violence  and
         expressly cited the relevant paragraphs. In particular E-DVILR  1.3
         that the applicant must  provide  evidence  that  during  the  last
         period of limited leave as a partner of a British  citizen....  The
         appellant's relationship with their partner broke down  permanently
         as a result of domestic abuse.

     15. The decision letter  also  made  reference  to  the  definition  of
         domestic violence that was introduced in March 2013  and  also  the
         modernised guidance.

     16. By reference to the appellant's claim the respondent  set  out  the
         evidence advanced by the appellant in support of  her  claim  which
         included a medical  history  from  the  medical  practice,  patient
         records, counselling records, letters from  my  well-being  College
         and a medical report file from a hospital in India.

     17. The respondent proceeded to consider that material at pages 4  -  6
         of the decision letter. The respondent made the following points:

         1)  the  information  is  insufficient  as  supportive  documentary
            evidence as the account detailed upon  each  document  has  been
            taken entirely from the appellant's  personal  verbal  testimony
            and is not considered to  be  from  a  reliably  independent  or
            resolutely impartial source. And that the testimony has not been
            supported by other significant items of  sufficiently  reliable,
            additional, corroborative, or independent evidence.

         2)  As  regards  the  medical  history  and  patient  records,  the
            documents have been submitted as evidence of domestic  violence.
            However, they contain no  reference  to  domestic  violence.  No
            assessments or conclusions are  outlined  within  the  documents
            that indicate or accept that the appellant had been assessed  or
            found to be a genuine victim of domestic violence,  provided  by
            relevant medical professional who had carried out  an  appraisal
            of the  appellant  and  her  claims.  The  information  was  not
            sufficient in establishing her claim.

         3) When considering the counselling records in the letter  from  My
            well-being College, the items indicate that she was referred  to
            therapy service due to depression. However  no  conclusions  are
            outlined in the documents accepting that she had  been  assessed
            or found to be a genuine victim of domestic violence or that she
            had been found to be in need of therapy as a  direct  result  of
            domestic violence provided by relevant medical professional  who
            carried out an appraisal of the appellant's claims.

         4) The letter from the college  dated  17/4/19  confirms  that  the
            appellant  was  discharged  the  service  after  attending  five
            sessions

         5) As regards the medical report from India, this was presented  as
            evidence in support of the claim that she had ingested bleach as
            a result of her distress and  unhappiness  in  relation  to  the
            stated arranged marriage. She also stated that she was pressured
            into reporting to the attending doctors that  she  had  ingested
            the bleach under accidental circumstances. However the documents
            do not indicate or support the claim that she  had  deliberately
            ingested bleach for the reasons now  given  or  that  it  was  a
            result of an arranged marriage or that it had  any  relation  or
            connection to domestic abuse or even that she was  coerced  into
            providing an incorrect account.

         6) The screenshots of the alleged text message  exchanges  purports
            to  be  a  summary  of  various   communications   between   the
            appellant's brother and the appellant's former partner. However,
            it is not independently source and has been compiled by  unknown
            persons. It is not clear who the messages  are  between  and  it
            cannot reliably be verified that the  messages  originated  from
            the appellant's brother's electronic  device  or  those  of  her
            former  partner.  It  cannot  be  independently  established  or
            verified that the messages  were  authored  by  the  appellant's
            former partner stop when looking at the Internet articles,  they
            are of a generic nature.

         7)  The  appellant  was  provided  with  a  number  of   additional
            opportunities to obtain  provide  documentary  evidence  request
            having been sent on  seven  May,  five  June,  six  August  23rd
            August, and 10 September 2019. However, the appellant failed  to
            provide  sufficient,  demonstrative  evidence  that  she  was  a
            genuine victim of domestic violence.

         8) In conclusion in light of the reasons set  out,  the  respondent
            considered that the appellant was not able to  produce  evidence
            to establish that the relationship with her  former  spouse  has
            caused a permanent breakdown during the  relevant  period  as  a
            result of domestic violence.



     18. The appellant appealed the decision, and it came before the FtTJ on
         the 6 January 2020.  In a decision promulgated on 23 January 2020
         her appeal was dismissed. The FtTJ heard evidence from the
         appellant and her brother and considered documentary evidence that
         had been advanced on the appellant's behalf. Having done so the
         judge did not accept the appellant's account that this was a
         "forced marriage" but that it was a marriage to which she agreed
         despite reservations. The judge assessed the evidence but found
         that her evidence was "vague, inconsistent and lacking credibility"
         that there was a paucity of documentation dealing with the divorce
         ( at [15]). The FtTJ also made reference to inconsistent evidence
         given by the appellant during the hearing (at [14]-15] and [17].
         The judge concluded that she is not given a truthful account of the
         history in India or in the United Kingdom and had failed to
         demonstrate that she had suffered domestic abuse. The judge
         therefore dismissed her appeal.


The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     19. Mr Greer, Counsel on behalf of the appellant, who  appeared  before
         the FtTJ relied upon the written grounds of appeal. There  were  no
         further written submissions. There  was  no  Rule  24  response  on
         behalf of the respondent.

     20. I also heard oral submissions from Mr Greer, and I confirm  that  I
         have taken them into account when reaching my decision. I intend to
         consider  those  submissions  when  addressing   the   grounds   of
         challenge.

     21. I begin to consider ground 2 first of all. Mr  Greer  submits  that
         the FtTJ  gave  weight  to  an  immaterial  matter  which  was  the
         appellant's demeanour at the hearing. In his oral  submissions,  Mr
         Greer submitted that at [24] the FtTJ noted her impression  of  the
         appellant during the hearing as follows:

         "The appellant is not a vulnerable person. In fact, it was clear to
         me she is rather domineering young  woman  who  is  not  afraid  to
         assert herself and  did  so  throughout  the  hearing."  And  later
         continued

         "whatever her reasoning, in  my  view  it  shows  she  sufficiently
         confident to assert herself in the context of  these  formal  legal
         proceedings and this is not consistent with a vulnerable  oppressed
         woman who submits to the will of others."

     22. Mr Greer relied on  the  observation  made  by  UTJ  Sheridan  when
         granting permission where it was stated  that  the  judge  arguably
         erred in finding that because the appellant appeared  confident  at
         the hearing she was less likely to be a victim of domestic violence
         when there was no evidence before the FTT indicating that women who
         appear confident in formal  settings  like  a  tribunal  were  less
         likely to be victims of domestic violence.

     23. He further submitted in his oral submissions that the comments made
         at [24] were wholly inappropriate and were  irrelevant  to  whether
         she had been in an abusive marriage.

     24. Mr Greer submits that if it is the case of the judge believed  that
         domineering young women are less likely to be victims  of  domestic
         violence, this is  plainly  wrong  and  arguably  contaminates  her
         findings in respect of whether the appellant was indeed a victim of
         domestic violence.

     25. I have given careful consideration to the  submission  made  by  Mr
         Greer. He has directed the tribunal to paragraph 24 where the judge
         set out her observations and findings related  to  the  appellant's
         demeanour. They are set out above.

     26. As a result of those observations Mr Greer  argues  that  not  only
         were they inappropriate observations but it is also unclear to what
         extent the judge the  relied  upon  her  independent  view  of  the
         appellant's demeanour in forming a view as to the likelihood of the
         appellant being a victim of domestic abuse.

     27. It has long been recognised that it is usually unreliable and often
         dangerous to draw a conclusion from the witness's demeanour  as  to
         the likelihood that the witness is telling the truth.  The  reasons
         for distrusting  reliance  on  demeanour  are  magnified  when  the
         witness is of a different nationality from the judge and is  either
         speaking English as  a  foreign  language  or  is  giving  evidence
         through an interpreter (I refer to paragraphs 36 and 37 of SS  (Sri
         Lanka) R, on the application of v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1391).

     28. It is plain from reading  the  decision  in  SS  (Sri  Lanka)  that
         findings  based  on  demeanour  are  unreliable   and   to   attach
         significant weight to such impressions or observations run the risk
         of making judgements which have no rational basis.

     29. I would add to that that it may also be wrong to assume the way  an
         appellant or witness gives evidence is an indication of whether  or
         not it is true. The way in which the witness reacts to the  process
         of giving evidence may vary wildly.

     30. However, the Court of Appeal in SS (Sri Lanka) also stated:

             "40. This is not to say  that  judges  (or  jurors)  lack  the
             ability to tell whether witnesses are lying. Still  less  does
             it follow that  there  is  no  value  in  oral  evidence.  But
             research confirms that people do not in fact generally rely on
             demeanour to detect deception but on the fact that  liars  are
             more likely to tell stories that are  illogical,  implausible,
             internally inconsistent and contain fewer details than persons
             telling  the  truth:  see  Minzner,  "Detecting   Lies   Using
             Demeanor, Bias and Context" (2008) 29 Cardozo LR 2557. One  of
             the main  potential  benefits  of  cross-examination  is  that
             skilful  questioning  can  expose  inconsistencies  in   false
             stories.

             41. No doubt it is impossible,  and  perhaps  undesirable,  to
             ignore altogether the impression created by the demeanour of a
             witness giving evidence. But to attach any significant  weight
             to such impressions  in  assessing  credibility  risks  making
             judgments which at best have no rational basis  and  at  worst
             reflect conscious or unconscious biases and prejudices. One of
             the most important qualities expected of a judge is that  they
             will strive to avoid being influenced by personal  biases  and
             prejudices in their decision-making. That  requires  eschewing
             judgments based on the appearance of a  witness  or  on  their
             tone, manner, or other aspects of their behaviour in answering
             questions. Rather than attempting to assess whether  testimony
             is truthful from the manner in which it  is  given,  the  only
             objective and reliable approach is to focus on the content  of
             the testimony and to consider whether it  is  consistent  with
             other evidence (including evidence of  what  the  witness  has
             said on other occasions) and with known or probable facts."

     31. In the paragraphs cited above reference is made  to  the  way  such
         judgments should be made and rather than attempt to assess  whether
         testimony is truthful from the manner in which  it  is  given,  the
         only objective and reliable approach is to focus  on  the  evidence
         and to consider whether it is consistent with the  other  evidence,
         including with what the witness said on other occasions or  against
         other probable facts.

     32. When seen in the light of the determination as a whole, that was in
         fact  the  approach  undertaken  by  the  judge  in  the  preceding
         paragraphs before those observations at [24].

     33. Whilst Mr Greer has referred the Tribunal to parts of paragraph 24,
         which I have set  out  above,  it  is  important  to  consider  the
         paragraph in  its  entirety  and  where  it  comes  in  the  FtTJ's
         decision. The paragraph is not at the beginning of  any  assessment
         of the appellant's credibility or the assessment  of  the  evidence
         but the conclusions of her assessment and after  having  considered
         all  of  the  evidence  including  the  documentary  evidence,  the
         supporting evidence both oral and documentary and the oral evidence
         of the appellant. The judge begins paragraph 24 by stating "Overall
         I found the appellant an unreliable witness who exaggerates.  I  do
         not accept her family forced her into marriage, but  I  accept  she
         agreed to a marriage she later regretted. Further, I find  she  has
         not given a truthful account of the history in India or the  United
         Kingdom and  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  suffered  any
         domestic violence whatsoever."

     34. This was the judge's omnibus finding  and  was  not  based  on  her
         assessment of the appellant's demeanour which she later went on  to
         describe at paragraph 24 but was based on  her  assessment  of  the
         evidence undertaken in the preceding paragraphs.

     35. Whilst I agree that assessments made of demeanour  particularly  in
         the context of domestic violence are unreliable  indicators  as  to
         whether the incident took place, when reading the decision  of  the
         judge it has not been demonstrated that she  attached  any  or  any
         significant weight to those observations. What the judge did  carry
         out prior  to  that  observation  was  what  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered to be the correct way of assessing  the  factual  matrix
         and rather than assessing whether the testimony was truthful in the
         manner in which was given,  the FtTJ focused on the reliability and
         consistency of the evidence given by the appellant. Thus, when seen
         in that context I do not consider that the FtTJ erred in law.

     36. This leads me to ground 1  which  challenges  part  of  the  FtTJ's
         assessment of the evidence.

     37. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted that the FtTJ erred  in  law
         by misdirecting herself in respect of  whether  the  appellant  had
         endured a forced marriage and domestic violence.

     38. In his oral submissions Mr Greer  took  the  Tribunal  through  the
         appellant's witness statement and her claim to have been  subjected
         to emotional pressure from family members, treatment by her in-laws
         after they married and ways  in  which  he  said  her  in-laws  had
         controlled her life. He submitted  that  the  appellant's  evidence
         fell within the  definition  of  domestic  violence  and  that  the
         treatment of the claim trivialised and misunderstood the extent  of
         her experiences.

     39. The second point raised in the oral submissions related to  whether
         or not the appellant had been subject to a forced marriage.

     40. Mr Greer submits that at [18] the FtTJ concluded that the appellant
         was not forced into marriage by her parents as her  parents  sought
         to convince her to agree to the marriage. At [17]  the  judge  made
         reference to the evidence as follows:

         "when asked what would  have  happened  if  she  had  maintained  a
         refusal she said, "it would have been  difficult,  just  because  I
         said no they were not talking to me." The appellant says bad things
         were said to her that hurt feelings but gave no particular  in  any
         of her evidence. The appellant referred me  to  "Islam"  which  she
         told me says, "if we take our parents blessing we will be happy."

     41. It is submitted that the  pressure  from  the  appellant's  parents
         towards the appellant arguably fell  within  the  definition  of  a
         forced marriage and thus the judge misdirected herself  in  respect
         of the definition.

     42. In considering those submissions, as with any decision of a  judge,
         it requires the decision to be read in its entirety. Not  doing  so
         fails to consider the decision  in  its  context  rather  than  the
         particular paragraphs that are highlighted.

     43. The issue of whether the appellant's marriage was a forced marriage
         or an arranged marriage was not identified as an  issue  the  judge
         was required to determine. The parties at the hearing are  expected
         to identify the issues to be determined by the Tribunal. This is so
         the parties and the judge can be directed to  the  relevant  issues
         and the evidence  can  also  be  directed  towards  those  disputed
         issues. In this appeal the judge expressly  asked  the  parties  to
         identify the issues which are set out at [5].  As  recorded  there,
         neither party expressly referred to the issue of forced marriage.

     44. Furthermore, whilst the written grounds advanced on behalf  of  the
         appellant  referred  to  the  government's  definition  of   forced
         marriage, none of the guidelines were produced before the judge  by
         either advocate nor do they feature in the  appellant's  bundle  or
         that of the respondent.

     45. The UK government's forced marriage unit provides a  definition  of
         forced marriage. That reads as follows:

         "what forced marriage is

         you have the right to choose who you marry, when you  marry  or  if
         you marry at all.

         Forced marriages when you face  physical  pressure  to  marry  (for
         example,  threats,  physical  violence,  or  sexual  violence)   or
         emotional and psychological pressure (e.g. if you are made to  feel
         like you are bringing shame on your family).

     46. Whilst the issue was not expressly clarified by the  advocates,  it
         is clear from reading the decision that the judge did undertake  an
         assessment of whether the marriage had been a  forced  marriage  as
         opposed to an arranged marriage. In  undertaking  that  assessment,
         the judge considered the evidence given by the appellant, both oral
         and written and considered the evidence in support  which  included
         evidence from her brother.

     47. The FtTJ's assessment is set out at paragraphs 10 - 23.  The  judge
         began her assessment by considering the appellant's evidence as  to
         why she married "to keep my family happy" but "she  was  not  happy
         about it". The judge returned to the appellant's evidence as to why
         she had married at paragraphs 12 and 13. Prior to this,  the  judge
         considered the evidence relating to the ingestion  of  Phenyl  that
         observed at paragraphs 10 - 11 that while she gave positive  weight
         the document, the document itself did not prove the marriage was  a
         "forced marriage". The judge therefore considered that document  in
         the light of and "in the round" alongside the other  evidence  (see
         paragraph 11).

     48. At paragraph 16 - 18 the judge  set  out  her  conclusions  on  the
         evidence. The judge did not find that the  appellant  had  given  a
         consistent or  credible  account  of  the  marriage  as  a  "forced
         marriage". The judge stated "the appellant has not  suggested  that
         she was against arranged marriages per se. In fact, it was cultural
         and social norm and something she expected. I  accept  she  married
         because she felt this was what her family  wanted,  but  I  do  not
         agree she was forced in the context of domestic  violence.  I  find
         she  agreed  to  the  marriage  despite  reservations.  It  is  not
         consistent that she was forced, when on her own evidence her family
         and those around including parents sought to convince her he was  a
         good person and sought her agreement the marriage. If this  were  a
         forced marriage they would have had no need to take such steps."

     49. The FtTJ was entitled to place weight on the fact  that  while  the
         appellant had reservations about the marriage, this did not  amount
         to it being a forced marriage within the definition. The judge made
         the point and it was one worthy of weight, that the appellant's own
         evidence was that her parents and others tried to convince her that
         he was a good person and to seek her agreement for the marriage and
         that there would have been no need to have done so, had this been a
         forced marriage as she had stated.

     50. At [17] the  FtTJ  set  out  inconsistent  evidence  given  by  the
         appellant at  the  hearing.  The  judge  set  out  the  appellant's
         evidence that when she  initially  refused,  her  family  were  not
         talking to her. When asked what would  have  happened  if  she  had
         maintained a refusal she said, "it would have been difficult,  just
         because I said no they were not talking  to  me."  The  judge  also
         recorded that the appellant said, "bad things are said to her  that
         hurt her feelings but gave no particulars on any of her  evidence."
         His further recorded by the judge that the appellant  referred  the
         Tribunal to "Islam" and said, "if we take our parents  blessing  we
         will be happy."

     51. In essence, the judge found as a fact that the appellant's  account
         given in oral evidence was either lacking in particulars (where she
         could give no details of the "bad things" that was said to her) and
         the judge also found that her oral evidence was  inconsistent  with
         her written evidence in which she claimed her  father  had  shouted
         at, threw a glass at which had cut her face  and  he  had  disowned
         her. The judge recorded  "I  find  her  inconsistent  evidence  and
         failure to mention these apparently far more serious  matters  when
         asked at the hearing to damage her credibility."

     52. Whilst I agree with Mr Greer that familial pressure can fall within
         the definition, there was no misdirection made by the judge because
         it is plain from reading the decision that the judge did not accept
         that the appellant had been under any pressure, whether by  way  of
         threat, physical violence or emotional psychological pressure,  and
         gave reasons for finding that the appellant's evidence was  lacking
         in support  and  particularisation  or  by  providing  inconsistent
         evidence.

     53. Those findings also have  to  be  considered  alongside  the  other
         findings of fact made by the FtTJ. The judge made an assessment  of
         the evidence concerning the marriage and whether the  marriage  had
         broken down due to domestic abuse.

     54. At [14] the judge summarised the appellant's  claim  that  she  had
         been subjected to emotional, psychological, and physical abuse. The
         FtTJ set out findings on the conduct  of  the  parties  during  the
         marriage at a number of paragraphs (see paragraphs 14, 15,  18,  19
         and 20 - 24) and gave reasons in accordance with the evidence as to
         why the judge did not accept the appellant's account.

     55. At [14] the FtTJ found her claim in the written evidence  that  she
         had  been  subjected  to  physical  abuse  by  her  husband  to  be
         inconsistent with her  oral  evidence.  The  judge  contrasted  the
         written evidence with her oral evidence where she accepted that she
         had not been subjected to physical abuse but said that  it  was  in
         the context of sexual behaviour. The  judge  found  that  this  was
         inconsistent with  her  present  factual  claim  for  a  number  of
         reasons. Firstly, the appellant had not previously  said  that  she
         refused to have sexual relations  with  her  husband  (her  witness
         statement at paragraph 61 made reference to her husband using  only
         for "sexual relations"). Secondly,  the  appellant  had  not  given
         credible evidence concerning the reasons given for the annulment of
         the marriage. At [14] the  judge  noted  the  evidence  before  the
         Tribunal was that the appellant's husband had sought  an  annulment
         of the  marriage.  Whilst  the  appellant  was  a  party  to  those
         proceedings,  none  of  the   documentation   relevant   to   those
         proceedings had been provided which could shed light  on  what  had
         happened save for a copy of the Decree Absolute and that the  judge
         was critical of that. Furthermore, the judge recorded at [15]  that
         when the appellant was asked about the grounds of the annulment she
         did not provide a "clear answer" that said, "she was not happy, and
         the marriage was forced". The  judge  concluded  "what  the  decree
         shows is that the appellant did not pursue a divorce of her husband
         on the ground she was coerced as she was the respondent.  It  shows
         the petitioner was in fact her husband and the  appellant  told  me
         she agreed to the divorce. I do not accept the appellant has  shown
         she had sexual relations with husband, or that any  such  relations
         amounted to domestic violence. Her evidence is vague, inconsistent,
         and lacking credibility and there is a paucity of documentation.  I
         also consider her reference to  physical  abuse  in  her  statement
         damages her overall credibility  and  is  indicative  of  a  person
         willing to lie or exaggerate  her  history."  The  grounds  do  not
         challenge that finding and it is one that was  reasonably  open  to
         the judge on the evidence.

     56. The grounds challenge the finding at [19]. It is further  submitted
         that the appellant's case was that when she joined her husband  and
         in-laws in the  UK,  she  faced  restrictions  in  respect  of  her
         behaviour including over what she could wear, when she was  allowed
         to eat and how often she was permitted to behave. At [19] the judge
         appeared to conclude that the treatment suffered by  the  appellant
         at the hands of her in-laws, taken at its highest, did  not  amount
         to domestic violence. The judge stated, "the fact a husband and his
         family expected the appellant to assist in household chores is  not
         of itself evidence of domestic violence."

     57. The grounds do not accurately set out what the judge considered  at
         paragraphs 18 - 19. At [18] the judge referred to the definition of
         controlling  and  coercive  behaviour.  Within   the   policy   the
         definition of domestic  violence  and  abuse  is  given  at   which
         includes "any incident or  pattern  of  incidents  of  controlling,
         coercive or threatening behaviour, violence or abuse between  those
         aged 16 or over who are, or have been, intimate partners or  family
         members regardless of gender or sexuality. This can include, but it
         is not limited to, the following  types  of  abuse:  psychological,
         physical,  sexual,  financial and emotional.

     58. The policy goes on to refer to "other forms of abuse which includes
         controlling behaviour which is defined as "a range of acts designed
         to make a person subordinate or dependent by; isolating them from
         sources of support, exploiting their resources and capacities
         personal gain, depriving them of the means needed for independence,
         resistance and escape, and regulating their everyday behaviour.
         Coercive behaviour is also defined as follows "an actual pattern of
         acts of assaults, threats, humiliation and intimidation and other
         abuse that is used to harm, punish or frighten the victim." The
         policy recognises that no distinction shall be made between
         psychological abuse and physical abuse when assessing if a person
         has been the victim of domestic violence or abuse.

     59. The FtTJ made reference to the definition at paragraph  18  and  at
         [19] after considering the appellant's evidence found "none of  the
         matters above  have  in  my  view  been  sufficiently  evidence  to
         demonstrate domestic violence at the hands of any  family  member."
         As regards the account of household chores, the FtTJ considered the
         appellant's evidence which was set out that she was made to  hoover
         the family home every day and undertake household chores. The judge
         sought to contrast this with what she had  undertaken  in  her  own
         home. The evidence given by the appellant was that when she was  in
         India she was at home helping with the household chores. The  judge
         concluded at [19] "her  evidence  about  being  made  to  undertake
         household chores is vague and lacking in particulars that would  be
         need to show she was being subject to mental abuse in any form. The
         fact her husband and his family expected the appellant to assist in
         household chores is not of itself evidence of  domestic  abuse.  In
         fact, none of the matters above have in my view  been  sufficiently
         evidenced to demonstrate domestic violence  at  the  hands  of  any
         family member."

     60. Thus, when paragraph 19 is read as a whole, the judge gave adequate
         and sustainable reasons why she  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
         evidence as it was vague,  lacking  in  particularisation  and  was
         insufficiently evidenced.

     61. It is therefore not a case of the judge misdirecting herself as the
         grounds assert that the judge did not find that the  appellant  had
         provided evidence upon which  the  judge  could  place  weight  and
         reliance.

     62. The judge also made further factual findings at paragraph  20  that
         there was a lack of reference made by her brother about any form of
         domestic  abuse,  at  [21]  that  the  witness  attended   at   the
         appellant's home and saw no evidence of any  problems,  further  at
         paragraph 21, the witness did not suggest any threat of violence or
         any force of violence or threats from her husband. The  judge  also
         highlighted that some of the appellant's evidence was  inconsistent
         with that given by her brother. In respect of the messages at  [21]
         the judge found that the content of the  messages  showed  no  more
         than a husband attempting to speak with the  appellant  during  the
         period leading to the  divorce  and  that  there  was  no  credible
         evidence that he wanted  to  anything  other  than  to  pursue  the
         divorce. At [22] the  judge  considered  the  appellant's  evidence
         relating to parents but found that the evidence her brother did not
         support any threats of violence from her parents as a result of the
         marriage ending. At [23] the judge analysed  the  medical  evidence
         and at [24] the judge gave her omnibus conclusions.

     63. Consequently, it has not been demonstrated at the  judge  erred  in
         law in the way the grounds have asserted.

     64. Ground 3 argues that the judge misdirected herself  in  respect  of
         whether  the  appellant's  marriage  broke  down  due  to  domestic
         violence.

     65. It is submitted that at [26] the FtTJ stated

         "to be clear, even if I had accepted any  of  those  matters  above
         could be classified as domestic violence (which I do  not),  it  is
         absolutely clear the marriage did not break down as a  result,  but
         ended because the appellant's husband decided the marriage was  not
         working and sought a divorce."

     66. It is submitted that this is irreconcilable with the reported  case
         of LA (paragraph 289A; causes of breakdown) Pakistan  [2009]  UKIAT
         00019 and was therefore wrong in law.

     67. Mr Greer referred to the decision and a copy was  set  out  in  the
         consolidated bundle (sent by email).

     68. The headnote in the decision  in  LA  (paragraph  289A;  causes  of
         breakdown) Pakistan [2009] UKIAT 000 reads as follows:

         In the light of AG (India)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1534, when deciding if an appellant  who
         is  the  victim  of  domestic  violence   has   proved   that   the
         "relationship was caused to permanently break down before  the  end
         of that period as a result of domestic violence" the Tribunal  must
         be careful to assess the evidence in  the  round,  looking  at  the
         totality of the evidence and remembering that a broken marriage.

     69. Having read the decision, I do not consider that it has  a  bearing
         on the decision of the FtTJ. On the facts of that  particular  case
         the judge was satisfied that the appellant had been the subject  of
         domestic abuse and is set out at paragraph 36 "believed  everything
         the appellant had to say". Notwithstanding those positive  findings
         the judge in that case found the difficulty was over the  cause  of
         the marital breakdown and that when she left the home  it  was  not
         because of the  domestic  violence  but  because  of  the  lack  of
         commitment on her husband's part. Thus, the Tribunal found that the
         judge had erred in law because from the factual findings it  should
         have been apparent but for the domestic violence the marriage would
         not have ended.

     70. The decision in LA was decided on  its  own  particular  facts  and
         there are no factual comparisons to be made in the present  appeal.
         The position of the FtTJ was that  she  did  not  accept  that  the
         appellant's marriage had been a forced marriage but  one  that  she
         had agreed to that had later regretted. At [26]  the  judge  stated
         that she had rejected the appellant's claim to have been the victim
         of domestic abuse. That being the case, it was open to the judge to
         conclude that she did not accept the marriage had broken  down  due
         to domestic abuse.

     71. Consequently, the alternative finding at [26] does not  demonstrate
         any error of law if the primary factual finding was  one  that  was
         open to the judge to make. For  the  reasons  set  out  above,  the
         conclusions drawn from the decision when taken as a whole  is  that
         the findings were open to the judge to make on  the  basis  of  the
         evidence  that  was  before  her.  Whilst  the  references  to   an
         appellant's demeanour are generally deprecated for the reasons  set
         out above, it is not been  demonstrated  that  significant  or  any
         weight was given to those  observations  and  that  the  judge  had
         placed weight and reliance  upon  the  factual  assessment  of  the
         evidence, both in terms of its  reliability  and  consistency  when
         seen in the light of the evidence as a whole.

     72. For those reasons, the decision of the FtTJ does  not  involve  the
         making of an error on a point of law and the decision shall stand.



Notice of Decision



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated  19 November 2020




NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email
