
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/16822/2017 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 September 2020                |On 10 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                                     MS

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Mr  D  Bazini,  instructed  by  Gulbenkian  Andonian
Solicitors



This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing I  reserved
my decisions and reasons, which I now give. The order made is  described  at
the end of these reasons.


 1. For the purposes of this decision, to avoid confusion, I have  referred
    below to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Kosovo  with  date  of  birth  given  at
    8.11.81. He is married to a British citizen (born in  Kosovo),  and  is
    the father of their child, now aged 7, and step-father  to  his  wife's
    child from a previous relationship, now  aged  13.  Both  children  are
    British citizens. It is accepted that he has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner and both children.

Chronology and Relevant Background

 3. In August 2015 the respondent decided to deport the appellant,  relying
    on the appellant's criminality, including not only  offences  committed
    in the UK between 2011 and 2015 but also his  conviction  in  Pristina,
    Kosovo, for an offence of attempted murder, for which he was  sentenced
    to a term of imprisonment  of  3  years  and  6  months,  so  that  his
    deportation was considered to be  conducive  to  the  public  good  and
    therefore he was liable to deportation pursuant to s3(5)(a) of the 1971
    Act. It should be noted that at the First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing
    the appellant did not accept that he had been convicted in Kosovo.

 4. In June 2016 the respondent refused the appellant's human rights  claim
    made against deportation, relying on his criminal offending  behaviour,
    by then including his further criminal behaviour,  including  the  most
    recent conviction and  sentence  in  March  2016  for  three  offences:
    burglary of commercial premises, possession of a prohibited weapon  (CS
    gas), and commission of an offence during the currency of  a  suspended
    sentence  (offences  from  2015  of  driving  whilst  disqualified  and
    uninsured, and taking a vehicle without consent). These  last  offences
    were committed whilst the appellant was  the  subject  of  a  suspended
    sentence and after being served on 17.8.15 with the decision to make  a
    deportation order against him. The sentencing exercise before the Crown
    Court in  resulted  in  a  cumulative  term  of  15  months'  immediate
    imprisonment. However, it  is  significant  to  the  preliminary  point
    raised by Mr Bazini (set out below) to note that the total of 15 months
    imprisonment comprised consecutive sentences for  the  three  offences,
    being 8 months, 4 months, and 3 months.

 5. The decision refusing and certifying the appellant's human rights claim
    made in June 2016 was withdrawn because of the Kiarie & Byndloss ruling
    and remade on 8.12.17. At paragraph [19] of  the  decision,  under  the
    heading of 'Reasons for Deportation',  the  respondent  relied  on  the
    appellant's Kosovo conviction for attempted murder, together  with  his
    subsequent convictions in  the  UK,  ranging  between  2011  and  2016,
    including the three offences which resulted in the  total  term  of  15
    months' imprisonment.

 6. At [24] of the respondent's  decision,  the  respondent  stated,  "Your
    deportation is conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
    because you have been convicted of an offence for which you  have  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at
    least 12 months. Therefore, in accordance with  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the public interest requires your deportation unless
    an exception to deportation applies." In the light of  that  statement,
    it is not clear the extent to which the foreign conviction  was  relied
    by the respondent. References to the appellant's offending behaviour in
    some of the  subsequent  paragraphs  of  that  decision,  including  at
    paragraphs [68] and [69], refer only to the UK criminal convictions. In
    considering  whether  there  were  very  compelling  circumstances   at
    paragraph [73] of the decision the respondent stated that there  was  a
    significant public interest in deporting the appellant,  relying  on  a
    list of his convictions,  beginning  with  the  Kosovo  conviction  for
    attempted murder. Nevertheless, at  [74]  the  respondent  stated  that
    "notwithstanding"  the  conviction  in  Kosovo,  the   UK   convictions
    demonstrated a blatant disregard for the laws of the UK and  showed  no
    inclination to curb his offending, and that his actions were not  those
    of a person predisposed to rehabilitation. The extent  of  reliance  on
    the foreign conviction in the decision of the respondent is relevant to
    the  preliminary  argument  addressed  below,  because  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge declined to take it into account, concluding at  [5]  of
    the decision that the respondent had failed to produce evidence of  the
    conviction despite earlier directions to do so.

 7. On 27.9.19, the First-tier Tribunal allowed on human rights grounds the
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  reasons  for  deportation
    decision of 8.12.17. The appeal was allowed on the basis that it  would
    be unduly harsh for the elder child, then aged 12, to leave the UK with
    the appellant, assessing her best interests were to remain in  the  UK.
    The judge concluded at [20] that those best interests "just tips in the
    balance of allowing the appellant to remain the UK."

 8. The respondent sought to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    to the  Upper  Tribunal.  Permission  was  refused  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 18.10.19. However, when the application was renewed to  the
    Upper Tribunal on 15.11.19, a week out of time,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hanson extended time and granted permission on 31.12.18.

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  originally  listed  for  a  panel
    hearing on 26.2.19. However,  the  appellant  raised  argument  at  the
    hearing that the grant of permission or more particularly the extension
    of time under Rules 5(3)(a) and 21 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, was unlawful. Although counsel for the  appellant
    urged the panel to reconstitute itself to hear a challenge  by  way  of
    judicial review, that was not possible as  the  Upper  Tribunal  cannot
    judicially review itself. The panel concluded that the statutory appeal
    could not proceed until this preliminary issue was decision. The appeal
    was, therefore, adjourned with the  understanding  that  the  appellant
    would apply to  the  Administrative  Court  for  permission  to  pursue
    judicial review and keep the Upper Tribunal informed of progress.

10. The matter was further considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
    on 8.3.19, 15.3.19. In the absence of  notification  of  resolution  or
    progress in relation to the judicial review application, the matter was
    listed for a Case Management Review. However, on 3.12.19 Judge  Norton-
    Taylor considered that no useful purpose would be served by holding  an
    oral  CMR  until  a  decision  on  permission  had  been  made  by  the
    Administrative Court. Further  directions  were  issued  requiring  the
    appellant to provide an update on the judicial  review  proceedings  as
    soon as there was any material change, and in any event  to  provide  a
    confirmation of progress no later than 6.1.20.

11. On 15.10.19, permission to apply for judicial review was refused on the
    papers by the Administrative Court, but followed by an  application  to
    renew  at  an  oral  hearing,  which  took  place  11.12.19.   However,
    permission was again refused.

12. On 18.12.19, the appellant filed  an  application  with  the  Court  of
    Appeal for permission to  appeal  the  decision  of  11.12.19  refusing
    permission for judicial review.

13. On 6.1.20, the appellant sent the Upper  Tribunal  a  written  progress
    report, detailing the above stages and confirming that the  application
    to the Court of Appeal remained outstanding without any  indication  of
    date of resolution.

14.  By  letter  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  4.7.20,  the  appellant's
    representatives confirmed that the application for permission to appeal
    to the Court of Appeal had been refused on the basis that there was  no
    right to renew an application for permission to appeal to the Court  of
    Appeal at an oral hearing and there was no avenue for the appellant  to
    make onward appeal challenge to the Supreme Court. In the premises, the
    challenge to Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson's decision to extend time  had
    come to an end, so that the statutory  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    could proceed  in  due  course.  In  consequence,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    directed the matter be set down for a remote hearing of  the  error  of
    law issue.

The Judge's Findings

15. As stated above, for the reasons  set  out  at  [5]  of  the  decision,
    primarily a lack of  evidence,  the  judge  declined  to  rely  on  the
    appellant's alleged conviction in Kosovo for attempted murder.

16. The judge made a number of findings adverse to the  appellant.  Despite
    his conviction in the OASYS report it is recorded  that  the  appellant
    denied being present at either burglary  in  his  record  and  did  not
    present as currently motivated to address his offending behaviour.  The
    judge concluded at [17] that at the date of  the  OASYS  assessment  in
    June 2017 the appellant "sought to minimise  his  offending  behaviour,
    deny involvement or culpability  and  provide  untrue  and  unsupported
    explanations for offences." At [18] the judge assessed the evidence  of
    the appellant  and  his  partner  as  not  credible,  pointing  out  in
    particular the discrepancy between her claims to work all hours and the
    limited income declared to HMRC. The judge found she was continuing  to
    receive tax credits for which she had made a false claim.

17. Although the appellant apologised for his crimes,  at  [19]  the  judge
    found his evidence to be "characterised by  an  impatient  attitude,  a
    failure to accept and recognise the seriousness of his offences and  an
    attempt to minimise his role at every opportunity."

18. The judge considered the best interests of the children at [20] of  the
    decision, noting that the respondent accepted that it would be harsh to
    expect the elder child to relocate to Kosovo. The judge found  that  it
    would be "very difficult" for her to move home and school  as  she  did
    not speak other than English and was settled in secondary school in the
    UK and all her friends, family and ties  were  in  the  UK.  The  judge
    concluded that it would unduly harsh for this child to move to  Kosovo.
    Within [20] the judge found that given that the younger child was  then
    only 5 years old, she would be more adaptable and although it would  be
    a difficult transition, it would not be unduly harsh for  this  younger
    child to relocate to Kosovo.

19. At [23] the judge set out the relevant considerations required  of  the
    Tribunal, though it is not clear what particular findings were made  in
    respect of these considerations.

20. At [24] the judge accepted that offences fell towards the less  serious
    end of the scale and  took  into  account  that  it  related  to  three
    separate offences. He had been in the UK for  some  10  years  and  his
    marriage had lasted more than 10 years. He could not be  said  to  have
    lost his ties to Kosovo and had some family there. However, he had  not
    committed any further  offences  and  the  judge  considered  his  past
    convictions as petty offences with only one suspended sentence.

21. Noting that it had already been found that it would be unduly harsh for
    the elder child to leave the UK as a  12-year-old  British  child,  and
    that her best interests were to  remain  in  the  UK,  the  judge  then
    stated, "This, of  course,  is  not  decisive  but  I  must  accord  it
    significant weight. There is a public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
    criminals but when weighing all the other factors in this case  I  find
    that it just tips in the balance of allowing the appellant to remain in
    the UK."

The Grounds of Appeal

22. In summary, the  primary  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a material misdirection in  law  and  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons. The primary complaint is that whilst the judge  found
    that it would be unduly harsh for the elder child to leave the  UK,  is
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal omitted to consider  the  second
    limb of  the  unduly  harsh  test  under  paragraph  399(a)(ii)(b),  as
    mirrored in s117C(5) of the 2002 Act, to  determine  whether  it  would
    also be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant. The judge did not consider whether separation  of  any  kind
    would amount to unduly harsh consequences  of  deportation.  Mr  Clarke
    accepted that in the light of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, the  grounds
    were a little out of date in respect of their reliance on  MM  (Uganda)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

23. The grounds argue that although the evidence of the appellant  and  his
    partner was found to lack  credibility,  this  and  the  other  adverse
    findings were  not  incorporated  into  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise.

24. Complaint is also made that the judge  failed  to  make  a  finding  in
    relation to the overseas conviction, in respect of which the  appellant
    was allegedly imprisoned in Kosovo for attempted murder. However,  this
    is patently wrong as at [5] of the decision the judge gave reasons  for
    not being able to rely on the conviction for attempted murder,  as  the
    respondent had failed to produce evidence of  it.  Mr  Clarke  did  not
    pursue this ground.

The Grant of Permission

25. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on  the
    basis that it was considered arguable that the judge erred  in  failing
    "to consider the second thread of the  requisite  test  of  considering
    whether it will be unduly harsh for the family to remain in the  United
    Kingdom if the appellant is deported."

26. Judge Hanson also considered  it  arguable  that  "the  proportionality
    assessment is incomplete as it was necessary for the Judge  to  clearly
    establish whether the appellant is able to meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules first and if not, why not. If it was not found unduly
    harsh for the family  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst  the
    appellant was removed the respondent's decision could  be  said  to  be
    arguably proportionate."

Preliminary Issue

27. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Bazini raised an entirely  new  issue,
    not the subject of any of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  and  despite  the
    absence of any cross-appeal. Mr Bazini, who represented  the  appellant
    at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, also confirmed that  he  did
    not raise the issue outlined below at the First-tier Tribunal.

28. As well as raising this issue at this very late stage  of  proceedings,
    without notice to the respondent, not even  in  a  Rule  24  reply,  Mr
    Bazini did not see fit to give any advance notice to  the  Tribunal  or
    submit a skeleton argument to assist the Tribunal. Only after close  of
    office  bours  in  the  evening  of  the  day   before   the   hearing,
    unfortunately not forwarded to me until shortly before the start of the
    2:30pm  hearing,  the  appellant's  representatives  sent   the   Upper
    Tribunal a series of emails attaching, without any explanation, several
    documents and copies of case authorities on which Mr  Bazini  proceeded
    to rely at the hearing before me in making his preliminary point.

29. Given the unacceptably late raising of this preliminary issue, on  more
    than one occasion I enquired of Mr Clarke whether  he  needed  time  to
    consider or take instructions on the argument raised by Mr  Bazini,  or
    whether he wished to make an application to adjourn. However, Mr Clarke
    was content to proceed and  addressed  the  preliminary  issue  in  his
    various submissions.

30. The preliminary point raised by  Mr  Bazini  was  that,  whilst  it  is
    accepted that the judge failed to conduct the second limb of the unduly
    harsh  assessment,  for  the  reasons  relied  on  by  Mr  Bazini,  the
    respondent cannot show a material error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The substance of the reasoning for this submission
    can be summarises as follows.

31. It is clear from [24] of  the  refusal  decision  that  the  respondent
    relied on the automatic deportation provisions for a 'foreign criminal'
    under s32 of the UK Borders Act 2007, on the basis that  the  appellant
    had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  12  months.
    However, Mr Bazini argued that as the judge did not accept  the  Kosovo
    conviction and as s38(1)(b) of that Act, mirrored in  s117D(4)  of  the
    2002  Act,  does  not  include  a  person  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months 'only by virtue of  being  sentenced
    to consecutive  sentences  amounting  in  aggregate  to  more  than  12
    months,' the appellant did not fall within the definition of a 'foreign
    criminal' and is not, therefore, subject to the  automatic  deportation
    provisions.

32. Mr Bazini drew my  attention  to  the  recent  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SC (paras A398-399D: 'foreign criminal': procedure) Albania
    [2020] UKUT 00187 (IAC), where  the  panel  held  that  the  expression
    'foreign criminal' in paragraph A398 is to be construed by reference to
    the definition of that expression in section 117D of the 2002 Act.  The
    panel also held that a foreign national who has been convicted  outside
    the UK of an offence is not, by reason of that conviction,  a  'foreign
    criminal' for the  purposes  of  paragraphs  A398-399D  of  the  Rules,
    because s117D(2) requires the conviction to be in the  UK.  It  follows
    that argument about the Kosovo conviction is irrelevant to the issue as
    to whether the appellant is a 'foreign criminal' for  the  purposes  of
    application of the unduly harsh tests under paragraph 399.

33. In response to Mr Bazini's submissions on the preliminary point, whilst
    accepting that aggregated sentences cannot be relied  on  to  define  a
    person as a 'foreign criminal', Mr Clarke submitted  that  Mr  Bazini's
    argument was misconceived because the respondent's case at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was advanced on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  was  a
    persistent   offender   under    s117D(2)(c)(iii),    an    alternative
    qualification for a 'foreign criminal'. Mr Clarke referred me  to  [15]
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  where  the  judge  stated,  "The
    respondent's case is that the  appellant  has  a  long  and  persistent
    history of offending." Mr Clarke also pointed out, as noted above, that
    this issue now advanced was not taken by Mr Bazini  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, who, to the contrary, argued that deportation would be unduly
    harsh and that the offending was towards the lower end of the scale, as
    recorded by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at [14] of the  decision.  Mr
    Clarke maintained that at no stage previously had the appellant  argued
    that he fell outside the definition of a 'foreign criminal'.

34. In response, Mr Bazini submitted that the respondent's  decision  which
    was the subject of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal never asserted
    a reliance on the appellant being a 'persistent offender'.  He  further
    argued that the respondent would have had to make a  specific  decision
    that the appellant's deportation is conducive to the public good and in
    the public interest because "in the view of the Secretary  of  State...
    they are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
    law,' pursuant to paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules. Mr  Bazini
    stated that no part of the  refusal  decision  relied  on  398(c),  and
    pointed out that the decision to make a deportation order in  2015  was
    triggered by the appellant's alleged Kosovo  conviction.  However,  for
    the reasons set out above, it is not entirely clear  which  convictions
    the respondent has relied on, a conundrum made more  difficult  by  the
    passage of time and supervening events since the decision to deport was
    originally made.

35. I do not accept Mr Clarke's argument, relying on [15] of  the  decision
    to assert that the respondent put its case at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal hearing on  the  basis  of  the  appellant  being  a  persistent
    offender. I am satisfied that the judge's statement at  [15],  referred
    to above, was not a characterisation of the respondent's case on appeal
    as being a reliance on the 'persistent offender'  criteria  but  rather
    the incidental but relevant argument that as appellant had a  long  and
    persistent history of offending, there was a risk of further  offending
    if he was allowed to remain.  To  that  extent,  Mr  Clarke's  argument
    appears to be clutching at straws.

36. As the 'particular disregard for the law' phrase is  not  found  within
    the statutory definition of a 'foreign criminal' at s117D(2)(c)(iii) or
    s32, I am not satisfied that Mr Bazini is correct in  arguing  that  to
    qualify as a 'foreign criminal' it has to be shown that  a  'persistent
    offender' has a  'particular  disregard  for  the  law',  or  that  the
    respondent has to make a specific decision on that basis to be able  to
    rely on that reason for deportation.  Nevertheless,  I  note  that  the
    reference to that phrase at 398(c)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  an
    additional trigger  for  consideration  of  paragraphs  399  and  399A,
    including the 'unduly harsh'  test.  There  may  be  a  lacuna  in  the
    difference. However the point is academic, as I agree with Mr  Bazini's
    submission that the 'persistent offender' qualification for a  'foreign
    criminal' was not what the respondent relied on either  in  making  the
    decision to deport in 2015 or  the  decision  in  2017  to  refuse  the
    appellant's  human  rights  claim  against  deportation,  even   though
    reference was made to the appellant's "blatant disregard for  the  laws
    of the United Kingdom".  Neither  was  it  the  basis  upon  which  the
    respondent put its case at the First-tier Tribunal. Of course, it would
    remain open to the respondent to make a further decision on  the  basis
    of the appellant being a 'persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
    disregard for the law,' as  that  is  an  interpretation  open  on  the
    appellant's poor history of criminal offending,  including  during  the
    operational period of a suspended sentence.

37. Mr Clarke further argued that  the  appeal  was  an  appeal  against  a
    decision on a human rights claim and whether or  not  the  respondent's
    decision was flawed, it was not open to the First-tier Tribunal, or the
    Upper Tribunal, to allow the appeal on the basis that the  decision  of
    the respondent was made in error of law. He also pointed out that  this
    was not raised as a ground of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    issue for the First-tier Tribunal, submitted Mr Clarke, was whether the
    appellant's deportation breached  the  Human  Rights  Act.  He  further
    submitted that s117A(2) required the judge in  considering  the  public
    interest question to have regard to the  considerations  in  s117C.  It
    was, therefore,  not  determinative,  submitted  Mr  Clarke,  that  the
    appellant did not meet the 'foreign criminal'  definition,  or  such  a
    finding was not open to the judge, because the judge was considering  a
    human rights appeal and had to consider the factors  under  s117A-D  in
    order to make an article  8-compliant  decision,  including  the  undue
    harshness exception 2. However,  as  Mr  Bazini  quickly  pointed  out,
    s117A(2)(b) relates only to a 'foreign criminal' and if  the  appellant
    does not fall within the definition of a 'foreign criminal' the 'unduly
    harsh' does not apply.

38. Mr Bazini made the further argument in submissions that in the light of
    paragraph [60] of the very recent decision of the Court of Appeal in HA
    (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176,  there was  no  need  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  to  consider  the  exceptions,  "where  a  tribunal  is
    satisfied that there is a combination of circumstances,  including  but
    not limited to the harsh effect of the appellant's deportation  on  his
    family, which together constitute very compelling reasons sufficient to
    outweigh the strong public interest in deportation, but where it may be
    debatable whether the effect on the family taken on its own (as section
    117C(5) requires) is unduly harsh." However, that decision is not  this
    case, in which the judge did not find very compelling circumstances but
    allowed the appeal on the basis that it would be unduly harsh to expect
    the elder child to go  to  Kosovo,  which  finding  was  considered  to
    narrowly tipped the proportionality balance in favour of the appellant.
    In the circumstances I do not accept this part  of  Mr  Bazini's  wide-
    ranging arguments. However, in light  of  my  findings,  the  point  is
    academic.

39. It is not for this tribunal to make a  finding  that  the  respondent's
    decision or decisions were not in accordance with the law, or that  the
    respondent was wrong to rely on the Kosovo conviction  in  the  refusal
    decision. Contrary to the grounds, the First-tier Tribunal  judge  gave
    cogent  reasons  for  not  accepting  and  taking  into  account   that
    conviction, which in any event, applying SC (Albania), could not render
    the appellant a 'foreign criminal'.

40. I have also found that the respondent did not put its case on the basis
    of the appellant  being  a  'persistent  offender.'  Even  without  the
    application of SC (Albania), which had not been decided at the date  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision, it necessarily follows that once  the
    judge rejected the Kosovo conviction for an absence  of  evidence,  the
    appellant could no longer fall within  the  definition  of  a  'foreign
    criminal', as he had no qualifying sentence of 12 months  or  more.  It
    also follows that the automatic deportation provisions  of  statute  or
    the Rules did not apply. On that basis, the 'unduly harsh' tests of 399
    or s117C(5) did not need to be applied or the exceptions met to justify
    allowing the appeal.

41. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was  whether  the  appellant's
    deportation to Kosovo would involve a breach of article 8 ECHR. If  the
    appellant did not meet the definition of a foreign criminal', as stated
    above, the considerations in s117C could not be applied to him. Neither
    could the considerations under paragraphs 399 and 399A apply.  Further,
    in SC (Albania), the  Upper  Tribunal  declined  to  follow  the  wider
    interpretation in Andell (foreign criminal - para 398) [2018] UKUT  198
    (IAC), which had held that the relevant provisions of  the  Immigration
    Rules include not only foreign criminals as defined in Part  5  of  the
    2002 Act but also other individuals who, in the respondent's view,  are
    liable to deportation because of  their  criminality  and/or  offending
    behaviour. It follows that the deportation provisions only apply  to  a
    person qualifying as a 'foreign criminal' as defined by s117D(2)(c).

42. Had the judge accepted the Kosovo conviction, even though it would  not
    have rendered the appellant a 'foreign criminal' it would have  been  a
    relevant and powerful public interest factor favouring  deportation  to
    be taken  into  account  in  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise.
    However, as stated above, I accept that the Judge was entitled  not  to
    rely on it, for failure  of  the  respondent  to  produce  satisfactory
    evidence of it. The only course properly open to the judge, had it been
    realised that the 'foreign criminal' provisions did  not  apply,  would
    have been to  conduct  an  article  8  ECHR  proportionality  balancing
    exercise adopting the Hesham Ali 'balance sheet' approach in which  the
    imperative of a stronger pubic interest in deporting either a  'foreign
    criminal' or a person with a foreign conviction for  attempted  murder,
    did not apply.

43. Whilst the 'unduly harsh' test was  clearly  flawed  as  it  failed  to
    consider whether it would be unduly harsh for the children  and/or  the
    appellant's partner to remain in the UK without him, the  finding  that
    it would be unduly harsh for the  elder  child  to  go  to  Kosovo  was
    certainly relevant to that balancing exercise, as was  the  appellant's
    offending behaviour and other factors arising from  the  UK  conviction
    history, including the issue of  rehabilitation.  The  judge  was  also
    required to have regard all other relevant factors, including the  best
    interests of the children, and the considerations in  section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I am  satisfied  that
    in light of the matters addressed  above,  the  decision  discloses  an
    adequate proportionality balancing exercise at [24] of the decision.

44. It follows that in the peculiar circumstances of this  case,  I  cannot
    find that the errors of law identified by the respondent could or would
    have led to any different outcome to the appeal, so that  those  errors
    cannot be material.

45. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such
    as to require it to be set aside.

Decision

    The appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands so that  the  appeal  of
    the appellant remains allowed on human rights grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    7 September 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    7 September 2020

