
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16727/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 November 2020                 |On 12 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD USMAN KHURSHID

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation    (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     None received

For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS




Background

1.   This appeal comes before  me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup on 30 June 2020 (served on  11  August
2020) against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Young-Harry,
promulgated on 16 January 2020 following  a  hearing  at  Birmingham  on  30
December 2019.

2.   The appellant is a Pakistani national born  on  3  September  1987.  He
appeals against the respondent's decision of 24  September  2019  to  refuse
his application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years  of
continuous, lawful residence made following his entry as a  student  in  May
2009. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant had completed  ten
years of continuous and lawful residence under paragraph 276B  nor  that  he
would face very significant  obstacles  with  re-integration  on  return  to
Pakistan.

3.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-Harry who  heard
oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  submissions  from  the  appellant's
representative. The respondent was not represented.  The  judge  noted  that
the appellant's leave ended in either August  2017  (although  the  decision
letter refers to July 2017) or, with 3C leave in May 2018.  She  found  that
he had not shown that he had resided lawfully in the  UK  for  the  required
period and she found that he would not struggle on return to Pakistan as  he
claimed because he had a wife, child, parents and other  family  there.  She
found he retained familial, social and cultural ties and that he  would  not
face very significant obstacles on return. She found that although he had  a
private life in the UK, it had been formed at  a  time  when  his  stay  was
precarious and, further, his failure to meet the rules was a weighty  factor
against him in the balancing exercise. She considered s.117B and found  that
his  ability  to  speak  English  was  a  neutral  factor.  Accordingly  she
dismissed the appeal.

4.   The appellant sought permission to appeal. This was refused  by  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale on 8 April 2020 (served on 27 May 2020)  but
granted on limited  grounds  upon  renewal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Upper
Tribunal Judge Pickup considered it arguable that  the  judge  had  made  no
finding on the key issue  of  how  long  the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
resident. He considered that the period of residence  was  relevant  to  the
proportionality argument.

Covid-19 crisis

5.   Normally, the matter would have  been  listed  for  hearing  after  the
grant of permission, but due to the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
precautions against its spread, this did  not  happen.  Instead,  directions
were included with the grant of permission and sent to  the  parties  on  11
August 2020. They were asked to present any objections to the  matter  being
dealt with on the papers and to make any further submissions  on  the  error
of law issue within certain time limits.

6.   The respondent's submissions were received on 26 August 2020 But  there
has been no reply from the appellant. I note that  Judge  Pickup's  decision
was sent by first class post to both the appellant at  his  Reading  address
and to his representatives in Mitcham. Neither letter has been  returned  as
undelivered. I consider it unlikely that both would have gone astray. I  am,
therefore, satisfied that the grant of permission  and  included  directions
were properly served.

7.   I now consider whether it is appropriate to determine  this  matter  on
the papers. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of  Osborn  v  The  Parole
Board  [2013]  UKSC  61,  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note   No   1   2020:
Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic (PGN) and the  Senior  President's
Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to  the  overriding  objective
which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008 as being "to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with  cases  fairly  and
justly". To this end I have considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and
justly includes: dealing with it in  ways  that  are  proportionate  to  the
importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;  avoiding
unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings;  ensuring,
so far as practicable, that the parties are able  to  participate  fully  in
the  proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper   Tribunal
effectively;  and  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible   with   proper
consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

8.   I have had careful regard  to  the  evidence,  the  determination,  the
grounds and the grant of permission.  I consider that a full account of  the
facts are set out in the papers before the Tribunal, that the arguments  for
and against the appellant have been clearly set out in the grounds and  that
the issue to be decided is straightforward. There  are  no  matters  arising
from the papers which would require clarification and  so  an  oral  hearing
would not be needed for that purpose. I have regard  to  the  importance  of
the matter to the appellant and consider  that  a  speedy  determination  of
this matter is in his best interests. I am  satisfied  that  I  am  able  to
fairly and justly deal with this matter without a hearing  and  now  proceed
to do so.

Respondent's Submissions

9.   For the respondent, Ms Aboni acknowledges that there was no  Presenting
Officer to assist the judge at the hearing but argues that  the  appellant's
immigration history was set out in the decision letter. It  is  agreed  that
the appellant's Counsel was correct to maintain the appellant had  3C  leave
until 4 May 2018 following the refusal of his application for  leave  on  26
March  2018  and  whilst  his  administrative  review  was  ongoing.  It  is
submitted that his period of lawful leave  commenced  on  16  May  2009  and
ended on 4 May 2018, a period of almost nine years. Ms  Aboni  submits  that
although the judge may have failed to  make  a  finding  on  whether  lawful
leave ended in August 2017 or May 2018, the  error  is  immaterial  because,
even taking the latter date, the appellant could  not  demonstrate  that  he
had resided lawfully in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  at  least  ten
years. It is pointed out that the judge properly concluded as such and  that
her decision should, therefore, be upheld.

Discussion and conclusions

10.  I have taken account of the evidence, the determination,  the  grounds,
the grant of permission and the submissions in reaching a decision.

11.  The parties appear to now  be  in  agreement  that  the  appellant  had
lawful leave from 16 May 2009 when he arrived until 4 May 2018 when  his  3C
leave expired. That is a period of less  than  nine  years  and  so  plainly
cannot meet the ten  year  requirement  under  paragraph  276B.  The  judge,
therefore, reached the only conclusion possible  when  she  found  that  the
requirements of that rule could not be met  (at  16).  Indeed,  the  grounds
acknowledge that (at paragraph 7 of the grounds)  and  it  appears  also  to
have been accepted by Counsel in his submissions at the hearing (at 15).

12.  The issue taken with the decision is that the judge failed  to  make  a
finding on when the appellant's lawful leave had expired and  it  is  argued
that this is a material error because the period  of  residence  impacts  on
the proportionality assessment.

13.  At paragraph 14 the judge sets out the conflicting  assertions  of  the
appellant and the respondent. The appellant maintains that  he  has  resided
lawfully in the UK for ten years. It is plain  from  his  witness  statement
that he includes in his calculation a fresh application made on 16 May  2018
after the expiry of his 3C leave on 4  May  2018,  arguing  that  the  later
application was made within the 14 day grace period and so should have  been
counted.    The  respondent  maintains  in  the  decision  letter  that  the
appellant's last  period  of  leave  expired  on  26  March  2018  when  his
application of 14 July 2017 was refused. Following that,  he  had  3C  leave
until 4 May 2018. The respondent thus concludes that  ten  years  of  lawful
leave had not been established.

14.  The judge then finds that she is unable  to  make  a  finding  "without
having all the details" as to whether the period of leave ended in  2017  or
in 2018 (at 16) however she finds on either basis the ten  year  requirement
has not been met. The issue now is whether her failure to make a  definitive
finding on the period of residence is a material error.

15.  I find it is not. The difference between the two dates is a  matter  of
months. It does  not  alter  the  judge's  finding  that  private  life  was
established at a time when the appellant's leave was  precarious.  Nor  does
it alter her findings that he retains familial,  social  and  cultural  ties
with his home country. It is significant that he has a wife, child  and  his
parents living there and that he has continued  to  visit  during  his  stay
here. No very significant obstacles are identified.  The starting  point  of
the balancing exercise as undertaken by the judge  was  that  the  appellant
did not meet the requirements of either paragraph  276B  or  276ADE(1).  His
application for further leave as a Tier 1 entrepreneur  was  refused  so  he
does not meet the requirements of the  Tier  1  scheme  either.  He  has  no
family here. No details of any friends have been  provided  and  apart  from
his period of residence no specifics are provided  as  to  why  his  private
life cannot be enjoyed in Pakistan where  he  would  be  reunited  with  his
wife, child and parents. No other outcome would have been possible  in  this
appeal even if  the  judge  had  made  a  definitive  finding  on  when  the
appellant's leave expired.

16.  I, therefore, conclude that the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in  her
proportionality assessment on  article  8.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the
appeal is upheld.

Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of  law
and it is upheld.

Anonymity

18.  There has been no request for an anonymity order and I  see  no  reason
to make one.


Signed


R. Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge

Date: 9 November 2020
