
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16543/2017
                                                               HU/16545/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2019                     |On 15 April 2019                     |
|                                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          MRS M O Y - 1st Appellant
                             AM -  2nd Appellant
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - (UKVS SHEFFIELD)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Maurantonis of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

   1. The Appellants are both citizens of Nigeria. The first Appellant who I
      shall refer to as the Appellant is the mother of the 2nd Appellant AM.
      The Appellant was born on 20 March 1972 and AM was born on 17  October
      2012. They both appeal against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Rhys-Davies sitting at Hatton Cross on 14  November  2017  in
      which he dismissed their appeals against decisions of  the  Respondent
      dated 2 November 2017. Those decisions were to refuse  the  Appellants
      applications for entry clearance under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
      Rules and outside those rules under Article 8, (right to  respect  for
      private and family life). The Appellant wished to join her husband  Mr
      [HO] ("the sponsor"), a British citizen present  and  settled  in  the
      United Kingdom. AM wished to travel with her mother as her  dependent.
      At first instance it was agreed that AM's appeal would stand  or  fall
      in line with the Appellant's appeal.

The Appellants' Case

   2. The Appellant's case was set out by the Judge at [14] to [32]  of  the
      determination. In summary, the Appellant had travelled to  the  United
      Kingdom in 2011 where she had a relationship with a  man  that  lasted
      until her return to Nigeria on 2 April 2012. She  became  pregnant  by
      this relationship and her marriage to  her  husband  broke  down.  She
      returned to the United Kingdom in September 2012 and AM was born  here
      in October of that year. In 2013 the Appellant  met  the  sponsor  and
      they began a relationship. The Appellant overstayed her visit visa  by
      a few days and was advised to return voluntarily to Nigeria.  She  had
      lost her passport so needed to obtain a travel document and  she  used
      the same surname as AM. The Appellant left the United  Kingdom  on  14
      April 2013 after being questioned by immigration  officers  about  the
      identity on her travel document.


   3. She changed her name from her married name to  the  surname  [Y].  She
      kept in contact with the sponsor who travelled  to  Nigeria  in  April
      2015 and the parties married. She then applied for entry clearance  as
      the sponsor's spouse in April 2016 which  was  refused  in  June  2016
      because there were outstanding NHS charges incurred when the Appellant
      gave birth to AM. The Appellant and  the  sponsor  remained  in  daily
      contact since then and there was a further visit  to  Nigeria  by  the
      sponsor in May 2018. The sponsor paid the outstanding NHS charges. The
      Appellant supported herself from her own business after  returning  to
      Nigeria. She currently lives in Lagos in a home owned  by  her  family
      where they have a maid. The Appellant's parents had not  come  to  her
      wedding due to insufficient time.

The Decision at First Instance

   4. The Judge began his findings and conclusions at [50]. He rejected  the
      Respondent's argument that the Appellant's passport submitted in  2016
      was not genuine. This meant that paragraph 320 (3) of the  Immigration
      Rules (which imposes a mandatory refusal where a document establishing
      identity has not been produced) was not substantiated.  He  held  that
      for the Respondent to succeed under paragraph 320  (11),  which  is  a
      discretionary refusal, with a four-stage process, the  Respondent  had
      to show both that the Appellant had overstayed and had contrived in  a
      significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules.
   5. The Judge attached weight to the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not
      overstayed, as she had claimed, by a matter  of  days  but  rather  of
      months. She arrived in September 2012 but did not  leave  until  April
      2013 when she should have left in February of that year. This was  two
      months or 33% longer than her visit visa  permitted.  The  explanation
      given by the Appellant for not abiding  by  the  requirements  of  her
      visit visa lacked material  detail.  The  sponsor  could  add  nothing
      useful to that. The Appellant was in  an  emotional  state  after  the
      birth of AM but that did not explain the failure to leave  the  United
      Kingdom. The Respondent had thus proved the 2nd stage.


   6. The  3rd  stage  was  to  determine  whether  there  were  aggravating
      circumstances.  Although  the  Judge  did  not   consider   that   the
      Appellant's recourse to NHS treatment would amount to  an  aggravating
      feature, he did consider that the Appellant's use of a false  name  on
      the emergency travel document she was using when leaving  the  country
      would amount to such. It was inherently  unlikely  that  the  Nigerian
      High Commission  staff  would  have  suggested  the  use  of  a  false
      identity.  The  use  of  a  false  name  for  innocent  purposes   was
      unnecessarily complicated and made no sense.  AM's  birth  certificate
      would bear the Appellant's name as AM's mother. There would be no need
      for the Appellant to worry about having a travel document in  her  own
      name with a different family name  to  that  of  AM.  The  Appellant's
      travel  document  also  bore  a  different  date  of  birth  but   the
      Appellant's explanation that this was an error  was  rejected  by  the
      Judge.

   7. The Respondent had properly applied the exercise of  discretion  under
      paragraph 320(11) and the Judge directed himself that it was not  open
      to him to review that exercise of discretion, relying on the  case  of
      Ukus [2012] UKUT 307. The burden of proof was on the Appellant to show
      that the relationship between her and the sponsor was genuine and  was
      subsisting. For the reasons given by the Judge at [73] to [79] he  did
      not find that to be the case. The time the couple had  spent  in  each
      other's company had been very short and it was reasonable to expect to
      see some documentary evidence of contact throughout  the  period  they
      had been apart. There was no explanation why they had spent so  little
      time together since the Appellant had left  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      explanation as to why the Appellant's parents  had  not  attended  the
      wedding, given by the sponsor, lacked credibility.

   8. The Judge found that the Appellant could not succeed under  Article  8
      outside the  rules  because  the  relationship  was  not  genuine  and
      subsisting. However even if it was any interference with  family  life
      was proportionate because it could continue  as  it  was  at  present.
      There was no evidence about the sponsor's relationship  with  his  own
      children in the United Kingdom in so far as those relationships needed
      to be considered if deciding whether the sponsor might go  to  Nigeria
      to be with the Appellant. The sponsor could travel to Nigeria, it  was
      not a country of which he had no knowledge at all. He  might  want  or
      need to find employment, but he would not be handicapped  on  the  job
      market. The appeal was dismissed.


The Onward Appeal

   9. The Appellant appealed against this decision  in  grounds  settled  by
      counsel who had appeared at first  instance.  The  first  ground  took
      objection  to  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  contrived   to
      significantly frustrate the Immigration Rules. That finding  was  said
      to be based on  errors  of  fact  and  law.  The  Appellant  had  only
      overstayed by one month not two.  She  should  have  left  the  United
      Kingdom by 14 March 2013 not, as the Judge found, by 14 February. This
      was material because the Judge had attached significant weight to  the
      period of overstaying. A period of up to 28 days should be  overlooked
      when calculating lawful residence.  Since  the  overstaying  was  less
      serious than the Judge believed it to be, it followed  that  the  true
      facts might demonstrate that she had not contrived  in  a  significant
      way to frustrate the intention of the Rules.


  10. The Appellant was not in the United Kingdom illegally when she met the
      sponsor.  According  to  the   jurisprudence,   some   pragmatism   in
      interpreting  paragraph  320(11)  was   desirable   because   if   the
      aggravating circumstances were  not  truly  aggravating  there  was  a
      serious risk that those in the position of someone like the  Appellant
      would continue to remain in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

  11. Ground 2 complained that there were no explicit  credibility  findings
      against  the  sponsor  and  there  was  a  flawed  assessment  of  the
      relationship which was genuine and subsisting. If the  Judge  were  to
      reject the sponsor's account of the relationship, he would have had to
      have  made  adverse  credibility  finding.  The  Judge  had   required
      corroboration  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  and   had   found   the
      Appellant's evidence not credible, but he had not said that  he  found
      the sponsor lacking in credibility  or  that  the  sponsor's  evidence
      should be approached with caution  as  he  had  with  the  Appellant's
      evidence. The Judge could not find this relationship to be not genuine
      and subsisting without grappling with the central contradiction  which
      was that the sponsor had attended court to attest to the fact that  he
      was in a genuine relationship with the Appellant.

  12. The Appellant lived in the sponsor's house  in  Nigeria  not,  as  the
      Judge had said, in the Appellant's house and he was  paying  money  to
      the  Appellant.  The  Appellant's  motive  did  not  account  for  the
      sponsor's motive nor did it undermine it. Just because an  immigration
      benefit might result for one party did not mean  the  marriage  was  a
      sham.

  13. Ground 3 argued that the authority of Ukus relied upon  by  the  Judge
      did not mandate the outcome that the Judge was unable  to  review  the
      legitimate exercise of the Respondent's discretion under paragraph 320
      (11). The case predated the 2014 changes  to  the  2002  Act  and  the
      Appellant could no longer appeal on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent
      should have exercised his discretion differently. Nevertheless,  there
      was a right of appeal arising against the entry clearance refusal  and
      it was always open to a Judge in a human rights appeal  to  find  that
      the Respondent's exercise of discretion breached Article 8. Since  the
      Appellant could otherwise succeed under the rules that amounted  to  a
      strong reason to allow an  Article  8  appeal.  Where  an  application
      failed due to the exercise of discretion under 320 (11)  it  would  be
      open to a Judge to remake the decision in the Appellant's  favour.  At
      the very least it was a factor to which considerable weight should  be
      attached in the proportionality assessment.

  14. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 29 January  2019.  In
      granting permission to appeal he found it arguable that the Judge  had
      misinterpreted the chronology in calculating the  length  of  overstay
      which was arguably one month not two months. The degree of aggravation
      ascribed by the Judge may have been affected. Arguably the  Judge  had
      not set out a sufficient  analysis  to  conclude  that  the  sponsor's
      credibility was undermined. This had affected the  Judge's  conclusion
      on the nature of  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the
      sponsor. The Judge had not referred to  the  matters  put  forward  to
      explain  why  the  Appellant  had  not  left  the  United  Kingdom  in
      accordance with her visit visa. That arguably affected  the  reopening
      of the exercise of discretion.

  15. The  Judge  had  found  that  the  sponsor's  answers  about  why  the
      Appellant's parents had not attended the wedding  lacked  credibility.
      It was arguable that this was an  insufficient  analysis  of  how  the
      sponsor came to know why they had not attended given that sponsor  may
      or may not have been told by the Appellant or by  some  other  source.
      Arguably the Judge's conclusions about the credibility of the  sponsor
      were not based on  the  sponsor's  evidence  and  were  insufficiently
      analysed. The finding that the relationship  was  not  a  genuine  and
      subsisting marriage may have  been  affected  as  had  the  Article  8
      exercise.

The Hearing Before Me

  16. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine in the first place where there was a material error  of  law
      in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that it fell to be set
      aside. If there was then I would make directions on the  rehearing  of
      the appeal. If there was not, the decision  at  first  instance  would
      stand.


  17. For the Appellant counsel relied on the three grounds of  appeal.  The
      first ground was that it was  erroneous  for  the  Judge  to  rely  on
      overstaying. The Appellant had a two-year visit visa under  which  she
      was only entitled to stay for a maximum of 6 months at  a  time.  What
      had happened in this case was she had overstayed  the  6  months  visa
      requirement by 30 days. Since 28 days was to be disregarded that meant
      only 2 days was an overstay. This  miscalculation  of  the  Judge  had
      infected everything else and was a material error of law.

  18. The key question under paragraph 320 (11) was  whether  the  Appellant
      had contrived significantly to frustrate the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      Appellant  had  explained  in  her  witness  statement  why  she   had
      overstayed, she had good reasons to do so. It was wrong for the  Judge
      to say that the Appellant had  met  the  sponsor  when  she  was  here
      illegally. That was due to the Judge's miscalculation.  In  the  Upper
      Tribunal decision of PS India [2010] UKUT it was made clear  that  the
      purpose of paragraph 320 (11) was to give an incentive to  individuals
      to return voluntarily to make an application for entry clearance  from
      their country of origin rather than persist in remaining in the United
      Kingdom without leave.

  19. The Appellant had left the United Kingdom  voluntarily.  She  had  not
      appealed the previous refusal because she had decided to apply  again.
      The question was whether there  were  aggravating  circumstances.  The
      Respondent claimed that the Appellant refused  to  sign  documents  in
      relation to payment for treatment but there was no  evidence  of  that
      before the Judge.  The  Judge  was  wrong  in  law  to  say  that  the
      Appellant's use of  the  NHS  facilities,  by  giving  birth,  was  an
      aggravating factor when the entire amount due to the NHS was  paid  by
      the sponsor before the current application was made.

  20. The other aggravating factor was said to be the Appellant's change  of
      surname on the passport she used  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
      return to Nigeria. The Appellant had been advised by the Nigerian High
      Commission to change her surname to that of her child  as  that  would
      make it easier for her to take the  child  back  to  Nigeria.  It  was
      apparent from the Respondent's own CPIN that  Nigeria  was  a  country
      where fake documents were normally and socially acceptable,  but  that
      argument had cut both ways. The High Commission would think there  was
      nothing fraudulent about advising the Appellant to  change  her  name.
      She had no financial advantage in leaving  the  United  Kingdom  under
      that identity.

  21. In relation to ground 2 there was no  full  attack  on  the  sponsor's
      credibility when he was the only one who could give live  evidence  at
      the hearing. I queried whether it  might  be  a  situation  where  the
      sponsor thought he was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
      the Appellant, but the Appellant did not think that. Counsel  accepted
      that it was for the Appellant to show that she was in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship. There were a number of  errors,  for  example
      the Judge thought the Appellant lived in her own property, but she did
      not, she lived in the sponsor's property in Nigeria. The  sponsor  had
      paid her NHS debt. Relying on the case of Goudey  [2012]  UKUT  00041,
      counsel submitted  that  whilst  there  might  be  some  gaps  in  the
      communications between the parties there were 103 pages of evidence of
      communications and he asked rhetorically what more  might  be  needed.
      The sponsor had sought further evidence from the telephone  companies,
      but they could not provide that.

  22. As to ground 3, this was an appeal against a decision under section 84
      of the 2002 Act and matters at the date of  the  hearing  were  to  be
      taken into account. Although the issue of discretion was a matter  for
      the Respondent alone as this was an Article 8 case the application  of
      the discretion should have  been  factored  into  the  proportionality
      exercise. There was nothing at all in the determination about the duty
      under section 55 of the 2009 Act to consider the best interests of the
      2nd Appellant who was a child.

  23. In reply, the Respondent argued there was no material  error  of  law.
      This was an entry clearance application. As the Judge had  found  that
      it was not a genuine and subsisting relationship, Article 8 could  not
      be engaged. There was no authority produced for the argument that  the
      first 28 days of an overstay would  be  disregarded.  Irrespective  of
      whether the overstay was  one  or  2  months,  the  Appellant  was  an
      overstayer. Ground 1 was merely an argument about the weight placed on
      the evidence. The Judge was entitled to make the findings that he  did
      and there were matters that the sponsor could not assist  with.  There
      was no merit in either the 2nd or the 3rd grounds in the light of  the
      Judge's findings.

  24. I queried with the advocates the statement in the  grounds  of  onward
      appeal that the Judge had not made any  explicit  adverse  credibility
      findings against the sponsor, see paragraph 11 above. At [75]  of  the
      determination the Judge had said in terms "I  further  find  that  the
      sponsor's answers about why the  first  Appellant's  parents  did  not
      attend the wedding lack credibility". Counsel  stated  that  what  was
      highlighted at [75] was a lack of credibility about the evidence about
      the wedding but accepted that this might not be his  strongest  point.
      He argued that at [75] the Judge had speculated about what the sponsor
      did not say rather than what he had said. There was  a  domino  effect
      resulting in dismissal of the  appeal,  once  the  Judge  had  made  a
      finding that this was not a genuine relationship.

Findings

25. This is a reasons-based challenge to the determination.  The  structure
    of the Judge's determination is that  there  is  a  four-stage  process
    under the Rules. (i) Did the Appellant contrive to frustrate the Rules?
    (ii) Did she overstay? (iii) Were there aggravating circumstances? (iv)
    Did the Respondent exercise his discretion correctly or at all?


26. The Appellant argues that the Judge, having incorrectly calculated  the
    period of the Appellant's overstay, has disregarded  the  fact  that  a
    period of overstay is permitted under the Rules. The Appellant  was  in
    possession of a two-year visitor's visa but this only permitted her  to
    stay in the United Kingdom for periods of up to six months after  which
    she was required to return to Nigeria before being able to  return  and
    enjoy another period of up to six months. In this case the Judge  found
    that the Appellant came back to the United Kingdom on 14 September 2012
    and the 2nd Appellant was born just over one month later on 17  October
    2012. The Appellant was encountered by immigration officers  attempting
    to leave the United Kingdom on 14 April 2013 that is  just  over  seven
    months later. There is therefore an error at [56] of the  determination
    where the Judge states that the Appellant overstayed by two  months  or
    33% longer than her visit visa permitted. In  fact,  the  overstay  was
    half of that.
27. However, the reference to a disregard of a period of overstaying of  up
    to 28 days relates to paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules.  This
    is a mandatory provision and entry clearance must be refused where  the
    applicant has previously breached immigration laws by overstaying.  For
    the purposes of  calculating  the  period  of  overstaying  under  that
    paragraph, overstaying of up to 28 days will be disregarded.  There  is
    no similar provision for paragraph 320 (11).  This  is  not  surprising
    since subparagraph (7B) relates to a mandatory condition and  therefore
    a period of 28 days grace is built into the Rules. Paragraph  320  (11)
    by contrast is a discretionary provision which means that  for  example
    the length of time spent overstaying could be a factor to be taken into
    account  by  the  Respondent  when  exercising  his  discretion.  Thus,
    although the Judge's calculation was incorrect the principle  which  he
    applied was not. There was no 28-day period  applicable  to  this  sub-
    paragraph.


28. The overstay of over one month was a substantial one and not  one  that
    could be overlooked by an application of the de minimis principle.  The
    idea of encouraging voluntary returns, suggested in PS  India  did  not
    therefore apply. Would the Judge have still considered that an overstay
    of one month was a significant breach such that  it  demonstrated  that
    the Appellant had contrived in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intentions of the Immigration Rules? It is not necessary  to  speculate
    on this point, as the answer can be  found  at  [58]  where  the  Judge
    carefully considered the Appellant's explanations for  the  overstaying
    and found none of them to be adequate. It is clear therefore  that  the
    Judge considered  that  the  overstaying  meant  that  the  2nd  stage,
    contriving to frustrate the rules, was met.

29. The grant of permission to appeal is  incorrect  when  it  states  that
    arguably  the  Judge  did  not  adequately  consider  the   Appellant's
    explanation for the overstay. The Appellant knew the terms of her visa,
    she did not say when she had lost her passport and she did not say when
    the father of the 2nd Appellant cut off all contact with  her.  It  was
    open  to  the  Judge  to  say  that  what  was  in  effect  a  lack  of
    explanations, failed adequately to deal with why the Appellant did  not
    leave the United Kingdom in accordance with her visit visa.

30. The 3rd stage concerned whether the Respondent had proved the existence
    of aggravating circumstances. The Judge found two aggravating features.
    The first was the receipt of NHS treatment which the Appellant was  not
    entitled to and the second concerned the use of a  false  name  on  the
    Appellant's emergency travel document which she was using to  exit  the
    United Kingdom. It is  worth  bearing  in  mind  that  the  Appellant's
    pregnancy was considerably advanced when  she  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 14 September 2012. She  was  at  that  stage,  eight  months
    pregnant. The Judge does not speculate on whether the Appellant had any
    medical clearance indicating she was fit to fly but it is difficult  to
    see how the Appellant could have  been  unaware  that  she  was  highly
    likely to need the services of the National Health Service very shortly
    after her arrival in the United Kingdom.

31. The Judge recorded the submission that the Appellant had not  travelled
    to the United Kingdom to give  birth  to  the  2nd  Appellant  and  the
    Appellant's denial that  she  had  refused  to  sign  forms  whilst  in
    hospital but in any event that was not the basis on which the Judge had
    found the recourse to NHS treatment to be an  aggravating  feature.  It
    was that the Appellant had recourse to NHS's treatment  while  she  was
    not so entitled. That the amount of the NHS  charges  was  subsequently
    paid was noted by the Judge but evidently not found to be a  sufficient
    explanation. It is not just a question of the financial cost, important
    as that is. It is  also  that  someone  who  is  not  entitled  to  NHS
    treatment but nevertheless receives it, is using resources at that time
    which potentially prevents another person who is entitled  to  use  the
    NHS from doing so.

32. The 2nd  aggravating  circumstance  related  to  the  use  of  a  false
    identity. At [62] the Judge noted that the use of  multiple  identities
    could be  an  aggravating  circumstance  although  I  accept  that  the
    sentence "it is not argued that the use of multiple identities can also
    be  an  aggravating  circumstance"  is   somewhat   infelicitous.   The
    Appellant's ground of appeal in relation to this point is to argue that
    fake documents are socially acceptable in Nigeria and the Nigerian High
    Commission in London would  not  have  considered  there  was  anything
    unusual about the Appellant using a fake  document.  An  allegation  of
    this sort would need to be substantiated by evidence, for example  that
    corruption was commonplace in the  Nigerian  High  Commission  in  this
    country. No such evidence was placed  before  the  Judge  and  no  such
    evidence was placed before me. The Judge was entitled to conclude as he
    did at [64] that the claim that the High Commission staff would suggest
    the use of a false identity was inherently unlikely.

33. The 4th stage related to the exercise of discretion by the  Respondent.
    The Judge relied on a pre-2014 Act case but  the  argument  essentially
    turns on whether the Judge should have  factored  into  his  Article  8
    proportionality exercise that  the  Respondent  could  or  should  have
    exercise discretion in the Appellant's favour. It is difficult  to  see
    what merit this submission has  in  the  light  of  the  Judge's  other
    conclusions.  The  Judge  found  that  there  was  not  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage between the Appellant and the sponsor and there was
    no reason why the Respondent should have exercised  discretion  in  the
    Appellant's favour.  At  [71]  the  Judge  stated  in  terms  that  the
    Respondent had properly applied paragraph 320 (11) and  the  consequent
    discretion. Given that the Judge  did  not  accept  that  the  marriage
    between the Appellant and the sponsor was genuine, it was difficult  to
    see where the proportionality exercise would arise in this case.  There
    was no interference with family life because there was no family life.

34. The Judge had the evidence of the sponsor but for  cogent  reasons  did
    not accept that evidence indicated the genuineness of the marriage. The
    grounds are misconceived when they say that the Judge made  no  adverse
    credibility findings against the sponsor and I can only  conclude  that
    the drafter of the grounds, who appeared at first instance  before  the
    Judge  but  not  before  me,  had  not  carefully  read  [75]  of   the
    determination, see  for  example  paragraph  7  above.  The  Judge  was
    concerned about the lack of involvement in the wedding  by  either  the
    sponsor's family or the Appellant's which had not  been  satisfactorily
    explained and which cast further doubt on the  claimed  genuineness  of
    the relationship. That was a matter for the Judge, he had  the  benefit
    of hearing the sponsor give evidence and was thus best placed to form a
    judgement of the credibility or otherwise of the sponsor and the  claim
    that the marriage was genuine.

35. The Judge did not require the production  of  particular  evidence  of
    mutual devotion before being able to find this was a  genuine  marriage
    (a requirement which Goudey mandates against).  It  was  not  just  the
    absence of communications but also the absence of a credible reason why
    they had spent such little time together. Again,  time  spent  together
    would not of itself be a requirement, but a genuine relationship  would
    be expected to have a reasonable explanation for absence, but there was
    none here. The Judge also considered the matter on an "even if"  basis.
    Even if the relationship was genuine the Respondent's  decision  merely
    confirmed the status quo, it did not impose a new interference.

36. The grounds of onward  appeal  are  premised  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant could succeed under the rules but that was  clearly  not  the
    case. The Judge had demonstrated that the Appellant's  application  for
    entry clearance fell to be refused under the  discretionary  provisions
    of paragraph 320 (11). Since both the Appellant and 2nd Appellant  were
    outside the United Kingdom is difficult to see how section  55  of  the
    2009 Act would be relevant and the grounds do not suggest that it  was.
    The duty under section 55 appears to have been  raised  for  the  first
    time in submissions to me, it was not raised at first instance. It  was
    not a Robinson obvious point and there was no material error of law  in
    the Judge in not dealing with it.  The  Judge  considered  whether  the
    appeal should be allowed outside the Rules but for the  cogent  reasons
    he gave he found it could not be allowed. Overall the grounds of onward
    appeal and the submissions made to me are no more than  a  disagreement
    with the result, they do not indicate any material error of law on  the
    Judge's part. I dismiss  the  Appellant's  onward  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision.




Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

     Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 8 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 8 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



















