
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16523/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th February 2021                 |On 10th March 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           KABIRU OLALEKAN YEKINNI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Khan, ICS Legal


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  23  January  1989.   His
    appeal against the refusal of his human rights  claim  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge T Lawrence in a decision,  promulgated  on  3
    April 2020.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor in 2013  and  overstayed.  He
    was served with liability of notice of removal  in  2014.  He  began  a
    relationship with a British citizen [LPL] in 2016 and  they  have  been
    living together since June 2016. The Appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on  12  February  2019.  This  application  was  refused  on  30
    September 2019 and is the subject of this appeal.

3.   The judge concluded that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in Nigeria and no very significant obstacles  to
    the Appellant's re-integration. The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant
    enjoyed family life with LPL and the refusal of leave  amounted  to  an
    interference with their family life. He found that the interference was
    in accordance with  the  law  and  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
    interference was necessary and justified, having regard to  the  public
    interest and sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act.

4.   The judge considered the public interest in requiring the Appellant  to
    return to Nigeria to seek entry clearance. He  relied  on  Chikwamba  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 at [44], Heshim Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 at
    [34] and R (Agyarko and Ikuga) v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  at  [51].  The
    Respondent accepted the Appellant had a good chance of succeeding in an
    application for entry  clearance  because  LPL  earned  more  than  the
    minimum income threshold. The judge found that although  the  Appellant
    had overstayed his visit visa, there were no aggravating factors  which
    would result in a refusal under paragraph 320(11). The judge  concluded
    that "the Appellant's removal or requiring him to leave the UK would be
    disproportionate, and would not be justified."

5.   The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in law. There were no compelling Article 8  factors
    which would make it difficult for the  Appellant  and  his  partner  to
    return Nigeria. Having found there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK, there was  no  reasons  why  LPL
    could not return to Nigeria with the Appellant. Her present job  lasted
    for just a year and there was no significant reason why she  could  not
    leave her employment. The Appellant formed his relationship whilst  his
    leave was precarious. He had family in Nigeria who could support him in
    his application for entry clearance. The refusal of leave to remain did
    not breach Article 8.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    13 August 2020 on the grounds that, having  found  that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules, the judge failed to adequately
    explain why the consequences of removal would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
    for the purposes of GEN 3.2 of Appendix FM.

Submissions

7.   Ms Cunha submitted the judge's reasons were inadequate. There  were  no
    children to consider  and  no  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.  The
    Appellant formed his relationship after his leave had  expired  and  he
    could not meet the requirements of the immigration rules. The judge had
    failed to consider this as part  of  the  balancing  act  advocated  in
    Heshim Ali. The Appellant's family life was not exceptional. There  was
    nothing over and above the factors in the  immigration  rules  to  take
    into account. On the facts, the interference was not  disproportionate.
    There was no reason why the Appellant could not return to  Nigeria  and
    obtain entry clearance. This case was not comparable to  the  situation
    in Chikwamba. The judge failed to properly apply section  117B(4).  The
    Appellant's family and private  life  could  not  outweigh  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control.

8.   Mr Khan relied on  a  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  the  decision
    should be upheld. The facts set out in detail at [9]  of  the  decision
    were capable of supporting the judge's  finding  that  the  refusal  of
    leave to remain was disproportionate. LPL was a British citizen and all
    her family lived in the UK. She had never been to  Nigeria.  The  judge
    considered R (Chen) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) and Chikwamba at [23].
    At the time of the application was made, LPL had a full time  job.  The
    judge took into account  all  relevant  matters  and  gave  appropriate
    weight to the Appellant's relationship and the public interest at [42].
    There was no dispute the income threshold  was  met  and  therefore  it
    would be disproportionate to  remove  the  Appellant.  The  only  issue
    against the Appellant was his unlawful residence. There was  no  public
    interest in removal because the Appellant could meet  the  requirements
    for entry clearance. Removal would  disproportionately  interfere  with
    family life because of the  prolonged  delay.  The  decision  was  well
    structured and well balanced.

9.   Ms Cunha submitted that, having  found  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK, there could  be  no
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant to return and obtain
    entry clearance. The Appellant did not bring himself within  Chikwamba.
    The Appellant's appeal should be  dismissed  following  Agyarko.  There
    were  no  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  and  the  Respondent  was
    entitled to enforce immigration control. Any interference  with  family
    and private life was temporary. There was nothing exceptional  in  this
    case.

Conclusion and Reasons

10.  The Appellant came to the UK as a  visitor  and  has  remained  without
    leave since October 2013. He was aware of his liability to  removal  in
    April 2014. He did not leave the UK and remained in the UK  unlawfully.
    During this time, he formed a relationship with a British citizen, LPL.
    Section 117B(4) makes it clear that little weight should be attached to
    this relationship and to the Appellant's private life formed  when  his
    presence in the UK was precarious or unlawful.

11.  There was no challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the  UK  and
    no very significant obstacles to integration. The Appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    immigration rules. The failure to meet the  immigration  rules  informs
    the weight to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control.

12.  This was not a case where the  Appellant  was  certain  to  be  granted
    leave to enter if an application was made from outside the UK. Although
    the Appellant's ability to satisfy the entry clearance requirements was
    relevant, it was not a determining factor and the judge erred in law in
    treating it as such. The weight to be attached to the  public  interest
    because of the Appellant's lengthy period of unlawful residence and his
    failure to satisfy the immigration rules outweighed his right to family
    and  private  life  applying  section  117B  (4),  notwithstanding  the
    Appellant had a good chance of succeeding on an application  for  entry
    clearance at the date of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

13.  I find that the judge erred in law in  failing  to  consider  paragraph
    GEN 3.2 of the immigration rules. There  were  no  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences identified in the decision or apparent from facts found by
    the judge. Further, the judge failed to properly apply section  117B(4)
    and failed to properly carry  out  the  balancing  exercise,  attaching
    appropriate  weight  to  the  public  interest  given  the  Appellant's
    unlawful presence in the UK for seven years and his failure to  satisfy
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

14.  In R (Chen), the Upper Tribunal found at [43]:


         "Against all this was the  fact  that  the  applicant's  leave  had
         expired well before she and Mr  Cheung  began  their  relationship.
         They were married in the full knowledge that the applicant did  not
         have leave and that her immigration status  was  precarious.  There
         was no evidence of the length of the disruption to family life  (if
         family life was indeed disrupted)  if  the  applicant  returned  to
         China to apply for entry clearance. Weighing all of the factors  in
         the balancing exercise, there was plainly only one answer,  on  any
         legitimate view.

15.  On the  facts,  the  Appellant  has  not  shown  that  there  would  be
    significant interference with his family life by his temporary  removal
    if he returned to Nigeria to obtain entry clearance. He would have  the
    support of family and friends and there was  insufficient  evidence  to
    show that LPL's employment or ties to her family would prevent her from
    joining him if she wished.

16.  At the conclusion of the hearing, I asked the parties  for  submissions
    on the future conduct of the appeal should an error of law be found. It
    was not argued that the position had materially changed  save  for  the
    passage of time. On the facts of the Appellant's  case,  taken  at  its
    highest, the refusal of leave to remain would not breach Article 8.

17.  I find the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law and I set  aside  his
    decision dated 3 April 2020  and  remake  it.  The  Appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of leave to remain is  dismissed  on  human  rights
    grounds.


Notice of decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade.

The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of leave to remain  is  dismissed
on human rights grounds.

No anonymity order is made


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
