
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16081/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                  Decision & Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                                 |
|on 28 September 2018                   |                  On 10 October 2018        |
|                                       |                                            |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                  NILSA [R]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Raffles Haig
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Jerromes (the judge), promulgated on 7 December  2017,  in
         which she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
         decision dated 23 June 2016 refusing her human rights claim.

Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Brazil, date  of  birth  6  December
         1940. She entered the United Kingdom as a  visitor  on  31  January
         2015 before returning to Brazil in June 2015. On 16 September  2015
         she again entered the UK as a visitor. On 15 March 2016 she made an
         application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  her  family  and
         private life and because of her medical issues. The covering letter
         accompanying her application claimed that  the  appellant's  health
         had deteriorated to a significant degree and that she was unable to
         live on her own and was being cared for by her daughter. The letter
         stated that, prior to coming to the UK, the appellant  "was  living
         on her own." The letter stated  that,  although  she  had  3  adult
         children in Brazil, she could not rely on them to look  after  her.
         Her oldest  son  had  mental  health  issues  having  battled  drug
         addiction for much of his adult life, and her  other  son  was  now
         estranged from her due to quarrels between her and her son's  wife.
         The appellant's daughter  was  said  to  be  a  single  mother  who
         suffered from depression and was not capable of looking  after  the
         appellant.

      3.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  met   the
         requirements of the immigration  rules  relating  to  private  life
         (paragraph 276ADE). It was not accepted that  the  appellant  would
         face 'very significant obstacles' to her  integration  into  Brazil
         because she spent the vast majority of her life there  and  because
         she had not lost her ties. Nor did the respondent accept that there
         were exceptional circumstances which, consistent with Art 8,  might
         warrant a grant of leave to remain outside the  immigration  rules.
         The respondent  acknowledged  the  claimant's  medical  conditions,
         which included diabetes,  high  blood  pressure  and  an  irregular
         heartbeat, but noted that she had  suffered  from  diabetes  for  5
         years and had received treatment for hypertension and that a letter
         from a Consultant Cardiac Surgeon advised that she have a follow-up
         appointment with a cardiologist on her return to Brazil. The doctor
         stated that surgery was not necessary and medical management  would
         be his treatment of choice. The refusal attracted a right of appeal
         under s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. The judge had before her a bundle of documents including statements
         from the appellant and her daughter, [M],  a  manuscript  statement
         from [SR], and  medical  documents  including  a  letter  from  the
         Messina Clinic  dated  15  November  2017.  The  judge  heard  oral
         evidence from the appellant, her daughter and [MA], a friend of the
         appellant, and  considered  a  written  statement  from  [TS],  the
         paternal grandfather of [M]'s son.

      5. The judge accurately set out the relevant law, including the burden
         and standard of proof, and summarised the appellant's claim and the
         evidence from the appellant and her witnesses.

      6. The judge noted that [M]'s son was born on [ ~ ] 2014 and that both
         [M]  and  her  son  were  British  citizens.  In  setting  out  the
         appellant's evidence the judge noted in particular her  claim  that
         she was estranged from her son [F] because of his  wife,  and  that
         [F] and his wife had told the appellant to stay in the UK. At  [17]
         the judge recorded that, during cross  examination,  the  appellant
         said she previously lived in a room  in  Brazil  and  worked  as  a
         cleaner, and that although she was not earning much it paid for the
         room. When asked who she lived with in Brazil  the  appellant  said
         she lived on her own and paid her own rent with the help  of  money
         sent to her by [M]. [M] however indicated in her statement and  her
         oral evidence that the appellant previously lived with [F] and  his
         family and had done so for a period of 10 years.

      7. The judge noted the  appellant's  claim  that  she  had  "emergency
         health issues", that she could no longer live on her own  and  that
         she also had sight problems and was due to have cataract surgery on
         both eyes. The judge  noted  that  [M]  had  been  caring  for  the
         appellant for the last 2 years and cooked for her to ensure limited
         fat and salt intake as the appellant's cooking was "a bit fatty and
         salty". The judge set out the evidence relating to the  appellant's
         medical conditions including her heart condition, the existence  of
         ulcers on her toes, a requirement for regular diabetes checks,  and
         the  risk  of  water  entering  her  lungs  which  may  necessitate
         emergency hospital treatment. The judge noted that [M] ensured  the
         appellant took her medicine as the appellant could neither read nor
         write. The judge noted the  claim  that  the  appellant  was  fully
         dependent  on  [M]  for  her  daily  needs  both   physically   and
         emotionally. The judge set out the  medical  evidence  including  a
         letter from a Consultant Cardiac Surgeon dated  25  November  2015,
         and set out in detail the  content  of  a  letter  from  Dr  Flavio
         Messina GP of the Messina Clinic Ltd dated  15  November  2017  (at
         [25.6]).

      8. The judge noted the evidence that [M] could not afford to keep  the
         appellant in a care home in Brazil. Doctors and  medical  treatment
         was expensive in  Brazil  and  the  appellant  previously  obtained
         treatment for her diabetes and heart problems from  money  sent  by
         [M]. [M] would be able to care for the appellant in the UK with the
         help  of  her  son's  paternal  grandfather,  but  he  would   stop
         supporting the appellant if she returned to Brazil because he  only
         provided support as she was looking after her grandson.

      9. The judge also noted that [M] worked for 3 or 4  hours  a  day  and
         that during this time the appellant looked after her  grandson  and
         that [MA] sometimes helped her.

     10. Under the heading 'Findings  of  Fact'  the  judge  again  reminded
         herself of the standard and burden of proof and indicated that  she
         had taken account of all the evidence 'in the round'. At  [29]  the
         judge rejected the appellant's claim that she had lived on her  own
         in Brazil and that she had not received any financial support  from
         her children in that country. In reaching this conclusion the judge
         identified contradictory evidence given by [M] who  indicated  that
         the appellant had been  living  with  [F]  in  his  flat  when  she
         returned to Brazil in June 2015 and that prior to her visit to  the
         UK in January 2015 she had been living with him for 10  years,  and
         that he had contributed towards the cost of her  medical  care.  At
         [30] the judge rejected the appellant's claim that [F] had  refused
         to allow her to  resume  living  with  him.  The  judge  found  the
         appellant's claim to have had a big quarrel with [F] and  his  wife
         to be vague and unsupported with any evidence from [F] or his wife.
         The judge accepted that neither of the appellant's other 2 children
         living in Brazil were able to provide her with care.

     11. At [32] the judge rejected the appellant's claim that she  required
         long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.  In  support  of
         her conclusion the judge referred to  the  lack  of  an  up-to-date
         medical report from her consultant or  even  her  current  GP.  The
         judge noted that the various medical letters  and  other  documents
         only provided information relating to treatments and  referrals  in
         2015 and 2016. Given that the burden of proof was on the  appellant
         the judge did not find her claim to need long-term personal care to
         perform everyday tasks to be credible. The judge additionally noted
         that, despite [M] cooking for the appellant,  she  was  capable  of
         cooking herself and that the appellant was left with her grandchild
         for 3 or 4 hours a day without any other care  being  arranged  for
         either of them other than [MA] visiting twice  a  week.  The  judge
         found that [F] would be able to assist the appellant in  any  event
         with the medication for her diabetes and heart condition  and  that
         he would also be able to take her to hospital if  required.  Whilst
         accepting that [M] be unable to pay for full-time residential  care
         in Brazil the judge found that the appellant could  live  with  [F]
         and that he could continue to contribute towards the  cost  of  her
         medical treatment and medication as he did  so  in  the  past.  The
         judge additionally noted that the letter from [TS]  was  silent  on
         the point of financial support stopping if the  appellant  returned
         to Brazil.

     12. In  her  conclusions  the  judge  accepted  that  the  respondent's
         decision interfered with the family life of the appellant  and  her
         daughter, but found that the  decision  was  not  contrary  to  her
         grandson's best interests as he was only 3 years old and his  world
         was very much focused on his mother, and that the appellant did not
         meet the requirements of the immigration rules giving expression to
         family and private life considerations. In  particular,  the  judge
         found  there  were  no  'very   significant   obstacles'   to   her
         reintegration into Brazil because she could live with  [F]  and  be
         supported by him and he could continue to be supported by [M],  and
         because she had lived there until 74 years  of  age  and  would  be
         familiar with the language and culture. The judge took into account
         the factors contained in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002 and was not persuaded that the appellant  would  be
         able to make a successful entry  clearance  application  under  the
         Adult Dependants Relative provisions of Appendix FM  as  the  judge
         had not found that she required long-term personal care to  perform
         everyday tasks or that the required level of care was in any  event
         unavailable in  Brazil  or  unaffordable.  The  judge  consequently
         dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal and the parties' submissions

     13. The grounds contend that the judge gave no clear or  proper  reason
         why she did not accept that [F] had refused to allow her to  resume
         living with him and his wife. Contrary to the  judge's  description
         of the evidence being "vague and not supported" the grounds contend
         that the  witness  statements  and  oral  evidence  was  clear  and
         consistent on this issue, that it was plausible that the  appellant
         had a big quarrel with her daughter-in-law and that  her  son  felt
         compelled to take his wife's side, and that no supporting  evidence
         had been produced as the appellant was now estranged from [F].

     14. The grounds further contend that the  judge  was  not  entitled  to
         conclude that the appellant did not require long-term personal care
         to perform  everyday  tasks  because  she  suffered  from  type  II
         diabetes,  hypertension,  hyperlipidaemia,  symptomatic  peripheral
         vascular  disease,  ischaemic   heart   disease,   bilateral   foot
         ulceration,  and  atrial  fibrillation.  The  grounds  additionally
         submit that the judge failed to take into account the  letter  from
         Dr  Messina  dated  15  November  2017  which  indicated  that  the
         appellant required "special medical care" and  that,  "due  to  the
         patient's age and medical conditions, also her living circumstances
         (where there is no one to look after her in Brazil), she can't live
         or take care of herself alone", and  that  he  failed  to  consider
         [M]'s oral evidence that the appellant had  glaucoma/cataracts  and
         could hardly see and that [M] cooked for the appellant to limit her
         fat and salt intake.

     15. Most of the appellant's remaining grounds were essentially premised
         on what was said to be  the  judge's  unlawful  assessment  of  the
         evidence relating to [F]'s estrangement and whether  the  appellant
         required long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks. It  was
         however also submitted that the judge's finding in relation to  the
         grandson's best interests was contrary to  the  evidence  that  she
         cared for him 3 to 4 hours a day, and that if the appellant met the
         substantive  requirements   of   the   Adult   Dependent   Relative
         immigration rules, this would be highly relevant to any  article  8
         assessment.

     16. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on the basis
         that the judge failed to take relevant evidence into  account  when
         she found that the appellant could reside with her son in Brazil.

     17. In his oral submissions Mr Hawkin  relied  upon  and  expanded  his
         grounds of appeal submitting that the appellant made  it  clear  in
         her witness statement that she was now estranged from her  son  [F]
         and that the evidence of the quarrel was  plausible.  He  submitted
         that it was unrealistic and unreasonable to  expect  evidence  from
         [F] and his wife in the circumstances. Mr Hawkin submitted that the
         judge had not taken into account the 15 November 2017  letter  from
         Dr Messina and that the  medical  evidence  was  both  serious  and
         compelling and was inextricably bound up  with  whether  [F]  could
         look after the appellant.  I  was  invited  to  find  that  if  the
         appellant could meet the requirements for entry clearance under the
         Adult Dependent Relative provisions then this would be  pivotal  to
         any assessment of proportionality. It was  further  submitted  that
         there was a significant emotional component to the  requirement  of
         long-term personal care and that [M] provided this care.

     18. In her submissions Ms Kelly submitted  that  the  judge  found  the
         appellant to be an  unreliable  witness  and  that  the  judge  was
         entitled to approach her  claimed  estrangement  with  caution.  If
         there had been a quarrel  with  [F]'s  wife,  then  he  could  have
         provided a  statement  or  some  other  evidence  as  it  would  be
         preferable for him to provide evidence that  the  appellant  should
         remain in the UK. Furthermore, no details were provided as  to  the
         nature of the quarrel. The judge had considered the letter from  Dr
         Messina but  this  only  referred  to  earlier  evidence  and  made
         assumptions that had been already rejected by the  judge  (such  as
         whether the appellant would be living by herself in Brazil). If the
         appellant required such high degree of care  it  was  very  unusual
         that she was left for 3 or 4 hours alone each day with her  3-year-
         old grandson. It was submitted that the judge was entitled  to  her
         conclusions in relation to the best interests of  her  grandson  as
         his primary focus given his young age was on his mother.

     19. I reserved my decision.

     20. After the decision I received a written note from Mr Hawkin  noting
         that [M] had no choice but to work and the 3 to 4 hours a day  that
         the appellant looked after her grandson did not  detract  from  the
         fact that she still required long-term personal care from [M].

Discussion

     21. The judge did not accept that the appellant was estranged from  her
         son [F]. This finding was central to the judge's conclusions as, if
         it was one she was rationally entitled to  reach  on  the  evidence
         before her and for the reasons given, then the appellant  would  be
         able to re-join her son with whom  she  previously  lived  and  who
         previously contributed to  her  medical  expenses  and  her  upkeep
         generally and who, presumably, would continue to care for her.

     22. The evidence advanced by and on behalf of the appellant  concerning
         her estrangement from [F] was, on any view, vague  and  lacking  in
         detail. The covering  letter  accompanying  the  appellant's  human
         rights claim made a bare assertion that the appellant was estranged
         from her son "due to quarrels between  our  client  and  her  son's
         wife" (I note in passing that the covering letter wrongly  referred
         to the relevant son as [D] and not [F]). The appellant's  statement
         itself merely indicated that she was estranged from [F] because  of
         his wife. No explanation  for  this  significant  estrangement  was
         proffered. In her statements [M] merely stated that [F] had refused
         to take their mother back on the instigation of his wife, and  that
         the appellant and her son's wife had a big quarrel and were not  on
         speaking terms. No further  explanation  for  the  estrangement  or
         details of the  nature  of  the  quarrel(s)  was  advanced  by  the
         appellant or her daughter at the appeal hearing. It is, at the very
         least, surprising that no further explanation or description  of  a
         serious  family  dispute  that  allegedly  had   very   significant
         ramifications  for   the   appellant   was   provided.   In   these
         circumstances the judge was an arguably entitled to  conclude  that
         the evidence was vague. Nor was it unreasonable for  the  judge  to
         conclude that, despite the alleged estrangement, there was no  form
         of statement or other evidence from either  [F]  or  his  wife.  As
         pointed out by Ms Kenny, if [F] and his wife no  longer  wished  to
         support the appellant it would have been in their interests to have
         provided some  evidence  of  their  position.  Nor  was  there  any
         evidence of any attempt  by  the  appellant  or  [M]  to  obtain  a
         statement from [F]. In these circumstances it cannot be  said  that
         the  judge's  conclusion  was  outside  the  range  of   reasonable
         conclusions open to her.

     23. The judge's conclusion must also be properly contextualised. In the
         preceding paragraph the judge gave rational reasons  for  rejecting
         the appellant's claim that she had lived on her own in  Brazil  and
         that none of her children in Brazil provided her with any financial
         support. While the appellant claimed to have lived on  her  own  in
         Brazil (a claim supported in  her  covering  letter)  and  to  have
         earned enough money to pay the  rent  on  her  room,  her  daughter
         contradicted this evidence in her statement and at the hearing when
         explaining that the appellant had in fact lived  with  [F]  for  10
         years and  that  [F]  had  contributed  towards  the  cost  of  the
         appellant's medical care. In these circumstances  the  judge  would
         have approached the appellant's alleged estrangement from  her  son
         with a considerable  degree  of  caution  and  the  inconsistencies
         reinforced her entitlement to reject the evidence relating  to  any
         estrangement.

     24. For the reasons given above I find that the judge was  entitled  to
         reject the appellant's claim that she was estranged from [F].  This
         being so, the judge was entitled to find that the  appellant  would
         be able to continue living with [F] and that he would  be  able  to
         contribute towards the costs of her upkeep  and  the  cost  of  her
         medication.  The  rejection  of  the   family   estrangement   also
         undermines the  ground  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
         emotional component of the provision of long-term personal care  as
         [F] could reasonably be expected to duplicate  any  emotional  care
         provided by [M].

     25. Nor am I persuaded that the judge failed to take into  account  the
         letter from Dr Messina dated  15  November  2017.  The  judge  made
         reference to the letter at [2] and at [25.6], where she set out  in
         four paragraphs (a) to (d) the content of the letter. At [32.1] the
         judge referred to the absence of an up-to-date medical  report  and
         noted that the various medical letters  and  other  documents  only
         provided information about treatment in 2015  and  the  appellant's
         referral in 2016 to the Department of Metabolic Medicine and Multi-
         Disciplinary Diabetes Foot Clinic. The  letter  dated  15  November
         2017 noted that the appellant came for a consultation on  23  March
         2015 and that she had three more follow  up  appointments,  all  in
         2015, and that in 2016 she was in the care  of  the  Department  of
         Metabolic Medicine and Multi-Disciplinary Diabetes Foot Clinic. The
         letter did not therefore give any details of her current  state  of
         health and the judge's assessment at [32.1] was accurate. There  is
         nothing in the decision to indicate that the judge failed  to  take
         this medical letter into account. In any event, the doctor lists  a
         number of diagnosis, replicated in the grounds of appeal, but  does
         not provide any satisfactory explanation as to how they  impact  on
         the appellant's life and, in particular, whether the diagnoses  are
         such as to render her someone who requires long-term personal  care
         to perform everyday tasks. The letter  states  that  the  appellant
         requires 'special medical care' but this is not explained. Although
         the letter then states that, due to the appellant's age and medical
         conditions she cannot live  or  take  care  of  herself  alone  (no
         detailed explanation is given to support  this  assertion),  it  is
         apparent that the doctor based his  conclusion  on  a  belief  that
         there is no-one to look after the appellant in Brazil. This however
         was lawfully rejected by the judge. On  the  judge's  findings  the
         appellant will have someone to take care of her in Brazil. In these
         circumstances the judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant
         did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  and  the
         judge's assessment of the possibility of the appellant meeting  the
         requirements of the Adult  Dependent  Relative  provisions  of  the
         immigration rules at [37.6] cannot be faulted.

     26. Nor am I persuaded that the judge erred in her  assessment  of  the
         best  interests  of  the  appellant's  grandson.  The   judge   was
         demonstrably aware of the relationship between  the  appellant  and
         her grandson (see, for  example,  [15]  and  [32.3])  and  she  was
         entitled to  find  that  the  grandson's  best  interests  was  not
         undermined by the respondent's decision given his  very  young  age
         and his principle focus on his mother. There  was  nothing  in  the
         evidence  to  suggest  that  the   grandchild's   primary   support
         relationship was other  than  that  between  him  and  his  mother.
         Although a child may develop a strong substitute relationship  with
         a grandparent, it would otherwise require strong evidence  to  show
         that the child-grandparent relationship is as strong or significant
         as that between a child and his parent(s). Family life in Art 8 (1)
         is certainly broad enough to include the ties between  grandparents
         and grandchildren (see Marckx v. Belgium [1979] ECHR  2).  However,
         the relationship between grandparents and grandchildren by its very
         nature generally calls for a lesser degree of protection than  that
         between natural parents and their children (G.H.B. v UK Application
         no. 42455/98). There was little in the way of independent  evidence
         before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  relating  to   the   appellant's
         relationship with her grandson or relating to  the  impact  of  the
         appellant's removal on the  child's  physical  or  emotional  well-
         being.

     27. For these reasons I find that the judge did not materially  err  in
         law.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision does the making of an error on a  point  of
law.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


[pic]                               1 October 2018
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
