
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chambers  Appeal Number: HU/16872/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                                |                                 |
|On 2 April 2019                       |On 8 April 2019                  |
|                                      |                                 |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                     G H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Bashaw instructed by Platts Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. An anonymity direction was made previously in respect of this Appellant
    and shall continue.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated on 5 November 2018 against a refusal
    of a human rights claim made on 11 February 2016, which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 19 March 1972 and is a national of Pakistan.

 4. The Appellant entered the UK in 2005. In 2013  she  made  a  claim  for
    asylum which was refused and she was appeal rights exhausted on 23 July
    2013. She made a number of further submissions which were  refused  and
    on 2 December 2015 she made an application based on family and  private
    life which was refused on 21 January 2016. On 11 February 2016 she made
    a further human rights application which was refused.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Herwald  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge misunderstood  the
    Appellants case in suggesting that the thrust  of  the  case  was  that
    refusal of leave severely affected the Sponsors chance of getting  free
    IVF; when this was not their  case;  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the impact of the Forced Marriage Protection Order (FMPO) in so
    far as it was a factor in relation to the insurmountable obstacles  she
    faced in enjoying family life with  the  Appellant  in  Pakistan;   the
    Judge took onto account irrelevant evidence , her 'ability to cope ' in
    the UK as the issue was how her mental health issues  would  impact  on
    the assessment of insurmountable obstacles in Pakistan.

 7. On 13 February 2019 First-tier Judge Scott  Baker  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms  Bashaw  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) The Appellants case was that the Appellant met the requirements  of
         EX.1 in that  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  for  the
         Appellant and his partner continuing family life in  Pakistan.  The
         relevant issues, the  infertility  problems,  the  sponsors  mental
         health problems and the impact of the FMPO  had  to  be  looked  at
         cumulatively.

      b) The Judge mischaracterised the Appellants case at paragraph  22(n).
         The IVF problems were not the central issue but only  part  of  the
         reason why the Appellant and his  wife  would  face  insurmountable
         obstacles in Pakistan. The loss of opportunity was  the  key  issue
         for the sponsor and its likely impact on her mental health.

      c) In relation to the FMPO the Judge did not assess it at all and  the
         relevance of it to the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles  because
         the Appellants and sponsor would have no family support on  return.
         She accepted that this was not an asylum  claim  but  her  fear  of
         honour based violence would persist even if she relocated.

      d) In relation to Ground 3 the Judge used the fact that she  was  able
         to give evidence as a reason to say that she could cope of she  was
         returned to Pakistan. This was  irrelevant.  The  medical  evidence
         said  she  was  fragile  and  her  health  would  deteriorate.  The
         reference to  having  grown  up  in  a  Pakistani  environment  was
         irrelevant: Pakistan is different.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates submitted that:

      a) The Judge provided adequate reasons  in  relation  to  all  of  the
         issues raised in respect of 'insurmountable obstacles.'

      b) It was suggested  that  the  Judge  took  into  account  irrelevant
         evidence: it was not irrelevant the issue was one of  weight  which
         was a matter for the Judge: the fact that  she  was  able  to  give
         evidence although she had mental health issues was  something  that
         he was entitled t take into account. If the Sponsor had been unable
         to give evidence he clearly would have taken that into account. The
         suggestion that the fact that she had been brought up in a diaspora
         household is relevant to the issue of cultural familiarity and  was
         something which KO stated was relevant.

      c) At 22 (m) in relation to IVF the Judge found that IVF was available
         in Pakistan but the difference was that the treatment was not free.
         The burden was on them to show that the difficulty  they  perceived
         that delay might cause would adversely impact on her mental  health
         and the likelihood of success. If they were saying  the  clock  was
         ticking they had to establish this with evidence.

      d) In relation to the FMPO the Judge was assessing this  case  at  the
         date of hearing of a human rights claim not  an  asylum  claim.  He
         found that there was no evidence of any threats since the  date  of
         the asylum claim in 2013. The Judge was entitled to take the  view,
         given the size of Pakistan  and  the  intervening  absence  of  any
         continued threat that the Appellant had failed  to  establish  that
         the higher threshold which applied in this case,  that  there  were
         insurmountable obstacles had not been met.

      e) In relation to the Sponsors mental health the Judge had  to  assess
         the evidence that was before him. It was open to the Judge to  note
         that by the time of the hearing the only medication  taken  by  the
         Sponsor was beta blockers. There was no evidence from a  consultant
         psychiatrist that supported their claims.

10. In reply Ms Bashaw on behalf of the Appellant submitted

      a) The factors relied  on  by  the  Appellant  had  to  be  looked  at
         cumulatively.

      b) The Appellant had produced medical evidence which was at B1.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

13. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

15. I am satisfied that on any fair reading of the  Judges  findings  as  a
    whole he gave more than adequate reasons why he did not find any of the
    matters relied on  by  the  Appellant  either  singly  or  cumulatively
    amounted to the high threshold required to meet EX.1 that  there  would
    be insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and his  partner  enjoying
    family life together in Pakistan a country to which the Sponsor enjoyed
    dual nationality.

16. The Judges  assessment  of  whether  the  Appellant  arguably  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to  insurmountable
    obstacles such that removal was disproportionate addressed all  of  the
    issues raised by Ms Bashaw at paragraph 22 (a)-(r). It is cleat in  the
    way he set his findings out that he considered the matters cumulatively
    and there is no suggestion of any one  factors  being  viewed  as  more
    important than any other.

17. While the Judge does not explicitly refer to the FMPO in  his  findings
    he noted the Appellants evidence about  the  making  of  the  order  at
    paragraph 15 at acknowledged that a copy of the order was in the bundle
    so it could not rationally be argued that he has failed to take it into
    account. However the starting point in this case was that this was  not
    an asylum claim based on the threat of honour based  violence  as  that
    claim had previously been rejected in  the  appeal  assessed  by  Judge
    Heynes in 2013. The relevance for this Judge who was , I agree with  Mr
    Bates looking at the high threshold provided in EX.1, whether  anything
    had occurred since the making of that order in  2011  and  the  adverse
    findings made by Judge Heynes about the existence of an ongoing  threat
    to suggest that any concerns held by the Sponsor were objectively  made
    out such as to have an impact on the parties relocating to Pakistan. At
    paragraph 22(d) -(e) the Judge addressed  the  issue  of  honour  based
    violence and was entitled to conclude in the absence of any evidence of
    ongoing threats that such claims were not made out and therefore  could
    not amount to insurmountable obstacles.

18. The Judge addressed the issue of the Sponsors mental health  issues  in
    great detail setting out the  evidence  at  paragraph  15  (d)-(e)  and
    analysing it at 22 (i)- (l) . He had before him material that there was
    provision for those  with  mental  health  problems  in  Pakistan.  The
    medical evidence before him was that in May 2018 the Sponsor was not on
    any medication in respect of her chronic anxiety, schizophrenia and  bi
    polar effective disorder , had some mild symptoms of feeling  down  and
    was stable under the care of  her  GP  although  this  was  subject  to
    review. The Judge therefore found that there was  no  evidence  of  any
    other intervention since  then  and  although  the  Nurse  practitioner
    suggested that she had come under pressure from her family there was no
    evidence that her mental health had deteriorated as a result  of  those
    stressors. It was of course open to the Appellant to call  more  up  to
    date expert evidence on this issue but none was before the  Judge.  The
    Judge found that  although  the  Appellant  relied  on  a  letter  from
    September 2018 where it was suggested she might not feel well enough to
    give evidence in the Appellants appeal (i) in fact the Judge  noted  at
    22(j) that she gave evidence before him and 'evinced  no  difficulties'
    in giving evidence.  He was entitled to take  that  into  account.  Any
    fair reading of the findings makes  clear  that  the  Judge  took  into
    account all the evidence but in the light of that evidence looked at in
    the round he concluded that the  Appellants  mental  health  would  not
    present insurmountable obstacles to her  living  with  her  husband  in
    Pakistan.

19. In relation to the infertility problems  of  the  couple  while  it  is
    argued that the Judge miscategorised  their  argument  that  they  were
    being deprived of free IVF. The grounds argue that the Appellants  case
    was rather that IVF was their 'last chance' to have a child. 'time  was
    running out', IVF was very expensive in  Pakistan  and  this  delay  in
    starting IVF in Pakistan would impact on her mental health. I have read
    both the ROP and the skeleton argument and  note  that  these  specific
    arguments were not put to the Judge nor was there any medical  evidence
    to support these claims advanced in the case. The Judge  was  therefore
    entitled to conclude that the evidence before him  was  that  treatment
    was available in Pakistan and while it might not be free or  indeed  as
    good as that provided in the UK that was not the test. I  finally  note
    that the Judge records at 22(p) the Appellants response to why  he  and
    his wife could not relocate to Pakistan and there is not  reference  to
    her infertility problems in his response at all.

20. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

21. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to take into account the absence of any ongoing  threats  from
    her family , the availability of IVF in Pakistan, the  availability  of
    mental healthcare support and the fact that  the  Sponsor  was  a  dual
    national who had cultural familiarity with Pakistan in concluding  that
    the Appellant had not met the evidential burden  of  establishing  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to them  enjoying  family  life  in
    Pakistan.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
3.4.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
