
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16172/2018
                                                               HU/16178/2018
                                                               HU/16176/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2019                   |On 24 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between
                            AOO (First Appellant)
                           OAO (Second Appellant)
                            OOO (Third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 1 August 1970.  The
    second and third appellants are his children, who were born on 21
    February 2001 and 2 February 2010.  The appellants have been in the UK
    since April 2011.  On 10 February 2018 they made a human rights
    application, seeking leave to remain in the UK on the basis of their
    private life in the UK.  The respondent refused the application on 17
    July 2018.

 2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where their appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Craft ("the judge").  In
    a decision promulgated on 24 June 2019, the judge allowed the appeals
    of the second and third appellants and dismissed the appeal of the
    first appellant.

 3. There is no challenge to the decision in respect of the second and
    third appellants. Accordingly, the judge's decision to allow their
    appeal stands and is unaffected by this decision.

 4. The first appellant is now appealing against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge stated that the Tribunal was required to have regard to
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    ("the 2002 Act") and set out in detail the consideration of that
    provision by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 6. The judge observed that the first appellant's circumstances had changed
    significantly since the application was made, as the second and third
    appellants were no longer living with him and were now residing with
    their mother (his former wife).  The judge summarised the evidence
    before the Tribunal about the mental health of the second appellant and
    the circumstances in which the second and third appellant had ceased
    living with the first appellant.

 7. At paragraph 28 the judge found that it was disproportionate to refuse
    the human rights claims by the second and third appellants.  The judge
    stated:

         "In this case, applying Section 117B(6) and taking note of the
         guidance in the cases referred to above the Tribunal has concluded
         that immigration controls will not be prejudiced, or undermined, by
         allowing [the second and third appellants] to remain in the United
         Kingdom".

 8. I pause to observe that section 117B(6) was not relevant to the appeals
    by the second and third appellants, as it applies to individuals in a
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, not to a qualifying
    child him or herself. However, this issue was not raised by either
    party and, as mentioned previously, the decision in respect of the
    second and third appellants is not being challenged.

 9. In respect of the first appellant, the judge found that his immigration
    status in the UK had always been precarious and that there would not be
    very significant obstacles to his reintegration into Nigeria given his
    social and cultural ties to the country and his capacity to obtain
    employment there.  The judge also found that the second and third
    appellants are no longer reliant for accommodation on the first
    appellant as they live with their mother.

Error of Law

10. The grounds of appeal were drafted by the first appellant without the
    benefit of legal representation.  They are drafted in general terms
    and, in summary, assert that the judge erred by placing immigration
    control over and above the best interests of his children.

11. There is a clear error of law that undermines the decision. Although it
    is not addressed specifically in the grounds, I am satisfied that the
    wording of the grounds is sufficient to encompass it.

12. The error is that the judge interpreted Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act
    in light of MA (Pakistan) a without appearing to recognise that the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 reversed the
    previous generally held understanding of Section 117B(6) by deciding
    that the question of whether it would not be reasonable to expect a
    child to leave the UK is focused exclusively on what is reasonable for
    the child without consideration of the appellant's immigration history
    and misconduct.

13. After delivering my decision, I proceeded to hear evidence and
    submissions in order to remake the decision.

Remade Decision

14. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

              (a)      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

              (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the United Kingdom".

15. It was not in dispute that the first appellant is not liable to
    deportation and that his children (the second and third appellants) are
    qualifying children.  It was also not in dispute that it would not be
    reasonable to expect the second and third appellant to leave the United
    Kingdom, given the unchallenged findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    about the "compelling family and other considerations" weighing against
    removal of the second and third appellants from the UK.  The only issue
    in dispute was whether the first appellant has a "genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship" with the second and third appellants.



16. The evidence indicates that until January 2019 the second and third
    appellants were living with the first appellant and that, until that
    date, he had been significantly involved in all aspects of their
    upbringing.  In January 2019 the second and third appellants moved to
    reside with their mother.  There have been serious concerns raised
    about the first appellant perpetrating physical violence on his former
    wife and excessive corporal punishment on the second and third
    appellants, and that his conduct may be connected to the second
    appellant's mental health problems.  However, there is no evidence of
    criminal proceedings or of a court order limiting contact between the
    first appellant and his children.

17. Ms Cunha argued that there was no evidence to show a continuing
    relationship between the first appellant and his children that has
    subsisted since they relocated to their mother's home in January 2019.
    She argued that given the nature of the issues raised, in terms of
    family dynamics and violence, one would expect to see a professional
    report concerning contact between the first appellant and his children;
    and in the absence of such evidence the first appellant cannot be found
    to have discharged the burden of showing he is in a subsisting
    relationship.

18. The evidence of the first appellant, given orally at the hearing, is
    that he has a continuing and ongoing relationship with his children.
    He stated that he sees them at least once a month and that he provides
    funds to their mother in order to support them.  He sought to
    corroborate his claim to provide financial support by showing bank
    statements where cash had been taken out, which he said was taken out
    by his former wife. Whilst I do not consider the bank statements
    helpful to his claim (they merely show money taken out, and do not show
    a transfer to his former wife) having heard the first appellant respond
    to questioning, I accept that he is being truthful when he states that
    he sees the children approximately once a month and makes some funds
    available for them on an informal basis, via their mother.

19. The Court of Appeal has confirmed in SSHD v AB (Jamaica) & Anor [2019]
    EWCA Civ 661 that the assessment of whether there is a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship between a parent and child is highly
    fact-specific and will involve consideration of the role played by the
    parent in his children's lives.  A parent can have a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship even when they do not provide any
    direct parental care and have only limited contact.

20. The first appellant has been involved in the upbringing of his children
    throughout their lives and they lived with him (after the separation
    from their mother) until January 2019. Since that date he has
    maintained contact with his children and has continued to see them on a
    regular basis.  Given the active parental role undertaken by the first
    appellant throughout the lives of the second and third appellants, and
    that he has maintained contact with them since they ceased residing
    with him in January 2019, I am satisfied that he has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with them.

21. The evidence indicates that there are potentially serious issues of
    abuse. However, there is insufficient evidence for me to make a finding
    one way or the other on this point; and, in any event, it is not
    necessary for me to do so. The question to be addressed is whether
    there is a genuine and subsisting relationship; not whether the
    relationship has (or had) an abusive element. The evidence
    overwhelmingly supports the view that the appellant has had a
    significant (indeed, central) parental role throughout the lives of his
    children who lived with him until only 10 months ago. This condition of
    section 117B(6) is therefore met.

22. Section 117B(6) is a self-contained provision, such that if all of its
    conditions are satisfied, the public interest will not require a
    person's removal. The appellant meets all of the conditions as he is
    not liable for deportation, has a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with two qualifying children, and it would not be reasonable to expect
    those children to leave the UK. Article 8 would therefore be infringed
    by the appellant's removal from the UK.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.  I set that decision aside and remake the decision by
allowing the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated: 23 October 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


