
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16908/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2021 via Skype for    |On 13 April 2021                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR OYEWOPO OLORISADE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Radford, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were the evidence that was  before  the
judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds of appeal,  and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal, the contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. For  convenience,  I  will
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, where
    appropriate.

 2. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated  on  14  April  2020  in  which  he
    allowed an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  23
    August 1990, against the Secretary of State's decision of 3 August 2018
    to refuse his human rights claim and uphold a decision to deport him.

Factual background

 3. The appellant was born to his Nigerian mother in this country. He spent
    the first nine years of his life travelling between the United  Kingdom
    and Nigeria, before returning here for the final time with  his  mother
    in October 1999. He enjoyed only limited leave to remain as a  visitor.
    He has never left. He was issued with residence documentation under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area  Regulations)  2006  on  24  August
    2007, valid until 15 February 2011. That application  appears  to  have
    been granted in relation to his sister, who  was  born  in  Ireland  in
    2001. On 3 November 2011, the appellant was granted discretionary leave
    outside the Immigration Rules, valid  until  3  November  2014.  On  31
    October 2014, before the expiry of his then extant leave, the appellant
    made a further application for leave to remain outside the rules.  That
    application remained outstanding until the refusal of  the  appellant's
    human rights claim on 3 August 2018, as outlined  below,  when  it  was
    refused under paragraph 322(5) of  the  Immigration  Rules  (character,
    conduct and associations) on account of his convictions.

 4. On 13 September 2016, the appellant  was  convicted  at  trial  of  two
    counts of the possession of a Class A drug, namely crack  cocaine,  and
    heroin, with the intention to supply, and the concealment or conversion
    of criminal property.  He was sentenced to a total term of imprisonment
    of four years.

 5. On 16 May 2017,  the  appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  two  offences  of
    violence; assault occasioning actual bodily harm and  battery.  He  was
    sentenced to a total of eight months' imprisonment, to run concurrently
    with the four-year sentence he was  already  serving  for  his  earlier
    convictions.  These offences were committed in 2013.

 6. On 10 July 2017, the Secretary of State served  the  appellant  with  a
    notice stating she had decided to deport him, pursuant to the automatic
    deportation provisions contained  in  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.  The
    appellant  made  a  human  rights  claim  in  an  attempt   to   resist
    deportation.  The letter making the claim is undated, but  the  copy  I
    have is stamped as received by 'Workflow  Support'  on  27  July  2017,
    suggesting it was sent to the Secretary of State at around  that  time.
    The absence of a date  on  the  letter  appears  to  have  caused  some
    confusion, because the Immigration history part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dated  3  August  2018,  and  the  chronology  in  the
    appellant's bundle, state that a human rights  claim  was  made  on  19
    February 2018.  I have not been referred to an additional human  rights
    claim from that date.  It  appears  that  the  only  substantive  human
    rights claim made by the appellant is that which featured at Annex T to
    the Secretary of State's bundle, stamped as set out above, which was re-
    considered in the substantive decision under challenge.

 7. The appellant's human rights claim, and his case before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, had several strands.  The appellant claimed he does not  know
    Nigeria. He was last there as a small child and knows only life in this
    country.  He considers himself to be British.  He could  not  integrate
    in Nigeria.  His family could not afford to  support  him  financially,
    and, without connections or introductions 'on the  ground',  could  not
    expect to be able to find work and settle in Nigeria.  The offences for
    which the Secretary of State pursued  his  deportation  were  committed
    some time ago.  The appellant had reformed since then,  obtained  work,
    and now presented no risk of reoffending.  He was rehabilitated.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  27  pages  long,  with  149
    paragraphs.  The operative reasoning  features  at  paragraph  120  and
    following.  There  had  been  some  discussion  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to whether the appellant  was  entitled  to,  or  otherwise
    held, British nationality. The  judge  made  clear  findings  that  the
    appellant was not British, although he accepted  that  the  appellant's
    sister was Irish (see [123]).  The judge found that, upon the birth  of
    his sister on 14 September  2001,  the  appellant  enjoyed  a  directly
    effective right to  reside  under  EU  law.   The  respondent  has  not
    challenged that finding, and I say no more  about  it.   The  appellant
    enjoyed EU residence rights until 15 February 2011, when an EEA renewal
    application was unsuccessful.  The appellant's lawful residence resumed
    on  3  November  2011  upon  the  Secretary  of  State   granting   him
    discretionary leave, which, the judge found, was valid until 3 November
    2014.  See [126].  I address the precise date of  the  expiry  of  that
    leave, below, as Ms Radford's  rule  24  response  raises  a  query  in
    relation to the judge's reasoning.

 9. The judge addressed the Immigration Rules  concerning  deportation  and
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002
    Act').  He calculated that the appellant had been lawfully  present  in
    the UK for 12 years, five months and a day, which was less than  'most'
    of his life, for the purposes of 'Exception  1'  contained  in  section
    117C(4) of the 2002 Act.  The appellant's total residence  exceeded  20
    years. The judge later held that the appellant's immigration status  as
    a child should not be held  against  him  [132],  when  addressing  the
    points at which he was lawfully resident.

10. At [128], the judge identified  the  essential  question:  whether  the
    appellant  had   established   that   there   were   'very   compelling
    circumstances' over and above the statutory exceptions  to  deportation
    contained in section 117C of the 2002 Act?  The judge directed  himself
    that the  existence  of  the  two  statutory  exceptions  informed  and
    calibrated what amounted to  'very  compelling  circumstances',  noting
    that it was a higher threshold: [129].

11. At [133], the judge  identified  that  the  only  exception  which  the
    appellant could, in principle, be capable of meeting was that contained
    in  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which,  of   course,
    corresponds to Exception 1 contained in section  117C(4)  of  the  2002
    Act.  Having found that the appellant had not  been  lawfully  resident
    for 'most' of his  life,  the  judge  held  at  [134]  that  the  'very
    compelling circumstances' threshold  must  be  'high'.   At  [137]  and
    following, the judge repeated some of the above analysis, this time  by
    reference to the corresponding statutory provisions in the 2002 Act. He
    recalled that the deportation of foreign criminals and the  maintenance
    of effective immigration controls are both  matters  that  are  in  the
    public interest, pursuant to Parliament's statutory endorsement of  the
    same.  The judge again directed himself that the extent  to  which  the
    exceptions were met informed the 'very compelling circumstances'  test:
    [140].

12. The judge was unimpressed with the evidence of the appellant's parents,
    who claimed to run a family business, but purported not to be  able  to
    recall any details concerning its profitability or  turnover.   But  he
    did accept their evidence that they would  support  the  appellant  and
    continue to deter him from the commission of further criminal offences:
    [142].  The appellant's offences were committed over six  years  before
    the hearing, the judge noted, and since his release from prison he  had
    secured two employed roles.  He had shown determination  that  must  be
    acknowledged and had paid his penalty to society through  his  sentence
    of imprisonment.  His rehabilitation had been  positive.   He  assisted
    with the family business.  The appellant had made  'every  effort'  and
    the judge 'should recognise that'.  The  appellant  was  'socially  and
    culturally integrated', notwithstanding his past offences.

13. The appellant had relied on an expert report from a Victoria Nwogu, and
    travel advice from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.  At [145],  the
    judge said that  he  had  taken  those  materials  into  account  'with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(a)(vi) [sic] of  the  Immigration  Rules'
    pertaining to whether there would be 'very  significant  obstacles'  to
    the appellant's re-integration in Nigeria. The judge found:

         'He would have no recollection of the  country  and  overall  there
         would be significant obstacles as to his integration into  Nigeria.
         I am guided by the Court of Appeal judgment in Kamara  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 813 in that respect. Of course I take into account  the  issues
         raised in the expert opinion of Miss Nwogu additionally  in  making
         that finding.'

14. The judge's operative findings were at [146]:

         'Notwithstanding that the appellant  is  not  found  to  have  been
         lawfully resident in this country for most of his life, it is found
         that he has  established  very  compelling  circumstances  for  the
         reasons which I have set out above. On that basis he does establish
         an exception with reference to both the Immigration Rules  and  the
         terms of part 5A of the 2002 Act. With  specific  reference  to  an
         assessment of his Article 8 ECHR private life  rights  outside  the
         Immigration Rules,  but  of  course  having  given  weight  to  the
         considerations applicable within section 117B and 117C of the  2002
         Act,  it  is  on  balance  found  that  based  on  very  compelling
         circumstances the consequences of requiring the appellant to return
         to Nigeria would not only in all the circumstances  be  harsh,  but
         unjustifiably so. In reality he knows only the United Kingdom.  The
         appellant has shown genuine remorse and I believe that he still has
         a bright future  ahead  of  him.  The  commission  of  any  further
         criminal offences, for which the risk is low, would be unlikely  to
         result  in  the  appellant   successfully   resisting   a   further
         deportation decision.'

15. The judge allowed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

16. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey  on
    the basis that the judge failed to provide sufficient reasons  for  why
    the support of the appellant's parents,  his  rehabilitation,  and  the
    difficulties he would find integrating into Nigeria met  the  threshold
    of 'very compelling circumstances'. That grant of permission  reflected
    grounds three and four of the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal.
    Ground three is a sufficiency of reasons challenge,  as  identified  by
    Judge Povey.  Ground  four  is  essentially  a  rationality  challenge,
    contending that the judge failed to identify  any  circumstances  which
    could rationally be described as 'very compelling.'

Submissions

17. Mr Avery submitted that the judge failed properly to take into  account
    the public interest  considerations  inherent  to  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals. The  judge's  focus  on  the  appellant's  offending
    conduct was brief, especially in light of the violent and  drug-related
    nature of the appellant's conduct.  The  judge  purported  to  identify
    'very compelling  circumstances',  but  in  reality  merely  identified
    factors that could not  rationally  be  described  as  attracting  such
    weight. All members of  society  are  expected  to  conduct  themselves
    without  committing  criminal  offences.  Similarly,  the   appellant's
    employment is not a factor capable of meriting a finding that there are
    'very compelling circumstances'.

18. In relation to the appellant's likely difficulties  in  integrating  to
    Nigeria, the judge's reasoning  was  so  brief  as  to  be  inadequate,
    submitted  Mr  Avery.  Although  the  judge  expressly   rejected   the
    appellant's parents' evidence concerning their business activities,  in
    relation to which they had purported not to be  able  to  recall  basic
    financial details such as turnover and profit,  he  failed  to  make  a
    finding concerning whether they would be able to support the  appellant
    financially in Nigeria. Their former business enterprise  had  been  in
    import/export,  between  this  country  and  Nigeria.  That   suggested
    significant contacts  within  Nigeria.  That  would  have  enabled  the
    appellant to re-establish himself in Nigeria, as a fit and healthy man,
    with relative ease. Those were factors that the judge simply failed  to
    consider, even though many of them logically flowed  from  the  judge's
    rejection  of  the  appellant's  parents'  attempt  to  minimise  their
    financial standing. The 'very compelling circumstances' test is a  high
    threshold and the  judge  simply  failed  to  take  that  reality  into
    account. Although he purported to direct himself  in  relation  to  the
    threshold, his operative  reasoning  demonstrates  that  he  applied  a
    materially lower threshold.

19. Resisting those submissions, Ms Radford relied on her rule  24  notice.
    She submitted that the decision featured a  'textbook  self-direction',
    featuring multiple self-directions as to the high threshold embodied by
    the  'very  compelling  circumstances'  test.  In   relation   to   the
    application of the statutory threshold, it was incumbent upon the judge
    to apply the criteria enunciated by the Strasbourg court in �ner v  The
    Netherlands (2007) 45 E.H.R.R. 14 and Boultif v Switzerland  (2001)  33
    E.H.R.R. 50, in order to ensure he reached a conclusion compatible with
    the European Convention on Human Rights. As such, given  the  statutory
    regime contained in section 117C must be interpreted consistently  with
    the Convention, and given the  inherent  (albeit  limited)  flexibility
    which the statutory considerations  feature,  it  is  possible  for  an
    application of the statutory provisions to lead to the conclusion  that
    a person succeeds on  'very  compelling  circumstances'  grounds,  even
    though they  do  not  meet  the  letter  of  either  of  the  statutory
    exceptions. It would have been an error of law for the  judge  to  have
    failed to engage with the appellant's post-conviction record,  and,  as
    such, it was not an error of law for  him  to  take  into  account  his
    recent good character. Those were considerations relevant to the public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals, as identified in  the
    Supreme Court  in  Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60 at [38].

20. In relation to whether the appellant would encounter 'very  significant
    obstacles' to his integration in Nigeria, the judge had relied upon the
    unchallenged expert report provided by the appellant.  Taken  with  the
    FCO travel advice, there was sufficient material before the tribunal to
    merit the judge's findings. The informal economy would be difficult  to
    access, there was a risk of terrorism, relocation to the south  of  the
    country would be impractical, and the appellant would stand out due  to
    the stigma of his enforced return. It is trite law, submits Ms Radford,
    that the judge does not have to address each submission advanced by  an
    appellant if there were grounds upon which it could have been rejected.
      Nothing  turns  on  the  judge  not  addressing  the  possibility  of
    remittances to the appellant. The family were in receipt of legal  aid,
    suggesting their finances had been scrutinised.  The judge did not need
    expressly to address that issue.  In any event, money from abroad  does
    not amount to integration.

21. Properly understood, therefore, the Secretary  of  State's  submissions
    were essentially a series of disagreements with the legitimate findings
    of the judge concerning the weight to be attached to the deportation of
    this appellant.

Legal framework

22. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 ('the 2007 Act')  defines  those,
    such as this  appellant,  who  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months as a 'foreign criminal'. Pursuant to
    subsection (5), the Secretary of State must make a deportation order in
    respect of such a foreign criminal. There are a  number  of  exceptions
    contained in section 33,  of  which  the  only  relevant  exception  is
    'Exception  1',  namely  that  'removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
    pursuance of the deportation order would breach - (a) a person's [ECHR]
    rights...' (see section 33(2)(a)).

23. Section 117C of the 2002 Act provides:

             '(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.

             (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.

         [...]

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances
         over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.'

Discussion

24. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal may be  distilled  into  the
    following propositions:

          a. The judge failed to ascribe sufficient weight  to  the  public
             interest  in  deporting  this  appellant,  in  light  of   his
             convictions for offences of violence and drugs, reflected in a
             total period of imprisonment  of  four  years,  which  is  the
             highest category of offending under the  regime  contained  in
             section 117C.

          b. The reasons given by the judge for finding that the  appellant
             would  encounter   'very   significant   obstacles'   to   his
             integration  in  Nigeria  were  insufficient,  such  that  the
             assessment   of   whether   there   were   'very    compelling
             circumstances' 'over and above' Exception 1 was flawed, as  it
             was based on the wrong starting point.

          c. In identifying 'very compelling circumstances' over and above,
             the only factors to  which  the  judge  could  point  was  the
             appellant's  rehabilitation,  a  factor  which,  at  best,  is
             capable  of  attracting  minimal  weight,  and  certainly  not
             determinative weight in the 'over and above' assessment.

Public interest: sufficient weight

25. I reject the submission that  the  judge  failed  properly  to  ascribe
    significance to the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals. At  multiple  points  throughout  the  decision,  the  judge
    directed himself as to the public interest in deporting  such  persons.
    At [118], he observed that there is  a  'very  high  threshold  if  the
    public interest in deportation is to  be  outweighed.'   At  [129]  and
    [134],  the  judge  directed  himself  that  the  threshold  for   very
    compelling circumstances was high; the context  of  those  observations
    was the judge addressing the fact that the appellant's offending placed
    him beyond the ordinary remit of exceptions 1 or 2, such that  stronger
    reasons were required for the  appellant  to  resist  deportation.   At
    [137], the  judge  expressly  addressed  the  statutory  considerations
    contained in section 117C  of  the  2002  Act;  noting  both  that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals was in the public interest,  and  that
    the more serious the offence, the greater the public  interest  in  the
    foreign criminal's deportation. At [140], the judge identified that the
    appellant's offences were 'serious', as reflected by the total sentence
    of 48 months.

26. Properly understood, Mr Avery's submission in this respect is that  the
    judge did not ascribe sufficient weight to the public interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals, by reference to the  overall  outcome
    of the appeal. That is a question of weight, rather  than  rationality.
    Barring  irrationality,  provided  the  judge  took  into  account  all
    relevant considerations as was plainly  the  case  here,  questions  of
    weight are matters for the trial judge, with which this  tribunal  will
    not interfere.

Very significant obstacles: sufficiency of reasoning

27. I do not consider that the judge gave insufficient reasons for  finding
    that the appellant would encounter 'very significant obstacles' to  his
    integration in Nigeria. This appellant was born  in  this  country  and
    lived here and in Nigeria until his ninth birthday. Since then  he  has
    known only life in this country. As  the  judge  noted  at  [145],  the
    appellant would have no recollection of the country given the time that
    has  elapsed  since  then.  The  reality  of  that  factual  foundation
    underpins the  subsequent  findings  of  the  judge.  It  was  entirely
    rational.  With respect, I agree with the finding.

28. The expert report outlined in considerable detail the difficulties  the
    appellant would be likely to encounter in the event he was to return to
    the country. It was open to the judge to ascribe  significance  to  the
    contents of  that  report,  when  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's return to what would now be a very  different  country,  to
    the one he last visited aged nine. The judge also had the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office travel advice which featured a  range  of  warnings
    about terrorism, crime, and general personal safety matters in Nigeria.
    While not all judges would have reached the conclusion  that  this  fit
    and healthy young man would face  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Nigeria, it was a finding rationally open to  the  judge
    on the evidence before him.

29. I accept that the  judge  did  not  address  the  appellant's  parents'
    ability to support him financially from this country, nor their  former
    field of import/export. The logical conclusion of the judge's rejection
    of the parents' evidence concerning their business activities was  that
    they did have some funds, and certainly  that  they  were  not  in  the
    destitute position they had purported to be. However, as  noted  by  Ms
    Radford in her rule 24 response, living off remittances is not the same
    as integrating. In Kamara, cited by the judge at  [145],  Lord  Justice
    Sales (as he then was) held at [14]:

         'The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life.'

30. Again, while not all judges would have  reached  this  conclusion,  the
    judge's findings concerning the  appellant's  likely  integration  were
    entirely consistent with the approach of the Court of Appeal in Kamara.
    The possibility of living off remitted financial support is not capable
    of dealing a knockout blow to the very real difficulties that,  on  any
    view, an adult returning to a distant country he knew only in childhood
    would be likely to encounter.

31. In her rule 24 response,  Ms  Radford  identifies  what  she  terms  an
    'immaterial error' of law by the judge.  At [125] -  [126],  the  judge
    concluded that the appellant enjoyed  leave  to  remain  only  until  3
    November 2014.  That analysis informed the judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant could not satisfy Exception 1, for the appellant had not been
    'lawfully resident' for 'most' of his life.  However, as highlighted by
    Ms Radford at [9],  the  appellant  made  an  in-time  application  for
    further leave to remain, which was not determined until the refusal  of
    his human rights claim in the impugned decision.  So much is clear from
    the terms of the  decision  itself.   At  page  9,  under  the  heading
    'Outstanding application', the respondent considered, and refused, that
    application, in light of the appellant's convictions.  The significance
    of the application being outstanding for so long was that the appellant
    enjoyed leave under section 3C of the Immigration  Act  1971  from  the
    submission of the application until the refusal.  The judge  failed  to
    identify that reality.

32. Ms Radford was right to use the rule 24 notice to set out the error  in
    that way.  As held by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the
    Home Department v Devani [2020] EWCA Civ 612 at [31], a  respondent  to
    an appeal is obliged to use a rule 24 notice to challenge a point  upon
    which they were not successful in the  tribunal  below,  despite  being
    successful overall, as this appellant was.  Mr Avery did not  challenge
    that assertion in his submissions, and nor could he have done so.   The
    judge's failure to acknowledge the role of section 3C of the  1971  Act
    was an error of law, the effect of which was that the judge incorrectly
    calculated  the  total  length  of  the  appellant's  residence.    The
    Secretary of State has not challenged the  judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant enjoyed 12 years, five months and one day's lawful residence.
    To that unchallenged calculation must be  added  the  additional  three
    years and nine months' lawful residence under section 3C  of  the  1971
    Act, extended by the submission of an in-time appeal until the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal, giving a total of six additional years.
     The true figure of the appellant's  lawful  residence,  based  on  the
    judge's unchallenged earlier calculations, is in the region of 18 years
    and 5 months.  The judge was wrong to conclude that the  appellant  had
    not been here lawfully for most of his life.  He had.

33. In additional unchallenged findings of fact, the judge found  that  the
    appellant was socially and culturally integrated.

34. It follows, therefore, that the appellant did meet the requirements  of
    Exception 1, on the judge's reasoning, adjusted to  take  into  account
    the section 3C point.  The appellant had resided here lawfully for most
    of his life, was socially and culturally  integrated,  and  would  face
    very significant obstacles to his integration in Nigeria.   While  that
    cannot be positively determinative of the appellant's appeal  in  light
    of his sentence of four years' imprisonment, it casts a different light
    on the judge's findings that there were 'very compelling circumstances'
    over and above the exceptions, for the simple reason that the appellant
    did meet one of the exceptions, namely Exception 1.

35. The remaining question is whether it was rationally open to the  judge,
    on the basis of the evidence before him, to  find  that  the  appellant
    could point to 'very  compelling  circumstances'  over  and  above  the
    exceptions.

36. All factors relied  upon  by  the  judge  concerning  'very  compelling
    circumstances' related to the appellant's apparent rehabilitation.   Ms
    Radford relies on  Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60 where, at  [38],  Lord  Reed  held  that  the
    assessment of the proportionality of a person's deportation:

         '...can include  factors  bearing  on  the  weight  of  the  public
         interest in the deportation of the particular offender, such as his
         conduct since the offence was committed...

37. Lord Kerr, in his dissenting judgment in Hesham Ali, concurred with the
    majority on the rehabilitation point, submits Ms Radford.  At [164], he
    said:

         'The strength of the public interest in favour of deportation  must
         depend on such matters as the nature and seriousness of the  crime,
         the risk of re-offending, and the success of  rehabilitation,  etc.
         These factors are relevant to an assessment of the extent to  which
         deportation of a particular individual will further the  legitimate
         aim of preventing crime and disorder, and thus, as pointed  out  by
         Lord Reed at para 26, inform the strength of the public interest in
         deportation.'

38. That passage, highlights Ms Radford,  was  endorsed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in [49] of Akinyemi (No. 2) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2098, where it was described as a conclusion
    'not doubted by anyone.'

39. The Court of Appeal addressed rehabilitation in HA (Iraq)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.    After  having
    surveyed the authorities (noting that he had 'some difficulty'  with  a
    suggestion by Hamblen LJ at [84] of Binbuga v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ  551  that  rehabilitation  would
    'generally be of little or no material weight'), Underhill LJ held,  at
    [141]:

         '...the fact that a potential deportee has shown positive  evidence
         of rehabilitation, and thus of  a  reduced  risk  of  re-offending,
         cannot be excluded from the overall proportionality  exercise.  The
         authorities say so, and it must be right in principle  in  view  of
         the holistic nature of that exercise. Where a tribunal is  able  to
         make an assessment that the foreign criminal  is  unlikely  to  re-
         offend, that is a factor which can carry some weight in the balance
         when considering very compelling circumstances. The weight which it
         will bear will vary from case to case, but it  will  rarely  be  of
         great weight...'

40. The Strasbourg authorities relied upon by Ms Radford  also  demonstrate
    that rehabilitation is not a factor that is irrelevant to the  question
    of proportionality.  For example, in Boultif at [48],  the  court  held
    that:

         'In assessing the relevant criteria in such a case, the Court  will
         consider the nature and seriousness of the offence committed by the
         applicant; the length of the applicant's stay in the  country  from
         which he is going to  be  expelled;  the  time  elapsed  since  the
         offence was committed as well as the applicant's  conduct  in  that
         period...'

41. The offences committed by this appellant were  in  2013.   The  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal  was  in  February  2020.   That  was  a
    reasonable passage of  time  capable  of  informing  a  finding  as  to
    rehabilitation.  The judge reached unchallenged  findings  of  fact  at
    [142] that the appellant's parents would support him  and  prevent  him
    from committing  further  offences.   The  appellant  had  secured  two
    employed roles, an achievement not reached by all those  released  from
    serving four year sentences of imprisonment.

42. Drawing this analysis together, rehabilitation is capable of attracting
    some  weight.   The  judge   ascribed   weight   to   the   appellant's
    rehabilitation.  I do not consider that the  weight  ascribed  by  this
    judge, bearing in mind the moveable quality of the public  interest  in
    the deportation of foreign criminals (as to which, see section  117C(2)
    of the 2002 Act, and Akinyemi (No. 2) at [39]), and the fact  that  the
    appellant met the full requirements of Exception 1, combined  with  the
    appellant's placement at the very lowest point on the  'four  years  or
    more' top category of offending under section 117C  by  virtue  of  his
    four year sentence of imprisonment, was irrational.  The appellant  was
    in the top category of seriousness, but only just.  He was on the cusp.
     Barring irrationality, weight is a matter for the judge.

43. To summarise, I have reached the following findings:

      a. The judge was  fully  cognisant  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign criminals, and correctly directed himself on
         the issue throughout the decision.

      b. His  findings  concerning  the  'very  significant  obstacles'  the
         appellant would be likely to face in Nigeria were  rationally  open
         to  him,  with  the  effect  that  the  appellant  met   the   full
         requirements of Exception 1, the judge having erroneously failed to
         take into account  the  impact  of  section  3C  of  the  1971  Act
         concerning  the  appellant's  lawful  residence,  taken  with   the
         unchallenged  findings  that  the  appellant   was   socially   and
         culturally integrated.

      c. The finding that the appellant's rehabilitation amounted  to  'very
         compelling circumstances' was rationally open to the judge.

44. Accordingly, by allowing the appeal on the basis that he did, the judge
    applied the statutory framework contained in section 117C of  the  2002
    Act, and the decision did not involve the making of an  error  of  law.
    It was not a decision all judges would have reached,  but  it  was  not
    unlawful for this judge to resolve the case on this basis.

45. As the judge observed at [146], if the appellant were to commit further
    criminal offences, he would be unlikely to be able successful to resist
    a future deportation decision.  I echo those remarks.

46. This appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Buckwell did not involve the making  of  an  error  of
law.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Stephen H Smith                         Date 31 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

