

                                        [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/16115/2017

                                                  HU/16120/2017

                                                 HU/16126/2017

                                                 HU/16130/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2019                            | On 22 May 2019                    |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                RAMOTU HASSAN
                             MOJEED G ADEGBOYEGA
                                     A A
                                     F A
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Childs, counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 24 January 2019 allowing appeals  by
    the applicants against the decision dated  15  November  2017  refusing
    them leave to remain in the  UK  on  human  rights  grounds.   In  this
    decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal, the applicants as the appellants and the Secretary  of  State
    as the respondent.
Background


2.    The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant was  born
    on 3 March 1980 and is the partner of the second appellant born  on  31
    December 1961.  They have three children, a  son  born  on  5  February
    2010, a daughter on 24 December 2012 and a third child  on  5  November
    2018.  Their immigration history can briefly be described  as  follows.
    The first appellant was issued with a visit visa  on  11  January  2005
    valid until 11 July 2005 and the second appellant a visit  visa  on  17
    January 2005 valid until 17 July 2005. There is no evidence  that  this
    was used for making a legal entry. In any event, on  20  July  2005  he
    made a further entry clearance application but, as he failed to  attend
    for an interview, entry clearance was refused.

3.    There is no formal record of when  the  first  and  second  appellants
    entered the UK. In her witness statement  the  first  appellant  claims
    that she arrived in April 2001 to work as a maid.  The second appellant
    claims that he arrived in 1996 with the help of an agent. On 5 February
    2010 the third appellant was born in the UK.  On 24 February  2010  the
    second appellant made an  application  for  leave  based  on  his  long
    residence, but this was  refused.   On  24  December  2012  the  fourth
    appellant was born in the UK.  In February 2013  the  second  appellant
    was arrested as an overstayer and on 4 March 2013 he applied for  leave
    on human rights grounds.  His application was refused and  he  appealed
    against this decision.


4.    In his appeal heard in  April  2014  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (IA/02973/2014), the second appellant claimed that he had  entered  the
    UK on 16 March 1996 but his evidence was not  believed  and  the  judge
    proceeded on the basis that he had been in the UK for 8 years  and  not
    18 years as he claimed.  The judge was not satisfied that the appellant
    met the requirements of para 276ADE(1) of the Rules or that removal  to
    Nigeria would be in breach of article 8 on  either  private  or  family
    life grounds.  The appeal was dismissed and  after  his  appeal  rights
    were exhausted, he and his dependants were  served  with  the  relevant
    notices that they had no right to remain in the UK.

5.    On 3 March 2016 the first appellant lodged a human rights  application
    which was refused and certified on 20 April 2016.   On  28  April  2016
    further submissions were lodged and these were rejected under para  353
    of the Rules on 17 August 2016.  The first  appellant  issued  judicial
    review proceedings and on 16 February 2017 permission  to  proceed  was
    granted. On 16 August 2017 a consent order was agreed, the  proceedings
    were withdrawn and the respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the  further
    submissions.  The decision to refuse leave to remain was maintained  in
    the decision of 15 November 2017, the subject of this appeal.


The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal


6.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  it  was  conceded  that
    the requirements of the Rules could not be met as none of the  children
    of the family had completed  seven  years  residence  at  the  date  of
    application.  By the date of hearing on 16  January  2019  their  third
    child had been born who, although not formally a party to  the  appeal,
    was now part of the family. It was  conceded  that  there  was  no  new
    evidence to show that the second appellant had  been  present  for  the
    time he claimed and in the light of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702 and the
    findings made the previous appeal, it was  indicated  that  the  appeal
    would proceed on human rights grounds on a freestanding basis [16].


7.    It was argued on behalf of the appellants that they could  not  return
    to Nigeria with their three  children  as  both  the  culture  and  the
    educational system would be alien to them.  They  regarded  the  UK  as
    their home and did not speak any of the local languages in Nigeria  and
    would not be in a position to turn to anyone for assistance [20].   The
    family were living with a friend in the UK  and  the  second  appellant
    derived an income  from  the  property  which  he  rented  to  a  local
    authority in Kent.  They wished to remain in the UK as  a  family  unit
    [21]. The  third  appellant  was  now  a  qualified  child  within  the
    provisions of s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as he had been living in the UK for more than seven years.  It was
    argued that it would be unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK  and
    that the other members of the family should therefore be given leave to
    remain with him [22].


8.    The judge accepted the evidence  that  the  third  appellant  had  had
    treatment in August 2012 when he underwent tongue reduction surgery  at
    Great Ormond Street Hospital, suffered from delayed  speech,  had  been
    classified as child  with  special  educational  needs  and  was  still
    receiving speech and language therapy at the hospital [25].   He  found
    that if the family had to return to Nigeria, they would face  immediate
    destitution given that there was no one there they could  turn  to  for
    any initial or long-term help [27].  He found that there  would  be  no
    real or viable support networks available particularly in  relation  to
    the three children [28].  He found with this backdrop in mind  that  it
    would not be in their best interests to make them go to Nigeria and  it
    would be particularly difficult for the third  appellant  who  was  now
    nine years of age, given his medical circumstances.  He also found that
    the youngest child suffered from sickle cell disease [29].


9.    He took it account that the first and second appellants had  no  leave
    to remain but they had demonstrated a genuine  subsisting  relationship
    with all of their children and, in particular, the third appellant  who
    he found could not reasonably be expected to leave  the  UK  and  whose
    best interests were to remain here as part of one overall family  unit.
    The judge therefore concluded that the public interest did not  require
    any of the appellants to be removed in  their  circumstances  which  he
    found to be exceptional in nature when taken together [45].  The appeal
    was, accordingly, allowed under article 8.





The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions


10.   The grounds can be summarised as arguing that the First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in the following ways:  the judge did not take  notice  of
    the findings in the previous appeal where it was found that the  second
    appellant was not a credible witness;  no adequate reasons  were  given
    why the family would face destitution on return to  Nigeria  when  they
    had family there, had been found to be financially independent  in  the
    UK and owned property which was being let; there was no  assessment  of
    whether the third appellant would have access to medical  treatment  if
    needed on return to Nigeria;  the finding that the youngest  child  had
    sickle cell disease was simply based on an assertion and there  was  no
    other evidence to support this contention;  the judge had made findings
    without taking all the facts into account and had failed in  particular
    to consider the circumstances in which the assessment of reasonableness
    had to take place, the fact that the children were  liable  to  removal
    because both their parents had overstayed,  so  failing  to  take  into
    account the guidance in KO (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53  that  in  these
    circumstances the question was simply  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect a child to follow parents  with  no  right  to  remain  to   the
    country of origin.


11.   Mr Tufan adopted these grounds in his  submissions.   He  argued  that
    the judge had failed to assess the relevant issues in the light of  the
    previous findings  in  the  earlier  appeal  and  the  guidance  in  KO
    (Nigeria).  The only factor in the appellant's favour was the fact that
    the third appellant had now been in the UK for over  seven  years.   He
    had had a operation on his tongue but there was no evidence to  suggest
    that any further treatment would not be available in  Nigeria  and  the
    medical evidence simply showed that a number of follow-up  appointments
    had been made.  The medical evidence did not suggest that there was now
    any serious medical condition which could only be treated  in  the  UK.
    He argued further that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  any  adequate
    reasons for his finding that the family would be destitute  in  Nigeria
    or  to  give  proper  weight  to  the  considerations  in  s.117B   and
    particularly to the public interest in maintaining immigration  control
    in circumstances where no member of the family had the right to remain.


12.   Ms Childs submitted that the judge had reached findings properly  open
    to him on the evidence and the fact that  they  might  be  regarded  as
    generous did not mean that his decision was not in accordance with  the
    law.  The judge had referred to KO Nigeria in  his  decision.   He  had
    given sustainable  reasons  for  his  finding  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the third appellant to return to Nigeria.  The fact that
    he had now been in the UK for nine years was  a  weighty  factor.   The
    judge had referred to the immigration history of the first  and  second
    appellants, but he was  entitled  to  conclude  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence before him that it would  not  be  reasonable  for  the  third
    appellant to return there.  Nigeria was not a cheap country to live  in
    and it was not unreasonable to find that it would be a struggle for the
    family on return.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law.


13.   I shall consider the grounds in the order set out at  in  [10]  above.
    It is argued that the judge failed to take into account the findings in
    the previous decision in accordance with the principles in  Devaseelan.
    This authority was mentioned in [16] but in the context  of  explaining
    why the appeal was being pursued on human rights grounds only. However,
    the previous decision remains the starting point so far as the  factual
    basis of the claim is concerned, subject to events subsequent  to  that
    decision and any further  evidence  which  might  affect  the  findings
    previously made. The previous judge took into account the operation  on
    the third appellant's tongue  but  found  that  there  was  no  medical
    evidence to suggest that he would have  any  specific  difficulties  in
    travelling to or adapting to life  in  Nigeria.   She  found  that  the
    second appellant and his partner had family  there  and  the  means  to
    resettle. She did not accept the second appellant's  evidence  that  he
    had been in the UK since 1996.

14.   The judge did not refer to the previous decision in  his  analysis  of
    the evidence. It was potentially relevant to a number of  his  findings
    of fact such as the finding that the appellants would be  destitute  on
    return, had no family there they could look to for support or help  and
    more generally to his finding that the appellants'  circumstances  were
    exceptional in nature when  taken  together.  He  failed  to  take  the
    previous decision as the starting point and in  consequence  failed  to
    take relevant evidence into account.

15.   It is then argued that the judge gave  no  adequate  reasons  for  his
    finding that there  was  a  serious  possibility  of  facing  immediate
    destitution on return.  This finding sits uneasily  with  the  evidence
    that the appellants have  a  property  which,  although  subject  to  a
    mortgage, is generating  rental  income,  the  finding  that  they  are
    currently financially independent [48] and also with  the  findings  in
    the previous decision.  The  judge  has  accordingly  left  matters  of
    account which were clearly relevant to his assessment of reasonableness
    or failed to give adequate reasons for this finding.

16.   The next ground is that there was no assessment of whether  the  third
    appellant would have access to medical treatment on return to  Nigeria.
    The judge said that the third appellant had been classified as a  child
    with special educational needs  and  was  still  receiving  speech  and
    language therapy at the hospital. However, he was discharged  from  the
    Speech and Language Therapy Service to Mainstream Schools in 2015:  see
    the report at A67-9 and his school reports show good progress: see  the
    report at A102-4.  This ground is not in itself determinative,  but  it
    does support the argument that the judge  did  not  take  all  relevant
    matters into account.

17.   There is little substance in the argument that the judge was wrong  to
    find that the youngest child suffered from sickle cell disease  in  the
    absence of evidence confirming this but even so, there was  no  further
    consideration  of  how  this   diagnosis   affected   the   issues   of
    reasonableness or proportionality.

18.   The final ground relates to the assessment  of  reasonableness  within
    s.117B(6).  In KO Nigeria the Supreme Court made  it  clear  that  when
    assessing reasonableness in this provision, the proper context was  the
    real-world position in which the children found themselves.

19.   Lord Carnworth said at [18]:


         "On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
          To that extent the record of the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain...".


20.   I am satisfied that the judge failed  to  assess  reasonableness  from
    this starting point, that in circumstances where both  parents  had  no
    right to remain it would normally be reasonable for their  children  to
    return with them.  The judge has referred to  the  appellant's  parents
    overstaying as a serious matter at [43]. In [45] he said that they  had
    no leave to remain but they had  demonstrated  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationships with all of their children and, in particular, the  third
    appellant who he found could not reasonably be expected to leave the UK
    and whose best interests were to remain as part of one  overall  family
    unit and this led him to conclude that  the  public  interest  did  not
    require any of the appellants' removal. This summary  of  his  findings
    does not indicate to me that  the  judge  approached  the  question  of
    reasonableness on the basis that the normal expectation would  be  that
    the family should leave the UK or explain why their circumstances  were
    exceptional in nature.

21.   I am also satisfied that when considering s.117B  the  judge  at  [48]
    appears  to  have  given  significant  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellants were  fluent  in  English  and  were  currently  financially
    independent without giving any adequate  consideration  to  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of  immigration  control.   In  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State [2108] UKSC 58, the Supreme Court at [57]  confirmed
    that the factors in s117B(2) and (3) should not be read as  imputing  a
    public interest against removal when those conditions were met.  It  is
    correct that the judge referred to the fact that the first  and  second
    appellants had not had leave for many years and that this was a serious
    matter but there is no real indication that their very poor immigration
    history was properly taken into account.


22.   Accordingly,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  when
    assessing whether it would be reasonable to expect the third  appellant
    to leave the UK and that he failed to give proper weight to the  public
    interest when assessing whether removal would be disproportionate. I am
    also satisfied that he failed to give adequate reasons for his findings
    that the appellants would face immediate destitution on return  or  why
    their circumstances taken together could be described as exceptional.

23.   For these reasons I am satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside.  Both representatives  submitted
    that in these circumstances the proper course would be for  the  appeal
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.  As the
    judge erred in his approach to the context in which the evidence should
    be assessed, I am satisfied that this is the proper course to  take  as
    there needs to be full rehearing.




Decision


24.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  The decision is set aside.   It
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration by way of  a
    full rehearing before a different judge.





Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 20 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
