
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16410/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2018                  |On 28 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                               Ms sunita limbu
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the adult child  of  Mr  Chandraman  Limbu,  a  former
    member of the Brigade of Gurkhas ("the sponsor"). He was discharged  on
    10 November 1987 after 19 years'  service.  His  military  conduct  was
    rated exemplary. The appellant  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent Entry Clearance Officer, dated 27  May  2016,  refusing  her
    leave to enter to join the sponsor, who  is  settled  in  the  UK.  The
    dispute in the appeal has been  whether  the  decision  amounted  to  a
    breach of article 8. The respondent decided family life did  not  exist
    as between the appellant and the sponsor  but,  even  if  it  did,  any
    interference with family life was outweighed by the legitimate interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control.

 2. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chana, sitting
    at Hatton Cross, on 1 August 2017. Her  decision  was  not  promulgated
    until 9 November 2017. The judge made a series of  adverse  credibility
    findings, including that the appellant had not genuinely  divorced  her
    husband in 2011 but had taken this step as a "ploy" or "ruse" to settle
    in the UK. She found the appellant was an  independent  woman  who  had
    previously worked for an airline as cabin crew. She did not accept  she
    was genuinely dependent on the sponsor and therefore  family  life  did
    not exist for the purposes of article 8.

 3. The grounds seeking permission to appeal made a number  of  submissions
    about the judge's reasoning but the main objection to the decision  was
    that the judge's decision that the divorce was a  ploy  was  irrational
    given the chronology. The divorce took place on 6 February 2011 but the
    appellant did not make her application for entry clearance until 6  May
    2016.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  this
    point. No rule 24 response has been filed.

 5. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's decision was vitiated by material error of law.

 6. Mr Bramble helpfully acknowledged that Judge Chana's decision contained
    an error with regard to her assessment  of  the  divorce.  However,  he
    suggested there were other findings which were not erroneous and  which
    were sufficient to show there was no family life. In other  words,  the
    error was not material.

 7. Mr Wilford made submissions along the lines  of  his  written  grounds,
    emphasising how the judge had failed to take account of the evidence of
    the sponsor's exemplary service and  the  description  of  him  by  his
    commanding officer as "honest" before proceeding to find  he  had  lied
    about numerous issues in the appeal.

 8. Mr Bramble argued the judge's findings with respect to the error in the
    evidence regarding when the appellant returned to live at her  father's
    home, regarding the appellant's  time  living  independently  from  her
    father, the peculiarity of sending money when he  already  had  a  bank
    account in Nepal and the inconsistency over the evidence of income from
    the sale or rental of a shop or house were  sustainable  and  could  be
    considered independently from the finding on the divorce.

 9. Having listened to the submissions made, I agree with Mr  Wilford  that
    the irrational finding that the appellant had divorced her husband as a
    ruse to show she was not living independently infected the remainder of
    the judge's reasoning. She began her findings with consideration of the
    evidence of the divorce, devoting several  paragraphs  to  it.  It  was
    plainly at the forefront of the judge's mind when  she  concluded  that
    neither the appellant's nor the sponsor's evidence was credible.

10. The judge's central finding  is  irrational.  It  cannot  seriously  be
    argued that the appellant would have divorced as a ruse to show she was
    no longer living independently from her father and then wait more  than
    five years to apply for entry clearance.  Moreover, it  was  not  until
    January 2015 that the respondent's policy was  amended  to  remove  the
    requirement for exceptional  circumstances.  It  cannot  rationally  be
    maintained that the appellant must have foreseen this change in  policy
    and prepared the ground for an application four years previous  to  the
    change.

11. Despite Mr Bramble's best efforts, I do not  accept  that  the  judge's
    other adverse findings can be sustained in isolation from this error. I
    find the judge's decision is vitiated by serious error and  has  to  be
    set aside in its entirety. No findings are preserved.

12. The representatives  were  in  agreement  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before  another
    judge. Having considered the Senior President's Practice  Direction  of
    15 September 2012, I make an order under  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. The appeal will be  reheard
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and  her
decision dismissing the appeal on  article  8  grounds  is  set  aside.  The
appeal is remitted to the first-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard  by  another
judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

