
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/16345/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd November 2018                         |On 15th November 2018         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                    mr SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of  birth  is  3rd
    September 1995.  His  date  of  birth  had  earlier  been  recorded  in
    proceedings before the Tribunal as 1st January 1994.  He arrived in the
    United Kingdom illegally on 3rd February 2010 and claimed international
    protection as a  refugee  the  following  day.   That  application  was
    refused on 11th June 2010, though he was  granted  discretionary  leave
    until 1st July 2011 presumably because of his age.  On 29th  June  2010
    he appealed. On 16th September 2010 he obtained  an  adverse  decision.
    He then made an out of time application for further leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom; that application being made on 19th July 2011.   On
    5th February 2013  following  a  refusal  to  grant  him  international
    protection as a refugee he was granted further leave  to  remain  valid
    until 3rd March 2013.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. On 21st February 2013 he made an application on human  rights  grounds.
    He received an adverse decision dated 10th June 2016 against  which  he
    appealed.  On 6th November 2017 his appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  R  L  Walker  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.   As  a
    preliminary matter, at  that  hearing,  there  was  an  application  to
    adjourn when details of the Appellant's criminality were produced.  The
    application was refused, and the matter proceeded with the focus of the
    appeal being on  whether  or  not  there  would  be  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration into Afghanistan.

 3. The Appellant contended that there  was  new  evidence  sufficient  for
    there to be a fresh protection claim, being evidence of the recognition
    that the Appellant's date of birth, as initially recorded, was wrong so
    that he was about eighteen months younger when the  matter  first  came
    before Judge Beck who dismissed the earlier asylum appeal and there was
    evidence of the Appellant's attempts to trace his  family  through  the
    Red Cross, which I am told was  to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant's
    family were no longer in the area where he had contended that they were
    as well as evidence of the Appellant's private and family life with his
    girlfriend Syra Khan as well some country evidence.

 4. Judge Walker dismissed the appeal.

 5. Not content with that decision  by  Notice  dated  10th  May  2018  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which was initially refused on 4th  June  2018  by  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy.  In respect  of  the  second
    ground upon which Mr Burrett has principally focussed  his  submissions
    (I should say that the first ground related to the refusal by the Judge
    to grant the adjournment and the second ground relates to the judge not
    engaging with the further evidence amounting to a protection  claim  in
    the context of the human rights appeal) Judge McCarthy was of the  same
    view as the judge at first instance that the decision of  the  previous
    judge in relation to the earlier asylum claim was not relevant.

 6. On a renewed application, Judge of the Upper Tribunal McWilliam,  in  a
    decision dated 25th September 2018, granted  permission  on  the  basis
    principally  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  refusal  to  grant  an
    adjournment had been unfair.  Upper Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  thought
    that there was rather less merit in  Ground  2  though  she  did  grant
    permission on it.

 7. In the event ground 1 was not pursued before me. That  was  because  Mr
    Burrett acknowledged  that  there  could  be  nothing  material  argued
    because there was no further evidence that he could now  produce.   His
    principle point is to be found at paragraph  42  of  the  Decision  and
    Reasons in which Judge Walker said,

         "There is no new evidence that I can take into account and which is
         particularly pertinent or relevant."

8.   Judge Walker had already come to the view that there was no  sufficient
    evidence to found a new protection claim but if there were, the  proper
    course was for it to be made to the Secretary of State.

9.   I observe that no application was made, albeit out of time,  to  appeal
    the decision earlier made. Whilst it  was  appreciated  that  the  only
    decision with respect to whether or not the Appellant was  entitled  to
    refugee status had been made premised on the Appellant's wrong date  of
    birth, that was a course open to the Appellant and one which Mr Burrett
    acknowledges could have been followed. Whether the Appellant would have
    been successful cannot be known.

10.  Mr Burrett urges me to find however is that  there  was  a  failure  to
    engage with the new evidence in determining whether or not  there  were
    obstacles to the Appellant safely returning to  Afghanistan,  going  to
    the issue of proportionality, as well as to the requirement  within  in
    paragraph 276ADE. It was submitted that Judge Walker had erred  by  not
    engaging in the point.

11.  I recognise that Judge Walker was wrong  to  say  that  there  was  "no
    evidence" that could be taken into account.  There was evidence.  There
    was evidence from the  Red  Cross,  but  in  my  judgment  it  was  not
    material, and it was not material not only because the  starting  point
    for the judge in this case, applying the principles of  Devaseelan  was
    that the Appellant was not a witness of truth, referred to at paragraph
    39 of the decision, but in every other material  respect  Judge  Walker
    found the Appellant to be a  witness  who  was  unreliable  and  indeed
    rejected the substance of the evidence being advanced.

12.  Given that the burden of proof was upon the  Appellant,  I  cannot  see
    how it can be said that Judge Walker, even if the evidence of  the  Red
    Cross had been taken into account,  could  then  have  found  that  the
    Appellant had proved, as part of his case, that  he  was  not  able  to
    communicate or contact his family.  The  only  evidence  was  that  the
    Appellant's family were not where he  said  they  were.   However,  the
    Appellant, as I have  already  said  was  found  to  be  an  unreliable
    witness.

13.    I  find  in  all  the  circumstances  that  the  Appellant  has   not
    established that there was any material error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  There was otherwise sufficient engagement with  the  relationship  with
    the Appellant's girlfriend which was dealt  with  and  in  all  of  the
    circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date: 9 November 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

