
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16906/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     mrs Shabanabanu Ismail-Gocha Patel
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Harvey, instructed by One Immigration Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued  on  25  August  2017  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa which  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the refusal of leave on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home  Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mrs  Patel  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant was born  in  India
    on 6 May 1990.  She is therefore now 28 years old.  She came to the  UK
    as a student on 30 March 2011 and was granted leave  in  that  capacity
    until 20 June 2014.  As part of an application made on 15 November 2012
    for an extension of leave she relied upon a TOEIC certificate  obtained
    on 21 August 2012.

 4. On 17 June 2013 the appellant was  issued  with  a  curtailment  letter
    indicating that her leave would be curtailed as of 19 August 2013.  She
    did not apply in time to extend that leave  but  on  27  November  2013
    applied for leave to remain as a spouse and this was granted  until  27
    May 2016.

 5. On 4 May 2016 she applied for further leave to remain as a  spouse  but
    this was refused on 24 June 2016.  Her  appeal  against  that  decision
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa on 28 July 2017.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had obtained her TOEIC
    certificate  using  a  proxy  and  could  not  meet   the   suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules; see [15]-[31].

 7. The judge went on to assess whether the appellant qualified for Article
    8 ECHR leave outside the provisions of the Immigration Rules.  As  part
    of that assessment she considered section 117B of the  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act 2002. It was not disputed  that  the  appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her two British children.  The
    First-tier Tribunal was therefore required to consider  the  provisions
    of s.117B(6) as to whether the public  interest  did  not  require  the
    appellant's removal because it would not be reasonable  to  expect  her
    children to leave the UK.

 8. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  reasonableness  of  the
    children leaving the UK was as follows:

         "51. In the instant case, I accept that the appellant had exercised
             deception in her TOEIC test and I do  attach  weight  to  this
             issue.  However, having regard to the respondent's  policy  as
             referred to above, I find that it  cannot  be  said  that  the
             appellant has a very poor immigration history or that there is
             evidence of criminality.

         52.   The  appellant  has  two  children  born  on  15/08/2015  and
             29/04/2017 who are British citizens and therefore comes  under
             the definition of a qualifying child under Section 117B(6).  I
             find that it is in the children's best interests  to  be  with
             both parents and I  note  the  children's  father  is  also  a
             British citizen.  If the  children  follow  the  appellant  to
             India they would be deprived of the right  to  grow  up  in  a
             country of which  they  are  citizens.   They  would  also  be
             deprived of the benefits of  living  in  the  UK.   For  these
             reasons, I find that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to leave the UK.  Therefore, in relation to the issue
             of proportionality the public interest does  not  require  the
             appellant to be removed."

 9. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  it  was  not  reasonable  for  the
    children to leave the UK even after some adverse weight was  placed  on
    the appellant's deception in her TOEIC test.

10. The respondent appealed  against  the  reasonableness  assessment,  the
    grounds maintaining:

         "3.  The judge was wrong in law to find that the appellant did  not
         have a poor immigration history given  his  finding  that  she  had
         exercised deception to obtain  leave  to  remain  in  the  past  by
         employing fraud.  Accordingly  there  were  powerful  reasons  that
         existed in this case that could have  rendered  it  reasonable  for
         family life to continue family (sic) abroad."

11. The grant of permission to appeal dated 13 June 2018 stated:

         "2.  It is arguable that  the  judge  misapplied  the  respondent's
             policy in respect of Section 117B(6) of the NIA  Act  2002  in
             not considering the fact that the appellant had used deception
             as amounting to a  'very  poor  immigration  history'.   As  a
             result, the judge arguably erred in law  in  applying  Section
             117B(6) and carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  under  Art
             8.2."

12. The respondent's case, therefore, was that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in not placing more weight on the appellant's use of deception

13. By the time of the hearing before me, the Supreme Court had handed down
    the decision in  KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53. In that case the  Supreme  Court  considered
    the proper approach to the  "reasonableness"  test  in  s.117B(6).  The
    Supreme Court in KO set down that the conduct of the parent  is  not  a
    factor to be weighed against the child  in  the  s.117B(6)  assessment.
    Paragraph 17 of KO, for  example,  states  "there  is  nothing  in  the
    subsection to import a reference to the conduct of the parent".

14. There was no application before me from the respondent  by  way  of  an
    amendment to the grounds in light of  the  guidance  in  KO.  Mr  Kotas
    accepted that the respondent's case was in difficulty  where  that  was
    so. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  be  in  error  in
    placing insufficient weight on the appellant's adverse conduct as  this
    is not a factor that should be weighed at  all  in  the  reasonableness
    assessment. The respondent's grounds do not set out any other challenge
    to the reasons given for that it would not be reasonable  for  the  two
    British children here to have to leave the UK. Where that is so,  I  do
    not find that the respondent's grounds can show an  arguable  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

15. For completeness  sake  I  should  indicate  that,  in  line  with  her
    instructions, Ms Harvey made an application for an extension of time to
    allow the appellant to renew a cross-appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  the
    First-tier Tribunal having refused permission to appeal in  a  decision
    dated 15 March 2018. The explanation  for  the  failure  to  renew  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was that the
    legal representatives had followed, incorrectly, the indication in  the
    refusal of permission that the appellant's cross appeal could not "  be
    entertained". Nothing explained  when  the  legal  representatives  had
    realised otherwise and why they had not applied in writing and prior to
    the hearing for an extension of time in order to renew an appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal. Professional legal representatives can be  expected  to
    be aware of the provisions of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and Upper Tribunal case law which allow for  a  cross-appeal
    even if a party is successful.  The  delay  in  seeking  to  renew  the
    application and applying for an extension of time is over a year.  This
    is extremely significant and the explanation for the delay is weak.  In
    those circumstances, I did not find that it was  in  the  interests  of
    justice to extend time to admit such an application.

16. For all of these reasons, the grounds before me do not  show  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  a  material  error  on  a
    point of law.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  not  in  error  and  shall
    stand.




Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 7 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt






