
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16795/2017
                                                               HU/16797/2017
                                                               HU/16800/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 January 2019                      |On 12 February 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  Mr S U A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                            First Respondent
                                     And

                                   M M A S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                           Second Respondent

                                     And

                                  Mrs M S M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                            Third Respondent





Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Richardson, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-Tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr S U A, Master
    M A S and Mrs M S  M  as  the  "First,  Second  and  Third  Appellants"
    respectively.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh who made an  application  for
    leave to remain. It was refused  and  they  appealed  and  following  a
    hearing, and in decision promulgated on 11 October 2018, Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Raymond allowed their appeals.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. It was granted by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal E M Simpson in  a  decision  dated  4  December
    2018. Her reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  The respondent applied  for  permission  to  appeal  in  time,
         concerning the decision of First-tier Judge JG Raymond  promulgated
         on 11/10/2018 (the Decision) allowing the appeals on  human  rights
         grounds, Art 8 of the ECHR.

         2.   The appellants,  husband,  wife  and  eldest  minor  son,  all
         nationals of Bangladesh,  had  appealed  against  the  respondent's
         decision of  17/11/2017  refusing  their  28/06/2017  human  rights
         claims for leave to remain on the basis of their family  &  private
         life in the UK, their family life additionally comprising 2 younger
         children of the family born in the UK.

         3.   Permission to appeal is granted because:

             (i)  as asserted, there was arguable that on a material matter
             concerning the respondent's refusal  of  the  first  appellant
             husband/father's application inter alia under the  suitability
             requirements in the Immigration Rules (the Rules), App FM para
             S-LTR.4.2. because when he submitted a TOEIC certificate  from
             Educational Testing Service (ETS) in  a  previous  application
             there  had  been  concluded  that  the  certificate  had  been
             fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test  taker,  that
             there appeared in the course of the judicial analysis both  an
             inadequacy  and  inconsistency  of  reasoning  underlying  the
             finding that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  establish  the
             appellant's dishonesty and/or that the appellant had furnished
             a sufficiency of innocent explanation (70-78);

             (ii) further when coming to addressing the minor son's  Art  8
             appeal, that appellant having been accepted to  have  been  in
             the UK 7 years, at the  time  of  the  family's  human  rights
             applications, having entered  on  08/05/2010,  there  appeared
             altogether, contrary to the authorities, an  arguably  muddled
             unstructured analysis of his 5.55 best interests and para  276
             ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules concerning  that  child,  and  arising
             from that child S.117B.(6) with  reference  to  the  appellant
             parents' appeals, disclosing arguable error in appearing inter
             alia to attribute primacy to best interests of the  child,  in
             failing to analyse in any real way  the  question  whether  it
             would not be reasonable to expect the eldest  child  to  leave
             the UK, and further appearing  overall  to  arguably  fail  to
             carry out  in  any  real  way  the  balance  sheet  structured
             approach of which the higher authorities  have  underlined  is
             necessary.

         4.   Arguable material error(s) of law disclosed."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Howells relied upon the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal.  He
    urged me to firstly accept that the Judge had failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for  findings  on  a  material  matter.  This  relates  to  the
    allegation of deception by the Appellant in the obtaining of his  TOEIC
    certificate by the use of a proxy test taker. He submitted that  having
    accepted that the evidential burden fell upon the Appellant to offer an
    innocent explanation the Judge has failed to  adequately  address  this
    issue where the Appellant  has  done  no  more  than  simply  deny  the
    allegation without the  actual  provision  of  the  required  "innocent
    explanation". Further in reaching the findings that he  did  the  Judge
    relied upon the Appellant's English language ability and other  English
    qualifications.

 6. Further he submitted that the Judge has misdirected himself in  law  by
    treating the Appellants' child's "best interests" as a "trump card". In
    so doing the Judge has elevated the consideration of the child's  "best
    interests" above that required, namely that of a primary consideration.
    There is no indication of the Judge carrying out a  balancing  exercise
    and  the  Judge  has  failed  to  consider  Section  117B  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 under public  interest  in  removal  in
    light of the precarious nature of the Appellants'  status.  It  is  not
    apparent that the Judge has considered the balance of the  elements  of
    Section 117B and the Judge has "used Article 8 as a general  dispensing
    power". Any assessment of whether it is reasonable to  remove  a  child
    must encompass all of the relevant public  interest  factors  including
    those set out in sections 117B [1]-[5]. It is reasonable  to  remove  a
    child if the actions of their parents are sufficiently damaging to  the
    public interest.

 7. Beyond that he submitted that the Judge had materially erred in failing
    to apply binding caselaw with particular reference to  the  Authorities
    of EV (Philippines) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, Zoumbas v SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 74 and E-A (Article 8 - best interests  of  child)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC).

 8. Mr Richardson submitted that the Judge  had  not  materially  erred  as
    asserted. I find that to be the case.

 9. The Respondent's grounds amount to little more than a disagreement with
    findings and conclusions that were open to be made on the evidence  and
    contained no material error of law.

10. Contrary to the  grounds  the  Judge  has  not  simply  relied  on  the
    Appellant's English language ability and other English  qualifications.
    At paragraph 60 onward the Judge has set out with great care  not  only
    the relevant  legal  authorities  but  also  the  principles  that  are
    involved. The Judge has carried out  an  evaluative  assessment  before
    concluding that the Respondent  had  not  established  that  the  first
    Appellant was dishonest in the June 2012 test. The Judge has recognised
    (paragraph 61 of his decision)  that  the  claimed  dishonesty  of  the
    Appellant on the ETS test effectively  reverses  the  burden  of  proof
    where deception is concerned. The Judge has  explored  the  Appellant's
    plausible explanation and the inability of the Respondent  to  disprove
    it. In so doing the Judge has not materially erred as submitted by  the
    Respondent.

11. Likewise, in relation to his analysis of  the  best  interests  of  the
    third Appellant, the child of the  first  and  second  Appellants,  the
    Judge has applied relevant case law throughout. At no  point,  contrary
    to the grounds, has the Judge elevated the child's status to that of  a
    "trump card". The third Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  since
    three years of age. He was 11 at the time of the  decision.  The  Judge
    concluded at paragraph 87 of his decision that the third Appellant  had
    provided adequate evidence to conclude that he had provided a "credible
    basis for considering  that  he  should  be  perceived  as  having  the
    cultural profile of any British child  his  age".  He  recognised  that
    irrespective of the precarious state of his  parents'  leave  the  best
    interests  of  the  third  Appellant  were  to  remain  in  a   regular
    relationship with them both. The Judge  has  looked  at  his  position,
    accepting that it has changed over time, and acknowledging the need for
    a correspondingly wider focus examining  that  position  in  the  wider
    world of which school would usually be an important part. The Judge has
    given significant weight to the period of time the third Appellant  has
    been in the United  Kingdom  and  concluded  at  paragraph  96  of  his
    decision that there were no powerful  reasons  militating  against  the
    best interests of the child being to remain with all his family in  the
    United Kingdom. The  Judge  has  taken  into  account  public  interest
    factors throughout. He focused  on  the  reasonableness  of  the  third
    Appellant going to Bangladesh but it was open to him to  conclude  that
    as a child whose 7 years of life and more in the United Kingdom engaged
    paragraph 276ADE [1][iv] of the Immigration Rules and section 117B [6].
    Considering both the Immigration Rules and the statutory provisions the
    Judge has taken into account the best interests of the third  Appellant
    and the issue of reasonableness. Thereafter he has separately  subsumed
    those considerations into his  Article  8  analysis  at  paragraph  103
    onward of the decision before  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision did not involve the making of an error of law.

The appeal of the Respondent is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 8 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
