

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/16174/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 November 2017                        | On 19 December 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                          Mr S F (first Appellant)
                      bof (a minor) (second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J Rothwell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals with leave against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J H H Cooper to dismiss his appeal against the  decision
    of the respondent made on 5 May 2016 to refuse to grant him  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal on 15 September 2017.  She stated at paragraph 6 that there was
    a patent error of law in that the appeal of the  second  appellant  had
    not been determined.  The other matters raised in the grounds of appeal
    are also arguable.  Ms Rothwell at the hearing before me confirmed that
    there was no separate appeal for the child.   She  was  included  as  a
    dependant of the first appellant and therefore did not have  an  appeal
    in her own right that had to be determined.   In  any  event  as  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson said that other matters raised  in  the  grounds
    were also arguable,  Ms  Rothwell  proceeded  to  make  submissions  in
    respect of those grounds.

3.   The appellant has a partner and two children, a daughter, BOF, born  on
    13 November 2008 (second appellant) and a son,  SOF,  born  on  28  May
    2016.  Both children were born in the UK.  The appellant claims to have
    entered the UK illegally on 1 December 2005.  On 17  November  2006  he
    applied for an EEA residence card, which was refused on 30  July  2007,
    but then granted following reconsideration on 28 June 2010, valid until
    28 June 2015.  On  27  June  2015  he  applied  for  an  EEA  permanent
    residence card on the basis that he was an extended family member (EFM)
    of an EEA national.  This application was refused on 3 December 2015.

4.   On or about 10 February 2016 the  appellant  submitted  an  application
    under cover of a  letter  from  his  solicitors,  indicating  that  the
    application was made on behalf of the appellant and his  daughter  BOF,
    who had been born in the United  Kingdom  on  13  November  2008.   The
    letter claimed that the appellant and his daughter had both established
    a private and family life in the United Kingdom, and should be  granted
    leave to remain.

5.   It was explained that the EEA residence card that  had  expired  on  28
    June 2015 had been granted on the basis that he was an extended  family
    member of his brother,
          J M F, a Dutch national who was exercising treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom, but that  his  brother  had  declined  to  support  the
    application he had made in June 2016 for a permanent residence card.

6.   It was stated that the daughter lived with the appellant  and  attended
    primary school in London.  She had been in the United Kingdom for seven
    years continuously, and the appellant himself had been  here  for  more
    than ten years  continuously.   Various  documents  were  submitted  in
    support of the application, confirming the daughter's school attendance
    and registration with a GP and showing  that  the  appellant  had  been
    lawfully working in the United Kingdom until the refusal  of  his  last
    application in December 2015.   It  was  stated  that  at  present  the
    appellant was her main carer.

7.   The judge noted from the respondent's Reasons for Refusal  Letter  that
    the respondent accepted that the minor child had resided in the  United
    Kingdom for seven years which gave a basis  for  considering  paragraph
    EX.1.  However it was not considered  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to her returning to Ghana and it was reasonable to expect her
    to do so.  The respondent had stated that she had  taken  into  account
    the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the United
    Kingdom, in accordance with her duties under Section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   However  it  was  generally
    accepted that the best interests of a child whose parents  were  facing
    removal from  the  United  Kingdom  were  best  served  by  that  child
    remaining with  their  parents  and  being  removed  with  them.   This
    according to the respondent represented the  centrality  of  a  child's
    relationship with their parents in determining their wellbeing.   Other
    general factors were considered and  the  respondent  stated  that  the
    minor daughter would be removed with her father, who  was  clearly  the
    most important person in her life, and this would help her  readapt  to
    life in Ghana.  The child was a national of Ghana and  would  therefore
    be able to enjoy all the benefits and advantages citizenship  entailed.
    Educational provision existed in Ghana.  There was no evidence  of  any
    special educational or medical needs for the child.

8.   The judge's findings and decisions are set out at paragraphs 38 to  60.



9.   The grounds pointed out that the consideration by the judge in  respect
    of the older child was at paragraphs 49, 51, 56 and 57.  The latter two
    paragraphs were concerned  with  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  where
    exceptional features would have to be present in order for an appeal to
    be successful.  So, the grounds looked to paragraphs 49 and 51 to argue
    that the judge failed to follow the principles in MA (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705.   The judge held as follows:

    49.  Mr Jones referred to the case of FY (Bangladesh),  and  I  do  not
         accept Ms Benitez' submission to the effect that  the  facts  there
         were  so  different  to  those  before  me  as  to  make  the  case
         irrelevant. In that case the child on whom the  appeal  turned  had
         been born in the United Kingdom in August 2006 and the  application
         for leave had been made soon after he acquired the age of 7  years.
         It was claimed that it would not be reasonable  to  return  him  to
         Bangladesh with his parents. By the time the matter came before the
         Court of Appeal he had been in the United Kingdom for some 9 years,
         but the court still found that it was reasonable to return  him  to
         Bangladesh. In giving the court's judgment, Burnett LJ said:


             24.   The  circumstances  of  the  Appellants  are  relatively
                  commonplace. As a result of the successive grants of leave
                  to remain as a student, they have  been  lawfully  in  the
                  United Kingdom since 2006. A was born here not long  after
                  the First Appellant's arrival and so unquestionably at the
                  time of the application satisfied the 7-year test.


             25.  The reference to it being a key test seems to me to be no
                  more than a statement that that is the starting point  for
                  consideration whether a child will be able  to  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom.


             26.  This is what might be regarded as  a  classic  bootstraps
                  application which depends entirely upon the position of A.




             27.  I do not accept that  there  is  any  mystery  about  the
                  meaning of the word reasonable in this rule any more  than
                  in other rules and legislation. It is extremely  difficult
                  to see why it should be unreasonable for A to travel  with
                  his  family  to  Bangladesh  in  circumstances  where  the
                  parents had no expectation of remaining here. Mr  Yeo  was
                  candid in recognising that the circumstances  are  not  in
                  any way unusual.


             28.  The use of the word precarious in this case, as Underhill
                  LJ observed in the course of his reasons, was explained by
                  the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge as meaning  no  more  than
                  that the family was here on successive grants  of  limited
                  leave which carried with it no  expectation  of  permanent
                  residence.


             29.  In those circumstances,  I  conclude  that  there  is  no
                  arguable basis for demonstrating that  the  conclusion  of
                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chana  under  the  Rules  was
                  wrong. As I have already indicated, it  is  accepted  that
                  there could be  no  separate  Article  8  claim  with  any
                  prospect of  success.  For  these  reasons,  this  renewed
                  application is refused.


    51.  Whilst I accept that the evidence  before  the  Respondent  showed
         that BOF was settled at her primary school and doing well,  it  has
         long been recognised that the  first  7  years  of  life  are  less
         significant in terms of  putting  down  roots  and  the  degree  of
         disruption that removal to  another  country  would  cause  than  a
         period of 7 years later on in a child's life. Both Beatrice and her
         father are Ghanaian nationals. As I find no grounds of finding that
         it would be unreasonable to return the Appellant to Ghana, I do not
         find it would be unreasonable to expect  Beatrice  to  return  with
         him.

10.  The grounds relied on MA (Pakistan) where  the  Court  of  Appeal  held
    that "significant weight" must be given to the  fact  of  seven  years'
    residence (paragraph 46) and (ii) "as a starting point ... leave should
    be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary"   It  was
    stated in the grounds that while the judge  did  take  account  of  the
    seven years' residence, he failed to

    (i)  attach it "significant weight"; and


    (ii) failed to approach it on the basis that "leave should  be  granted
         (to the child) unless there are powerful reasons to the  contrary".




    It was argued that the decision of the judge focused on  reasonableness
    of returning the child as an  adjunct  of  the  parents  only,  without
    regard for her discrete interests, without affording the  seven  years'
    residence "significant weight" and  without  assessing  if  there  were
    "compelling reasons" for  not  granting  the  child  leave  to  remain.
    Rather than following the guidance in MA (Pakistan),  the  judge  cited
    extensively from FY (Bangladesh) to justify his conclusions.

11.  Ms Rothwell  relied  on  the  grounds  and  submitted  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself on this issue.  Whilst he quotes MA  (Pakistan)  in
    his consideration at paragraph 56, he  did  not  then  apply  it.   She
    submitted that paragraph 46 of MA (Pakistan) gives guidance as  to  how
    to  apply  the  reasonableness  test.   Seven  years  must   be   given
    significant weight relying on the policy guidance of the respondent.

12.  Ms Rothwell  submitted  that  FY  Bangladesh  was  a  Court  of  Appeal
    decision  made  on  20  October  2015  in  respect  of   a   permission
    application.  FY Bangladesh does not have the same gravitas as MA.   At
    no stage in his decision did the judge give any  consideration  to  the
    Home Office policy that  there  needs  to  be  strong  reasons  to  the
    contrary in respect of a child with seven years' residence.  For  these
    reasons Ms Rothwell submitted that the judge made a material  error  of
    law.

13.  Ms Rothwell submitted that Mr Walsh  in  his  grounds  at  paragraph  6
    relied on the Court of Appeal decision in Remi Akinyemi [2017] EWCA Civ
    236 that held that a person born in the UK was not one who  necessarily
    required leave to remain and if he were  not  removable  his  residence
    could not be treated as unlawful.  Consequently,  Section  117B  should
    not be applied to the child's circumstances.   Ms  Rothwell  said  that
    this ground did not take the case any further.

14.  She submitted that the fresh evidence  a  year  on  since  the  judge's
    decision is that BOF is 9 years old today, the date of the hearing.

15.  Mr Clarke said that the first  ground  raised  by  Ms  Rothwell  was  a
    narrow ground.   He  said  that  the  judge  raised  MA  (Pakistan)  at
    paragraph 56 and therefore must have been aware of the basic  principle
    which is that he had to consider the best interests of  the  child  and
    the countervailing interests.  He said the  question  was  whether  the
    judge  applied  significant  weight  to  the  child's  residency.    He
    submitted that the judge did at paragraph 42 when he said


         "Case law makes clear that the provisions of EX.1  in  this  regard
         are to be the starting point i.e. that once a child has spent seven
         years in the United Kingdom, careful consideration must be given as
         to the reasonableness of expecting her to leave."

    Mr Clarke submitted that MK says that the reasonableness  test  is  the
    same.  Whilst it does not say significant weight, it  is  difficult  to
    construe that the judge was not applying the weight referred to  in  MA
    (Pakistan).  Consequently, he submitted  that  the  judge  followed  MA
    (Pakistan) in that regard.

16.  Mr  Clarke  went  through  the  appellant's  immigration  history.   He
    submitted that the weight in a proportionality exercise is a matter  of
    discretion for the judge.  He submitted that the grounds amounted to  a
    disagreement over the weight the judge attached to various  aspects  in
    his proportionality exercise.

17.  Mr Clarke submitted that the second ground  was  not  addressed  by  Ms
    Rothwell.  The second ground arguing  about  the  judge's  approach  to
    Section 117B was erroneous and not made out.

18.  In reply Ms Rothwell submitted that the judge's reference at  paragraph
    42 to "careful consideration," is not the test.  We have the  Secretary
    of State's own policy that there needs to be  strong  reasons  and  the
    Court of Appeal refers to significant weight given to a child's  seven-
    year residence.  She submitted that  the  judge's  reference  to  every
    piece of evidence needs careful consideration at paragraph 42 does  not
    deal with the error.  She said the judge's decision cannot be  repaired
    because the judge  failed  to  take  MA  (Pakistan)  into  account  and
    erroneously misdirected himself in his application of FY  (Bangladesh).



19.  Following consideration of the  submissions  made  by  the  parties,  I
    found that the judge erred in law for the reasons given in the  grounds
    of appeal which were relied upon by Ms  Rothwell.   I  found  that  the
    judge focused on the reasonableness of returning BOF returning to Ghana
    with the parents. This was particularly notable at  paragraph  48.  The
    judge failed  to  apply  the  principles  in  MA  (Pakistan).   In  the
    circumstances the judge's decision could not stand.

20.  In making the decision, I took into account  the  submissions  made  by
    the parties.

21.  Ms Rothwell submitted that  in  accordance  with  Section  117B(6)  the
    child who is 9 today is a qualifying child.  On the immigration control
    side of matters, in 2005 the child's father the appellant came to  join
    his brother who was an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.
     His application was accepted and under EEA law was granted a residence
    card although she accepted that the appellant came illegally  into  the
    country in 2005.  He made an application in 2006 and leave was  granted
    until  December  2015.   A  subsequent  application  for  a   permanent
    residence card was refused.

22.   Ms   Rothwell   relied   on   Rupiah   and   Kaur   (children's   best
    interests/public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC) to  submit
    that there are different degrees of precariousness.  Whilst he  entered
    the UK illegally, there was no evidence of illegal  working.   That  is
    the extent of the public interest.

23.  She said that on the appellant's side,  significant  weight  should  be
    given to the child who is now  9  years  old.   There  must  be  strong
    reasons as to why the child ought not to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    The child has formed her own private life here and  is  doing  well  at
    school.

24.  Ms Rothwell submitted that in conducting the balancing  exercise,  very
    little evidence should be in the balancing side for  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The family applied in 2006 as extended family members of an EEA
    national and the application was granted.  The appellant was  therefore
    an extended family member of  an  EEA  national  in  2005  because  the
    residence card is a recognition of the status quo.   The  Secretary  of
    State would rely on the few weeks when the application was not  granted
    because he was no longer reliant on his brother.  Ms Rothwell said this
    was just  a  little  gap.   There  was  also  a  little  gap  when  the
    application was refused in 2015.  That was less than two months.   This
    is not a strong reason for this child not to be granted leave to remain
    and for the father to be granted leave to remain in line.

25.  Mr Clarke submitted that the best interests of the child is not  fixed.
     It is a fact that is dependent on other factors and what weight to  be
    given to it.  He accepted that significant weight should  be  given  to
    the fact that the child has  been  in  the  UK  for  seven  years.   He
    accepted that the child was 9 years old today and therefore has been in
    the United Kingdom for nine years.  In educational terms she is in year
    five, another year before entering secondary school.  The stage of  her
    education is not a critical factor.

26.  He submitted that the appellant has ties with a Mr Pinto with  whom  he
    lived in Ghana before leaving the country.  The first appellant has  no
    right to remain in the UK and the child will be returning with him.  He
    was not aware of any linguistic  issues  or  any  interference  in  the
    family circumstances were they to be removed to  Ghana.   He  submitted
    that there are schools available in Ghana where English is the language
    taught to children.  He submitted that according to MK it  is  for  the
    appellant to demonstrate that his move to Ghana would be detrimental to
    the child.

27.  He submitted that against the appellant in the  balancing  exercise  is
    the public interest.  He accepted that the appellant entered  illegally
    but was then granted a residence card.  The appellant was aware of  the
    limited nature of that leave.  Given the  paucity  of  evidence  beyond
    seven years in respect of the child's residency, he submitted that  the
    public interest in the family returning to Ghana outweighs the  child's
    best interests.

28.  Ms Rothwell submitted that  EV  Philippines  had  a  different  set  of
    facts.  The appellants in that case were here  illegally.   As  regards
    the appellant's relationship with Mr Pinto, Ms Rothwell submitted  that
    the appellant has spoken to Mr Pinto briefly.  She  questioned  whether
    Mr Pinto would take the appellant, his child,  his  partner  and  other
    child in.  There was no evidence that he would.

29.  She submitted that because the appellant's application was  successful,
    he must be  seven  or  eight  on  the  degree  of  precariousness  when
    considering whether "little weight ought to be given to those who  have
    been here illegally when considering Section 117B".

Findings

30.  The appellant has no right to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   On  his
    own facts,  his  case  has  no  chance  of  succeeding.   I  accept  Ms
    Rothwell's  submission  that  the  gaps  in   the   first   appellant's
    immigration history are not huge; they are little ones.  I also  accept
    in  the  light  of  Rupiah  and  Kaur  that  there   are   degrees   of
    precariousness.  Although the appellant entered the  UK  illegally,  he
    was successful in his application for a residence card as  a  dependant
    of his brother who was an EU  national  in  the  UK  exercising  treaty
    rights.  I accept that the degree of precariousness in this case is not
    as high as that  of  an  appellant  who  has  remained  here  illegally
    throughout most of their stay.  Nevertheless, as already stated on  his
    own facts the appellant's case would stand no chance of success.

31.  It is said that the appellant has  had  very  little  contact  with  Mr
    Pinto and it  is  not  likely  that  Mr  Pinto  would  accommodate  the
    appellant, his wife and their two children.  I do not place much weight
    on this evidence.  The appellant is an adult.  He is 32 years  old  and
    now has a family of his own.  He was resourceful in finding  employment
    in the UK.  He could use the same resourcefulness in finding a  job  on
    his return to Ghana with his family.  There was no evidence  before  me
    that his brother the EEA national would not assist him to  settle  down
    in Ghana with his family.

32.  The appellant's strongest argument is his  dependent  daughter  who  is
    now 9 years old.  The appellant relies on MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ
    705 which provides that significant weight must be given to a child who
    has been in the United Kingdom for seven years when  carrying  out  the
    proportionality exercise and  as  a  starting  point  leave  should  be
    granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

33.  Applying Section 117D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, I find that the appellant's daughter is a qualifying child.   She
    is not a British national.  She is a Ghanaian national.  The  strongest
    factor put forward by Ms Rothwell was that the child is now 9 years old
    and has established her own human rights.  I ask myself  if  these  two
    factors alone are enough to satisfy the requirement that she  ought  to
    be granted  leave  to  remain.   If  I  were  to  answer  that  in  the
    affirmative, then I would be making the best interests of the  child  a
    trump card.  As stated by Mr Clarke, BOF is not at the  critical  stage
    in her education.  She has yet  to  enter  secondary  school.   I  take
    notice of the fact that there are very  good  schools  in  Ghana  where
    English is the medium through which children receive  their  education.
    BOF is still dependent  on  her  parents  who  remain  who  remain  the
    important people in her life.  She is a national  of  Ghana  and  would
    therefore be able to enjoy all the benefits and advantages of  being  a
    Ghanaian national.  She has no medical needs. When the  appellant  made
    the application for leave to remain, he  had  no  legitimate  expection
    that his application would be successful.  On the evidence  it  is  not
    unreasonable to expect BOF to leave with the appellant.

34.  I am not persuaded that the reasons given for the  child  remaining  in
    the UK sufficiently outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant
    returning with his family to Ghana.

35.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 19 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
