
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16091/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 April 2019                              |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR PERCY MAGODO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Youssefian, Counsel instructed by House of
Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 24 January 2019 Judge  Lewis  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) allowed the appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter  the
    claimant) against the decision made by  the  appellant  (hereafter  the
    Secretary of State or SSHD) on 14  November  2017  refusing  his  human
    rights claim for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his private
    and family life.  On page 2 of the decision the case officer wrote:

         "Consideration


         Your human rights application for indefinite leave to remain on the
         basis of enjoying a family  life  has  been  considered  under  the
         Immigration Rules, including the family and private life Rules, and
         outside the Immigration Rules.


         Your case has  not  been  considered  by  the  Secretary  of  State
         personally, but by an official acting on her behalf.


         Immigration history


           . On 30/01/02 you arrived in the UK


           . On 13/11/08 you applied for leave to remain under Human Rights
             A8, you were granted  leave  on  a  discretionary  basis  from
             15/03/10 to 15/03.11


           . On 11/03/11 you applied in time for further leave  to  remain,
             you were again granted leave on  a  discretionary  basis  from
             07/04/11 to 07/04/14


           . On 05/03/14 you applied in time for further  leave  to  remain
             and you were again granted leave on a discretionary basis from
             17/06/14 to 17/06/17


           . On 10/06/17 you submitted your current in time application for
             indefinite leave to remain.


         It is noted that all of your periods of  discretionary  leave  were
         granted on the basis that you  were  the  carer  for  your  British
         spouse.  It is also noted that after writing out to you on 19/10/17
         to request evidence that you were still the carer for your  spouse,
         you responded in writing on 30/10/17 to inform us that you have not
         been your spouse's carer since 2013.  You also informed us that you
         have been living apart for the last 4 years and that you are in the
         process of obtaining a divorce".

2.   At the  hearing  before  the  judge  it  was  argued  that  the  SSHD's
    reference in the refusal letter to the claimant being granted a  period
    of discretionary leave from 15 March 2010 was erroneous  and  that  the
    evidence pointed to the grant date being two years before, on 15  March
    2008.   The  judge  ultimately  accepted  this  argument,  stating   at
    paragraphs 15-19 that:

         "15. Mr Balroop, with reference to the Respondent's policy document
             'Asylum Policy Instruction, Discretionary Leave' (version 7.0,
             published 18  August  2015)  refers  to  a  past  practice  of
             granting discretionary leave to remain for an  initial  period
             of 3 years.  He submits that this makes it  more  likely  than
             not that the initial period of discretionary leave was from 15
             March 2008 until 15 March 2011.  In further  support  of  this
             submission he identifies a letter from the Respondent  to  the
             Appellant  dated  29  April  2014  (Appellant's  supplementary
             bundle, page 73) which states in part "our records have  shown
             that you have now completed a 6 year period  of  discretionary
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom".  This  letter  appears
             to have been written to the Appellant at  the  time  that  his
             application made on 5 March 2014  was  pending,  inviting  the
             Appellant to consider whether instead of applying for leave to
             remain as the spouse of a settled person he  wanted  to  apply
             for indefinite leave to remain.


         16.  I pause to  make  the  following  two  brief  observations  in
             respect of the letter of 29 April 2014:


             (i)  Whilst the letter alerted the Appellant to the fact  that
                  he was "entitled to apply for indefinite leave to  remain"
                  on the basis that he had completed a  six-year  period  of
                  discretionary leave,  it  was  appropriately  cautious  in
                  avoiding indicating that the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
                  succeed on  such  an  application  -  "I  cannot  give  an
                  indication  of  the  likelihood  of  success  of  such  an
                  application".


             (ii) In the event the Appellant did  not  at  that  time  seek
                  indefinite leave to remain.


         17.  I am not able to identify any other  documents  on  file  that
             assist in resolving the question of  the  date  of  the  first
             grant of discretionary leave to remain.


         18.  On the basis of the materials that are available  -  and  with
             particular emphasis on the Respondent's own letter of 29 April
             2014 - it seems to me more likely than not that the  Appellant
             was indeed granted an initial period of 3 years  discretionary
             leave to remain from 15 March 2008.  I so find.


         19.  Mr Balroop, on this  premise,  invites  consideration  to  two
             consequences: that the Appellant would have completed 6  years
             discretionary leave to remain by 14 March 2014, and  10  years
             continuous lawful residence by 14 March 2018.  It is submitted
             that both these circumstances are pertinent to a consideration
             of proportionality".


3.   The judge went on  to  conclude  that  the  claimant  was  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal since he now met the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B regarding ten years' continuous lawful residence.

4.   On the way  to  this  conclusion  the  judge  rejected  the  claimant's
    submission that he was also entitled to succeed on  the  basis  of  the
    SSHD's  policy,  'Asylum  Policy  Instruction,   Discretionary   Leave'
    (version 7, published 18  August  2015)  at  Section  10  "Transitional
    Arrangements" dealing with applicants granted DL before  9  July  2012,
    which stated that normally applicants will be  eligible  to  apply  for
    settlement after accruing six years' continuous residence.

5.   The SSHD's principal ground contends that:

         "8.  It is respectfully submitted that no evidence was submitted by
             the Representatives which could have brought  Judge  Lewis  to
             the conclusion that this appellant was ever granted leave from
             March 2008.


         9.   This was never part of the appellant's evidence and  was  only
             brought about by an unsubstantiated  submission  made  on  his
             behalf.


         10.  Given that this mistake of fact by  the  judge  was  the  only
             reason  that  this  appeal  was  successful   the   Respondent
             respectfully request permission to appeal.


         11.  The judge has failed to  provide  reasons  why  he  finds  the
             Reasons for Refusal letter erroneous and his findings is based
             solely on speculation".

6.   The claimant submitted a Rule 24 response whose central plank was  that
    the SSHD had failed to establish that there had been a mistake of  fact
    as alleged.  It pointed out that in order to amount to an error of law,
    on the authority of E v SSHD  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49  at  [66],  several
    requirements had to be met:

         "First, there must have been a mistake  as  to  an  existing  fact,
         including a mistake  as  to  the  availability  of  evidence  on  a
         particular matter.  Secondly, the factual evidence must  have  been
         'established',  in  the  sense  that  it  was   uncontentious   and
         objectively verifiable.  Thirdly, the appellant (or  his  advisers)
         must not have been responsible  for  the  mistake.   Fourthly,  the
         mistake must have played a material (not necessarily decisive) part
         in the Tribunal's reasoning".

          In this Response it was argued that  not  all  these  requirements
    had been met in this case. The Response also contained a further ground
    contending that even if I found the judge had erred in relation to  the
    alleged mistake of fact, I should conclude that the judge was wrong not
    to allow the appeal on a  distinct  basis,  namely  that  the  claimant
    should have had the DL policy applied in his favour.

7.   I heard helpful submissions from both representatives.

8.   I am not persuaded that the SSHD's grounds are made out.

9.   First, it is incorrect of the grounds  to  state  that  there  was  "no
    evidence" that could have brought Judge Lewis to  the  conclusion  that
    the appellant had ever been granted leave from March 2008.  The  letter
    of 29 April  2014  was  at  least  some  evidence  pointing  that  way.
    Further, by virtue of this letter, the judge cannot  be  said  to  have
    reached his finding on the basis of "an unsubstantiated submission".

10.  Second, whilst a different judge might well have taken  the  view  that
    it was for the claimant to prove he had been granted DL in  March  2008
    (and the normal way of doing that would be by production  of  a  letter
    making such a grant or at least a request to  the  Tribunal  to  direct
    that the SSHD check her records), it was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    limited evidence to reach a decision on the matter.

11.  Third, the SSHD's grounds fell far short of  establishing  either  that
    there had been a mistake of fact or, if there  had,  that  it  met  the
    criteria enjoined by the Court of Appeal in E.

12.  As regards establishing whether there had been a mistake of  fact,  the
    SSHD took no steps to adduce further evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2) of
    the Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2018.  Even  a  statement  stating
    that a check had been made and no grant of leave for that date could be
    found would probably have sufficed.

13.  Even assuming the SSHD had established there  had  been  a  mistake  of
    fact (and assuming there had therefore been an availability of evidence
    on the matter) and that this evidence was uncontentious and objectively
    verifiable, it  simply  could  not  be  said  that  the  SSHD  bore  no
    responsibility for the mistake, since  the  letter  of  29  April  2014
    appeared to be premised  on  the  SSHD's  "records"  showing  that  the
    claimant had "now completed a 6  year  period  of  discretionary  leave
    ...".  That was logically impossible if he had only been granted DL  in
    2010.

14.  Mr Youssefian also sought to argue that even if I found  the  judge  to
    have erred in his application of  paragraph  276B,  by  virtue  of  the
    alleged mistake of fact, I should still come to an ultimate  conclusion
    (whether by way of immateriality of the error or by way  of  re-making)
    that the claimant should succeed under the DL policy (contrary  to  the
    judge's own finding).  However, given my  conclusion  that  the  SSHD's
    grounds are not made out, I need not address this argument.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 3 May 2019
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal





