
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
                             HU/16807/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 June 2019                         |  On 4 July 2019                      |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                              PRISCILLA MAPHOSA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Vokes of Counsel instructed by Biscoes
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 22 February 1966. On  29
    December 2007 she entered with leave until 17 March 2008 as a  visitor.
    On 1 April 2009 she sought international surrogate protection which was
    refused and on 13 October 2009 her appeal rights became exhausted.  She
    submitted 3 separate sets of further submissions on 31 August 2011,  25
    January 2012 and 12 October 2012, all of which the Respondent rejected.

 2. In late 2013 she met and entered into a relationship with the  Sponsor,
    Mark McCrorie, a British citizen born on 15 April 1960. On 28 September
    2016 they married. On 2 December 2016 she submitted an application  for
    subsidiary protection which on 16 January 2017 the Respondent refused.

The Sponsor

 3. The Sponsor is in employment in the aviation industry as an Aero Engine
    Technician, trained to work on a particular type of aircraft engine. He
    has a tumour on his neck which is considered benign but is  subject  to
    regular MRI scanning and  he  suffers  from  Type  2  diabetes.  He  is
    divorced with two adult children from his former marriage living in the
    Portsmouth area with whom he and the Appellant are in frequent contact.
    He has two grandchildren.

Hearing History

 4. On 8 February 2017 the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of her private and family life in the United  Kingdom.  This  was
    refused under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules and following  the
    Appellant's issue of  a  Pre-Action  Protocol  letter,  the  Respondent
    withdrew the decision and on 3 August  2018  made  a  new  decision  to
    refuse the application. This is the decision under appeal.

 5. On 13 August 2018 the Appellant lodged  notice  of  appeal  relying  on
    grounds of Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration
    Rules.

 6. By a decision promulgated on 14 March  2019  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Talbot dismissed the appeal. On 30 April  2019  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal M Robertson granted permission to appeal because it
    was arguable that Judge Talbot had failed to give adequate reasons  why
    the Sponsor's health did not constitute insurmountable obstacles to the
    establishment of family life in Zimbabwe. The Respondent did not file a
    response under Procedure 24.

The Hearing

7.   The Appellant and the  Sponsor  attended  the  hearing.  She  confirmed
    their present address but  otherwise  took  no  material  part  in  the
    proceedings.

Submissions for the Appellant

8.   Mr Vokes relied on all  the  grounds  for  appeal  following  Safi  and
    Others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT  00388  (IAC).  His
    first submission was that the Judge at paragraph 25 of his decision had
    accepted that for  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  the  prospect  of
    establishing family life in Zimbabwe was "a daunting one". The test  to
    ascertain  whether  there  were  "insurmountable  obstacles"  or  "very
    significant difficulties" was a high test but not, contrary to what the
    Judge stated, a very  high  test.  He  relied  on  the  judgment  in  R
    (Agyarko) v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11.  The  meaning  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles" is discussed at paragraphs 42-48 and  at  paragraph  43  the
    test is described as  "stringent".  The  Judge  had  erred  in  law  at
    paragraph 25 in setting too high a threshold and this had also infected
    his  assessment  at  paragraph  27  of  the  proportionality   of   the
    Respondent's decision by reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules in respect of which he had commented on  the  proportionality  of
    the "daunting prospect" to which he had referred at  paragraph  25  and
    not adopted the recommended balance sheet approach.

9.   His second submission was the  Judge  had  not  adequately  taken  into
    account  the  background  evidence  on  the  availability   of   health
    facilities in Zimbabwe which he had described at paragraphs 22 and  23.
    He referred me to the expert evidence given to  the  House  of  Commons
    International Development Committee (IDC) at pages 138 and 148  of  the
    Appellant's bundle (AB). The Judge  at  paragraph  23  had  found  that
    treatment was not unavailable and had assumed without setting  out  the
    evidence on which the assumption  had  been  based  it  would  be  more
    readily available in Bulawayo and Harare. The evidence before  the  IDC
    was that the health system had collapsed and that "there is  a  lot  of
    fragmentation of services". He invited me to conclude there was a  lack
    of adequate  healthcare  in  Zimbabwe  and  this  could  constitute  an
    "insurmountable obstacle". He referred me to the  Respondent's  Country
    Policy and Information Note (CPIN) on medical and healthcare issues  in
    Zimbabwe which referred to the excessive prices for diabetes drugs  and
    the availability of cancer  screening  services  only  in  the  private
    sector at a cost prohibitive for  the  majority.  He  referred  to  the
    extensive reliance on private sector health  care  available  generally
    only through the workplace.

10.  His third submission was that in addressing  the  Sponsor's  employment
    opportunities  at  paragraph  24  the  Judge  had  erred  in   reaching
    conclusions without due regard to the general situation of the  economy
    in Zimbabwe and the difficulty, if not impossibility, of the Sponsor re-
    training in Zimbabwe. The Judge had ascertained after the hearing  that
    the aero engine on which the Sponsor had been trained to work  was  not
    used in Zimbabwe. There was no evidence before the Judge of  facilities
    for re-training of  foreign  nationals  in  the  aviation  industry  in
    Zimbabwe and he had not taken into account the likely security issues.

11.  The decision contained errors of law and should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

12.  Ms Isherwood highlighted that the Appellant is a failed  asylum  seeker
    and has a poor immigration history. Her relationship with  the  Sponsor
    was started in the full  knowledge  that  her  immigration  status  was
    precarious if not unlawful: see paragraph 10 of  her  statement  at  AB
    p.A12. There was  no  right  for  an  individual  to  choose  in  which
    jurisdiction to enjoy family life. The evidence was the  Appellant  had
    had good employment in Zimbabwe where she has family.

13.  The test was whether there were "very significant obstacles" which  the
    Judge had set out at paragraphs 16 and  17  of  his  decision.  He  was
    entitled for the reasons given to reach his conclusions.  At  paragraph
    21 he had taken into account the reports from the Sponsor's doctor  and
    consultant and at paragraph 24 concluded he would  be  able  to  afford
    medical treatment in Zimbabwe.  I  noted  the  Judge's  conclusion  had
    relied in part on the ability of the Sponsor's  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom  financially  assisting  him.  The  Sponsor's  doctor  had  not
    mentioned any continuing treatment.

14.  The Judge had taken all relevant matters into account at paragraphs 20-
    24 of his decision which disclosed no arguable error of law and  should
    stand.

Response for the Appellant

15.  Mr Vokes referred to paragraph 27 of Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40
    noting the only substantial ground for refusal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules was the Appellant's lack of immigration status.  The  Appellant's
    challenge was to  the  Judge's  interpretation  of  the  evidence.  The
    Respondent's policy was  "subtle".  Regard  had  to  be  given  to  the
    Sponsor's reliance on daily injections of insulin which constituted on-
    going medical treatment. The decision  should  be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal allowed.

Findings on error of law issue

16.  I find for the reasons given by Mr Vokes in his first  submission  that
    the Judge erred in setting a "very high"  test  for  assessing  whether
    there are  "insurmountable  obstacles".  Further,  the  Judge  made  no
    reference to or consideration of the public interest factors identified
    in s. 117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the
    2002 Act).

17.  The Judge noted at paragraph 24 that the Zimbabwean  economy  is  in  a
    very poor state which would have an impact on the employment  prospects
    of both the Appellant and the Sponsor.  He  acknowledged  that  in  any
    event the Sponsor may have to re-train but did not make any  assessment
    whether this was practicable in all the circumstances. At paragraphs 25
    and 26 the Judge did not take expressly  address  the  difficulties  or
    lack of difficulties  which  the  Sponsor  would  face  on  seeking  to
    integrate into and  establish  himself  in  Zimbabwe.  It  is  only  at
    paragraph 27 he considered the  prospect  of  the  Appellant  returning
    alone to Zimbabwe to seek entry clearance.  It  appears  there  was  no
    information before the Judge about the likely time it  would  take  for
    the Appellant on return to  make  an  application  and  for  it  to  be
    considered, bearing in mind that there is no visa post in Zimbabwe.

18.  The Judge referred to the need for a  fact-specific  assessment  to  be
    made and concluded  that  the  hardship  which  would  arise  from  the
    Appellant's temporary return to Zimbabwe  is  limited  and  had  to  be
    balanced against a weighty public interest in terms of the  Appellant's
    poor  immigration  history.  There  was  no  detailed   fact   specific
    assessment  of  the  situation  and  timetable  in  the  event  of  the
    Appellant's return: see paragraphs 36-43 of Chikwamba.

19.  I conclude that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision. The parties agreed at the hearing that in the event there was
    a material error of law the appeal could be dealt with substantively in
    this decision subject to the further submissions made for each party at
    the hearing.

Further Submissions

20.  Mr Vokes referred to the issue of the expense of  private  health  care
    in Zimbabwe highlighted the April  2019  (post-F-tT  hearing)  CPIN  on
    medical and healthcare issues in Zimbabwe at paragraphs1.4.1 and 4.1.2-
    4. He also mentioned the failing mental health service noting that  the
    Sponsor's doctor had indicated that the Sponsor's depression  had  "the
    potential to significantly decline if a move to Zimbabwe is enforced".

21.  Ms Isherwood submitted that the starting point for the  proportionality
    assessment should be the ability of the Sponsor and  the  Appellant  to
    find employment, the ability of the  Sponsor's  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the Appellant's family in Zimbabwe to support them on their
    move to Zimbabwe and the ability of the  Sponsor  to  re-train  to  fit
    himself for local employment.

22.  The latest CPIN showed that health facilities were available,  even  if
    costly, in Zimbabwe. No list of the medications taken  by  the  Sponsor
    had been supplied so it was not possible to  check  whether  they  were
    available in Zimbabwe it was acknowledged that the CPIN particularly at
    paragraph 4.1.1 noted that some medicines for the treatment of diabetes
    in Zimbabwe are not available. The sponsor had not shown  that  he  was
    presently undergoing or in need  of  continuing  psychiatric  treatment
    beyond medication.

23.  Mr Vokes responded that the Sponsor had  never  been  to  Zimbabwe  and
    that his current mental health issues had to be put into the context of
    what was likely to happen on moving to Zimbabwe,  particularly  in  the
    light of what his  doctor  had  written.  The  availability  of  health
    insurance was effectively dependent on the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
    finding suitable employment which would not be easy in the light of the
    current poor state of the Zimbabwean economy.  It  was  unrealistic  to
    expect the Sponsor will be able  to  re-train  for  employment  in  the
    aviation industry.

24.  The First-tier Tribunal had found that the prospect of  re-location  to
    Zimbabwe was daunting and in addition  regard  should  be  had  to  the
    Sponsor's long-term  medical  conditions.  The  Sponsor  had  extensive
    family  in  the  United  Kingdom  including  his   aged   parents   and
    grandchildren with whom he maintains close contact. It was acknowledged
    the Appellant's relationship with  the  Sponsor  had  been  formed  and
    continued while her immigration status was precarious.The appeal should
    be allowed.

Re-consideration of the Substantive Appeal

25.  There was no challenge to the Judge's findings on  the  factual  matrix
    of the appeal. I accept  the  submissions  that  the  Sponsor  is  most
    unlikely to be able  to  re-train  in  the  aviation  industry  in  any
    position similar to his present one as an aero  engine  technician  and
    that at his age and with a complete absence of any experience  of  life
    in Zimbabwe (or elsewhere in sub- Sahara Africa) he is unlikely to find
    employment. There was no evidence that his parents or children are in a
    position to assist the Sponsor with any prospective  medical  costs  he
    would likely incur in Zimbabwe. His doctor has expressed  concern  that
    if he had  to  settle  in  Zimbabwe  his  mental  state  is  likely  to
    deteriorate.  The  background  evidence  is  that   while   psychiatric
    medications may be available in Zimbabwe there  is  little  by  way  of
    psychiatric care. The Sponsor's mental state would also be  a  relevant
    factor in assessing his employment prospects in  Zimbabwe.  Looking  at
    the evidence in the round, there are very significant obstacles to  the
    Sponsor's settlement in Zimbabwe with the Appellant.

26.  Having regard to the factors identified in s. 117B  of  the  2002  Act,
    the Appellant's immigration history is poor. Her relationship with  the
    Sponsor was formed at a time when she had no immigration status and  so
    was unlawfully present in the United Kingdom.  Consequently,  the  2002
    Act requires  little  weight  be  given  to  the  relationship  of  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor There  was  no  suggestion  advanced  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant was not fluent in  English  and  even  if
    permitted, would not  be  able  to  find  employment  or  otherwise  be
    financially independent. The Respondent's only substantial  ground  for
    refusal is the Appellant's lack of immigration status at the  time  she
    made her application and her unsatisfactory immigration history.

27.  The reality is that if the Appellant's appeal is dismissed she will  be
    forced to return to Zimbabwe to seek entry clearance to return  to  the
    United Kingdom to join the Sponsor, her husband. The Respondent has not
    suggested at any time that there is any reason to  anticipate  that  on
    return Zimbabwe the Appellant will not be able to show  she  meets  the
    relevant requirements of paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.  Those
    factors adverse to the Appellant which have  been  identified  are  her
    lack of the appropriate immigration status to satisfy the  requirements
    of paragraph 281 and  her  poor  immigration  history  and  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration controls. The  Respondent
    has not sought to rely on any aspect of paragraphs 320 or  322  of  the
    Immigration Rules. With reference to  the  Immigration  Rules  for  the
    Appellant cannot satisfy them only for the matters  mentioned  in  this
    paragraph.

28.   The  appeal  is  on  human  rights  grounds  and  so  I  consider  the
    Appellant's claim under Article 8 of European  Convention  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. In terms of the general  situation  in  Zimbabwe,  I
    note that while a new government has been recently elected in Zimbabwe,
    the situation there remains uncertain and there is no evidence that  it
    has improved so that conditions there can  no  longer  be  said  to  be
    "harsh and unpalatable", as described by the Judge.

29.  I take account of the nature  of  the  Respondent's  challenge  to  the
    present  application  (lack  of  relevant  entry  clearance  and   poor
    immigration history). On this basis it is likely to be the  case  that,
    the Appellant would meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  281  of  the
    Immigration Rules and succeed on an application for entry clearance  to
    join the Sponsor, her husband in the  United  Kingdom  in  which  event
    refusal would be disproportionate to the need to  maintain  immigration
    control: see TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ. 1109 in which it  is
    also noted that in conducting a balancing exercise the factors are  not
    equally weighted.

30.  I have had regard to lead judgment  of  Lord  Brown  in  Chikwamba.  He
    stated:

       42....In an article 8 family case the prospective length  and  degree
         of  family  disruption  involved  in  going  abroad  for  an  entry
         clearance certificate will always be highly relevant. And there may
         be good reason to apply the policy if  the  ECO  abroad  is  better
         placed than the immigration authorities  here  to  investigate  the
         claim,  perhaps  as  to  the  genuineness  of  a  marriage   or   a
         relationship claimed between family members, less  good  reason  if
         the policy may ultimately result in a second section 65 appeal here
         with the  appellant  abroad  and  unable  therefore  to  give  live
         evidence.

          44.....Should the article 8 claim then be dismissed so that it can
         be advanced abroad, with the prospect of a later, second section 65
         appeal if the claim fails before the ECO (with the disadvantage  of
         the appellant then being out of the country)? Better surely that in
         most cases the article 8 claim be decided once and for all  at  the
         initial stage. If it is well-founded, leave should be  granted.  If
         not, it should be refused.

          46...... Is it  really  to  be  said  that  effective  immigration
         control requires that the appellant and her child must first travel
         back (perhaps at the taxpayer's expense) to Zimbabwe, a country  to
         which  the  enforced  return  of  failed  asylum-seekers   remained
         suspended for more than two years after  the  appellant's  marriage
         and where conditions are "harsh and unpalatable", and remain  there
         for some months obtaining entry clearance, before finally  she  can
         return (at her own expense) to the UK to  resume  her  family  life
         which meantime will have been gravely  disrupted?  Surely  one  has
         only to ask the question to recognise the right answer.

31.   At paragraph 43 of Agyarko, the Supreme Court adopted the  view  that
    "insurmountable obstacles" needs to be understood in  a  practical  and
    realistic sense and at paragraph 45 that outside  the  Rules  leave  to
    remain may be granted in "exceptional circumstances"  and  adopted  the
    Respondent's view in its then  current  Instructions  that  these  were
    "circumstances in which refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the individual  such  that  refusal...  Would  not  be
    proportionate".

32.  At paragraph 51 the Supreme Court found:

             .... If, on the other hand, and applicant - even  if  residing
         in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to
         enter, at least if an application were made from  outside  the  UK,
         then there might be no public interest in his or her removal.....

     and at paragraph 57 that:

             .... The critical issue will generally be whether, giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the Article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.

33.  Looking at the evidence in the round, and the inevitable disruption to
    the family life of each of the Sponsor  and  the  Appellant,  what  the
    Sponsor's doctor has written about the likely increased pressure on the
    Sponsor's psychological health, I  conclude  the  Appellant  has  shown
    that,  applying  the  Agyarko  test  of  stringency  there   are   very
    significant obstacles to the establishment  of  family  life  with  the
    Sponsor in Zimbabwe.

34.  The remaining issue is whether the Appellant has  shown  there  is  no
    real public benefit in the maintenance of immigration controls  if  she
    were forced to return to Zimbabwe to seek entry clearance in the  light
    of the findings already made about the likelihood of her  show  meeting
    all the requirements  of  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  for  entry
    clearance for settlement as a spouse.

35.  Having regard to the views expressed in Chikwamba  already  mentioned,
    the findings already made and the prospect of the Appellant  satisfying
    the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  an  entry  clearance
    application and considering the factors identified  in  s.117B  of  the
    2002 Act (including the precariousness issue), I  find  that  in  these
    particular circumstances reduced weight can be attached to the need  to
    maintain immigration controls, such that the Respondent's  decision  is
    disproportionate to any of the legitimate public objectives  identified
    by Article 8(2) of the European Convention. The appeal  is  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.

Anonymity

36.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal, I consider none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The appeal of the Appellant is allowed on human rights grounds.
    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  28.
vi. 2019


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and decline to make any fee award because the
appeals have been allowed on the basis of evidence submitted subsequent to
the Respondent's decision.


Signed/Official Crest                                             Date 28.
vi. 2019


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
