
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16913/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 February 2019                  |On 01 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  HINDA [F]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, U.S.A.
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     No legal representative; sponsor present
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT
    Judge Doyle, promulgated on 3 September  2018,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance as a spouse.

 2. The ECO refused entry clearance because the evidence did not  establish
    the validity of the marriage, and because the required evidence was not
    produced to meet the financial requirements of the rules.

 3. The FtT accepted the validity of the marriage, but dismissed the appeal
    because even if the financial requirements could be met at  some  later
    date, the remedy was to present a further application.

 4. The  appellant's  grounds  are  set  out  at  [2(i)  -  (iii)]  of  her
    application dated 17 September  2018.   They  are  based  on  the  best
    interests of the child of the appellant and sponsor.

 5. The sponsor, Mr [I], addressed me on his desperation to have  his  wife
    and son living with him at last; the expense of  proceedings  to  date,
    and of any further application; his gratitude for being recognised as a
    refugee; his hard work in the UK; and his desire to integrate.

 6. I  have  considerable  sympathy  for  the  family  situation.   Mr  [I]
    impressed me as entirely  genuine.   However,  the  first  question  is
    whether the making of the decision of the FtT involved the making of an
    error on a point of law, such that it ought to be set aside.   No  such
    error has been shown.

 7. It is usually in the best interests of  any  child  to  live  with  his
    parents, if they are living together, or to have regular  contact  with
    both parents; but that does not generally override the requirements  of
    the immigration rules.  There was no evidence before the FtT  by  which
    it might rationally have come  to  another  conclusion,  based  on  the
    child's interests.

 8. Where it appears that a future application to the respondent  has  good
    chances of success, it can very  seldom  be  appropriate  to  allow  an
    appeal on article 8 grounds because it is  disproportionate  to  expect
    that application to be made.

 9. Mr [I] explained that another application has  not  been  made,  partly
    because he sends money to  his  family  in  the  USA,  which  makes  it
    difficult to save up the significant costs of application, and  because
    so much money has already been spent.  However, article 8 is not a  way
    out of that problem.  It may be unfortunate that money has been  wasted
    so far, but it was pointless to go ahead with  applications  which  did
    not meet the requirements of the rules, and with appeals which  had  no
    real chance of success.

10. It is up to the appellant (and sponsor) how to proceed further.  The UT
    cannot offer advice or predict outcomes.  That said,  however,  if  and
    when  the  appellant  (and  the  child  of  the  family)  make  further
    applications, they may wish to ensure that they are carefully supported
    by all required evidence.  The immigration rules  are  designed  to  be
    operated that way, not by making cases better after the application has
    been made.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      26 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
