
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16825/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th July 2021                    |On 5th August 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           Marie Mignonette France
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Metzer, Counsel, instructed by Huneewoth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Ms Nazlee Butt interpreted the Mauritian Creole and English
                    languages
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Mauritius against the decision  of
       the respondent on 7 October 2019 refusing her leave to remain in the
       United Kingdom on private and family life grounds.  The decision has
       previously been determined unsatisfactorily.  I ruled that there was
       an error of law in an earlier decision and directed that the  appeal
       be reheard in the Upper Tribunal and it came before me.

    2. The parties have served additional material and as a result of  that
       Mr Melvin was able to  make  concessions  which  are  realistic  and
       extremely helpful.  Whilst making it clear that the  case  was  very
       much contested Mr  Melvin  accepted  that  the  appellant  enjoys  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with her husband and that in the
       event of an entry  clearance  application  being  made  now  on  the
       available evidence the financial requirements of the Rules would  be
       satisfied.  He did not accept that  the  appellant  would  meet  the
       English language requirements.  She had passed an  appropriate  test
       at an appropriate standard but that was in 2016 and so too long  ago
       to currently satisfy the requirements of the rules and there was  no
       evidence that a more recent test had been taken.

    3. In order to set his concessions in context Mr Melvin then  outlined,
       in an appropriately summary form, his  submissions  to  support  the
       conclusion that there was no disproportionate  interference  in  the
       private and family life consequent on the decision complained of.

    4. There were two important applications before me.  The first  was  to
       adduce further evidence and was unopposed.  The second was  to  rely
       on new matters which Mr Melvin insisted, rightly, were a matter  for
       him but he did accept that new matters were  raised  and  should  be
       considered.  They related to the appellant's relationship  with  her
       new grandchild who was born after these  proceedings  had  commenced
       and so clearly was not a  consideration  when  the  application  was
       determined.

    5. At the core of Mr Melvin's  argument  is  the  contention  that  the
       Immigration Rules do not permit a person to change categories from a
       visitor to a person on a route to settlement as a wife  and  if  the
       appellant wished to enter the United Kingdom  as  a  wife  then  she
       should have returned to Mauritius and made an application  for  that
       purpose under the rules.

    6. In outline  he  submitted  that  the  matters  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant, although genuine, on their proper analysis did not amount
       to sufficient reason to outweigh the public interest in  it  forcing
       immigration control.

    7. It was part of his submissions but not something he submitted to  be
       pivotable, that the appellant had been deceitful  when  she  entered
       the United Kingdom on a visit visa because it was her  intention  to
       remain and that factor, he submitted, was an aggravating factor  and
       weighed against allowing the application.

    8. I set these matters up here because, in  a  sense,  they  "drew  the
       battle lines".  I am very aware of a substantial  skeleton  argument
       from Mr Metzer  and  submissions  which  I consider  below.   These
       remarks are not predetermining the appeal but are set out by way  of
       introduction so that my decision is  easier  to  follow.   That,  at
       least, is the intention.

    9. There was considerable argument before me about procedural  matters.
       Mr Melvin was concerned that the appeal  was  listed  for  a  remote
       hearing when there was contested evidence and the witnesses were not
       under the supervision of a solicitor but  (I  think)  in  their  own
       home.  There was no independent way of  monitoring  assurances  that
       they would not communicate with each other and indeed at  one  point
       he cross-examined on the basis that such communication had happened.

   10. I declined to disallow the evidence or to adjourn.  Although it  was
       clear to anyone reading the papers that there were areas of dispute,
       it did not seem to me that  this  was  a  case  that  was  based  on
       allegations of wholesale dishonesty or a sophisticated web of  lies.
       It was more a matter of nuance and weight and a lot of the important
       evidence was in documentary form.  In my judgment  the  arrangements
       did not significantly inhibit a fair hearing and certainly not in  a
       way that impacted on the likely issues to be resolved.   The  appeal
       went ahead.  I took detailed notes of the submissions and  arguments
       at the time but I do not find it necessary to set them out here.

   11. It is accepted that the appellant has  a  history  of  visiting  the
       United Kingdom.  She came first in May 2012 and  returned  in  2013,
       2015, 2016 and 2017, and, as far as I can see, it is  accepted  that
       she behaved responsibly and in accordance with her visitor's visa on
       each of those occasions.  On the most recent occasion she  asked  to
       remain before her leave lapsed.

   12. I turn now to the terms of the decision complained of.

   13. I summarise the  Reasons  for  Refusal.   This  confirmed  that  the
       application did not fail because of suitability reasons but  because
       the applicant was not eligible because she was in the United Kingdom
       with leave as a visitor and the rules did not permit  a  visitor  to
       apply to settle as a spouse.  Additionally, the Secretary  of  State
       did not accept that the relationship between the appellant  and  her
       husband was genuine and subsisting. This, according to  the  Reasons
       for Refusal, arose from her stating in the application that she  was
       not living with her partner.

   14. The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  there  would  be  "very
       significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration into Mauritius
       but this is not the point of this appeal.   Although  the  appellant
       said it would be difficult to return because of a change  in  family
       circumstances it certainly was not  suggested  that  she  could  not
       return to her country of nationality where she had  lived  for  many
       years.  The gravamen of the appeal is the assertion that she  helped
       care for her husband who has glaucoma.  The Secretary of State  took
       the view that other people could  provide  the  necessary  care  and
       there would be no "unjustifiably harsh consequences" in the event of
       her returning to Mauritius.  Her children were adult.  She claimed a
       relationship with her grandchildren but it was not claimed to  be  a
       parental relationship.

   15. The appellant gave evidence before me and adopted statements made on
       23 November 2019 and 12 July  2021.   An  interpreter  attended  the
       hearing.  The appellant wanted to show her English  language  skills
       and, unusually, I permitted her to give her evidence in English  and
       to turn to the interpreter for help if  required.   The  interpreter
       had to interpret questions on several occasions  but  the  appellant
       answered the questions in  English  intelligibly  without  need  for
       further assistance.

   16. In her statement of 23 November 2019 the  appellant  confirmed  that
       she arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2018  as  a  visitor  and
       subsequently applied for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds.
       She married her  husband  on  22  July  1978  and  they  have  three
       children.

   17. She outlined some of the problems  they  had  had  shared  in  their
       married life.  The details are not relevant to my decision  but  add
       to the picture of a couple who are committed to one another and have
       been for about 43 years.

   18. Th appellant explained that  she  was  qualified  and  worked  as  a
       registered nurse for  41  years  in  the  public  health  sector  in
       Mauritius and was a community health nurse.

   19. The wording of  paragraph  6  of  the  witness  statement  might  be
       significant.  She says there:

  "I retired five years early in May 2018 prior to  retirement  age  of  65
  years old in order to be able to come to  the  UK  to  join  my  husband,
  children  and  grandchildren.   My  husband's  health  has   deteriorated
  severely and I need to stay to look after him."

   20. The appellant then explained how her husband had worked as  a  crane
       operator, that their children were entitled to  British  citizenship
       so they decided to  send  them  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  their
       education.  The two older children are graduates and all  three  are
       in work.

   21. The appellant explained that her husband suffered from glaucoma  and
       came to the United Kingdom with their daughter in 2012 as  his  eyes
       were deteriorating.  Medical treatment was not  good  in  Mauritius.
       The health service there  was  overburdened  and  her  husband  took
       advantage of the much better health service available to him in  the
       United Kingdom.  It must be emphasised that he was entitled to  that
       because he is British.

   22. The appellant said at paragraph 11:

  "The main reason for my appeal to stay is to join my family who  are  all
  settled here and to assist my husband on a daily basis  as  he  is  quite
  elderly and his  condition  keeps  deteriorating.   He  constantly  needs
  someone to accompany him to the GP and hospital appointments due  to  his
  vision and also someone to help him communicate as  English  is  not  his
  first language".

   23. She then outlined his medical conditions.  As well  as  glaucoma  he
       has a propensity to develop kidney stones and  he  has  an  enlarged
       prostate.

   24. The appellant then outlined the kind of care that  she  provided  in
       the United Kingdom.  It is  important  that  these  things  are  not
       skipped over.  It was Mr  Metzer's  contention  that,  cumulatively,
       they were significant and important  to  the  appellant's  husband's
       welfare.

   25. She said the first thing she has  to  do  in  the  morning  is  help
       administer his eyedrops.  This is  something  that  she  had  to  do
       several times a day.

   26. She accompanied him to his medical appointments and accompanied  him
       everywhere he needed to go because his vision was poor and his renal
       problems made it hard  for  him  to  walk  and  he  needed  physical
       support.

   27. She also helped look after her then youngest grandson.  She prepared
       his lunch and  cooked  and  collected  the  oldest  grandchild  from
       school.

   28. The appellant explained how living  in  Mauritius  on  her  own  was
       trying for her.  She lived in a part of Mauritius with a fairly high
       crime rate and her age was making her vulnerable.

   29. She also explained how her eldest son  had  suffered  mental  health
       problems.

   30. She then gave details about cash payments on her retirement  but  as
       it is now accepted that the financial requirements of the Rules  can
       be met I  see  no  point  in  considering  further  that  strand  of
       evidence.

   31. In her supplemental statement dated 12 July 2021 she  confirmed  the
       contents of her earlier statement and then said how  she  had  built
       strong bonds with her grandchildren.  At paragraph 3 she said:

  "My husband is 70 years old; he has  various  medical  complications  and
  needs daily care.  My husband suffers from  glaucoma  and  cataract.   He
  needs me mostly to administer his eyedrops of  which  he  now  has  eight
  different eyedrops  that  need  to  be  administered  multiple  times  at
  different times of the day.  I accompany him to his medical  appointments
  which is now very frequent and has moved further  away  from  her  house.
  Due  to  the  specialist  care  required,  we  now  need  to  attend  the
  Peterborough City Hospital which is about 27 miles away  from  our  house
  each way and takes us  two  hours  to  get  to  on  three  different  bus
  exchanges; compared to Hinchingbrooke Hospital which was  within  walking
  distance from our house.  We must take six buses to get there  and  back,
  and he can barely even see the bus number and find  his  way  around  the
  hospital".

   32. She also confirmed that she did housekeeping and  other  chores  for
       her husband.

   33. Her husband had further surgery in his right eye in March 2021.

   34. She then confirmed she had nothing left for her in  Mauritius.   Her
       mother had died in January 2020.

   35. Her daughter gave birth to  the  appellant's  grandson  in  February
       2021.  She described him  as  "not  well"  and  currently  receiving
       hospital treatment in Cambridge. His mother had moved to be with the
       appellant and others because she needed support  and  the  appellant
       could not leave her husband.  She said her  daughter  was  suffering
       from postnatal depression and sometimes breaks down and cannot cope.

   36. The appellant then explained that she was getting older and  finding
       life more stressful.  She then said that travelling back  and  forth
       from Mauritius to the United Kingdom would be expensive.   A  return
       plane ticket cost four months' pension.  There are also restrictions
       on travelling.  At the time of  writing  Mauritius  had  closed  its
       borders for the second time in the year.

   37.  She  then  explained  that  her  husband's  physical   health   had
       deteriorated significantly  since  the  case  was  last  before  the
       courts.  In March 2021 the consultant said that,  unless  there  was
       urgent treatment, her husband would lose the sight in his right  eye
       and there was surgery planned for March 2021 and also  for  cataract
       surgery in July 2021.

   38. The appellant then  talked  about  the  problems  arising  from  his
       recurring kidney stones.  Essentially they caused pain.   Procedures
       were undertaken to break up the stone but she explained how "on  the
       numerous occasions he has had this procedure, he has needed to  have
       a stent inserted through his water passage and left inside  him  and
       then required more personal care that only myself as  his  wife  was
       able to provide."

   39. It is expected that there would be surgery  soon  for  his  enlarged
       prostate.

   40. They had got used to each other in the United Kingdom and  it  would
       be hard for him to adapt to someone else. He would struggle  without
       her.

   41. She then explained that  she  had  no  meaningful  contact  left  in
       Mauritius, after her mother's death.  She said that she had a  house
       in Mauritius and had inherited it from her father.   When  she  left
       one of her nephews asked temporarily to live there and has now  made
       it his own home and does not want to move  out.   This  has  led  to
       tension between her and her brother who are no  longer  on  speaking
       terms.

   42. In an effort to  address  the  "covid  crisis"  the  authorities  in
       Mauritius had introduced extremely severe restrictions  on  people's
       liberty, such as limiting them to only one day a  week  out  of  the
       house to do essential shopping and  the  borders  have  been  closed
       twice since the pandemic.

   43. She also needed to support  her  daughter.   I  consider  later  the
       evidence about her grandchild.  Suffice it to say here that he is  a
       very poor little boy.

   44. The baby's father is self-employed and it is very difficult for  him
       to provide any kind of practical care and attend to  his  job.   The
       appellant described herself as a strong anchor for the whole family.

   45. The appellant was cross-examined.

   46. I have indicated above that I considered the wording of paragraph  6
       of her first statement to be potentially significant. Mr Melvin took
       her to it. She said there:

  "I worked as a registered nurse for 41 years in the public health  sector
  in Mauritius and obtained a Certificate in Community  Health  Nursing  in
  2005 and a Diploma in Nursing in December 2015.   I  retired  five  years
  early in May 2018 prior to a retirement age of 65 years old in  order  to
  be able to come to the UK to join my husband, children and grandchildren.
   My husband's health has deteriorated severely and I need to stay to look
  after him".

   47. It was put to the appellant that whilst it may be the case that  her
       husband's health has deteriorated she  had  said  that  she  retired
       early in May 2018 before her usual retirement age to travel  to  the
       United Kingdom to join her husband and family.   She  was  asked  if
       that was right why she had applied for a visit visa?  The  appellant
       claimed not to understand the point.  She then  said  that  she  had
       come on a visit visa because it was not her intention  to  stay  and
       she was asked to stay when she saw her husband and realised how  his
       health has declined.

   48. She accepted that she was in communication with her family  and  was
       asked to explain why, if that were the case, she did not realise how
       her husband's health had deteriorated. She replied that  being  told
       is not the same as seeing it with your own eyes.

   49. She was asked why she had not applied for a  visa  to  settle  as  a
       wife.  She said she had retired because her health was not good  and
       she could not work because she  had  high  blood  pressure  and  her
       children and husband were far away.

   50. She was then asked what she had planned to do when she had  returned
       to Mauritius if, as she claimed, it was  her  intention  to  return.
       She had no real answer to that.

   51. She was then asked directly if it was her  intention  to  circumvent
       the Rules and she denied that.

   52. She accepted that she had sold her domestic appliances to her nephew
       who was using them but said that was after she had applied  for  her
       visa to settle.  She said that her husband needed her more than  had
       been the case previously.

   53. She was then asked why, when she saw the state of her  husband,  she
       did not return to Mauritius promptly and then apply to return  as  a
       spouse.  She said she was worrying about her husband's health  which
       was deteriorating  and  about  the  children's  limited  ability  to
       provide him the care that he needed.  She was his wife  and  also  a
       nurse and could look after him better than anyone else and wanted to
       be with him.

   54. The appellant was asked if she had made inquiries about how long  it
       would take to get a spousal visa and she said she did not know.

   55. She was not re-examined but at the end of her evidence  she  offered
       the information that she had been looking after her mother who  died
       in January 2020.

   56. The appellant's husband, Mr Jean Aurele  France  gave  evidence  and
       adopted his statements of 23 November 2019 and 12 July 2021.

   57. In his first statement he introduced himself as the husband  of  the
       appellant who, he said, had arrived in the United Kingdom  in  April
       2018 on a visit visa from Mauritius and had remained there.

   58. He explained that he had been born in Salomon Island in August 1950.
        He had met his wife about 50 years ago and they  had  been  married
       since July 1978.  He said that  he  had  British  citizenship  as  a
       result of being born on the British  Indian  Ocean  Territories  and
       then  forcefully  evicted  from  his  homeland  and  "deported"   to
       Mauritius to make  way  for  a  UK-US  military  installation.   His
       children all received British citizenship and settled in the  United
       Kingdom as they were entitled to do.

   59. He then said he relied heavily on his wife for his day-to-day tasks,
       especially administering his medicines and he needed her to be  with
       him.   He  described  her  as  his  "rock  and  pillar".    He   was
       particularly  grateful  for  the  assistance   given   to   him   by
       administering eyedrops and also personal care.  She accompanied  him
       when he left the home and as  he  was  losing  his  sight  that  was
       particularly advantageous.

   60. He referred to his propensity  to  develop  kidney  stones  and  the
       treatment he was expecting for that.

   61. He then explained how his wife assisted in the  childcare  of  their
       grandchildren.

   62. He said he could not return  to  Mauritius.   He  had  deteriorating
       vision and the health service there was not adequate.

   63. He explained that he needed eyedrops twelve times a day and his wife
       was able and willing to do that and understood what was required.

   64. He explained that from 2012 to 2018 he had spent a long  time  apart
       from the appellant.  They were careful to  comply  with  immigration
       control.  Either he would go to Mauritius  or  the  appellant  would
       come to the United Kingdom.

   65. In his more recent statement he repeated some  of  the  things  said
       earlier, pointing out that he was now  married  for  43  years.   He
       described his health as "significantly deteriorating"  and  said  he
       could barely see in his right eye and his left  eye  had  had  three
       procedures and surgeries and had developed a cataract,  as  well  as
       the glaucoma.  He explained how there was very high pressure  within
       the eye and he was given emergency tablets in March 2021 to try  and
       save the sight of his right eye.

   66. He continued to suffer from recurring kidney stones and the need for
       a stent to be inserted that required intimate personal care.

   67. He also had an enlarged prostate.

   68. His wife continued to help run the family in the home and look after
       the grandchildren.

   69. He explained particularly that their youngest  grandchild,  born  in
       February 2021,  had  various  medical  complications  and  that  the
       child's (obviously their daughter) had come to live with them so she
       could provide care for the grandchild and their daughter Mariam.

   70. He regarded the borders to Mauritius being closed in February  2021.



   71. He could not imagine managing without his wife.   She  was  a  great
       help to him.

   72. In answer to questions in cross-examination he confirmed that he had
       arrived in the United Kingdom in 2012.  He had eye problems then but
       his condition was worsening.

   73. It was put to him he had given  the  impression  that  treatment  is
       better in the United Kingdom.  He said he had been having  treatment
       in Mauritius but he was encouraged by the doctor in Mauritius to get
       treatment in the United Kingdom.  He then almost immediately changed
       his answer to say that the doctor in the  United  Kingdom  told  him
       that the treatment was better than he would get in Mauritius.

   74. He had always lived with his children.  He had returned to Mauritius
       three or four times between 2012 and 2018.   When  he  had  gone  to
       Mauritius he had stayed with family members.

   75. He denied that there was any intention for his wife to settle in the
       United Kingdom when she came as a visitor in 2018.  The plan was  to
       arrive in April and return in May but when she arrived  she  changed
       her mind.

   76. There was then some confusion  about  when  his  wife  retired.   Mr
       Melvin accused him of responding to "off camara" prompting which  he
       denied.

   77. He was not re-examined.

   78. The appellant's son Mr Jean Martin Luther France gave  evidence  and
       adopted statements made on 25 November 2019 and 12 July 2021.

   79. In his first statement he explained that he was born in 1988.

   80. His mother arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2018 and  remained
       there.  She had applied for leave to remain on human rights  "family
       life" basis.

   81. He set out facts  about  his  parents'  personal  history  which  is
       helpful to understand the case  but  did  not  add  to  the  witness
       statements already considered.

   82. He explained that he left to live in the United Kingdom in 2006, his
       brother joined him in 2010 and his sister in 2012.  His father  came
       to the United Kingdom with his sister but his mother could not  join
       them because she was not qualified.  He  felt  it  right  that  they
       should be entitled to live together after such a long marriage.

   83. He outlined his father's medical conditions but  this  evidence  too
       has been considered.  He explained that as well as looking after his
       father's medical needs and supporting him as he had lost  his  sight
       his mother helped her husband with translation and communication.

   84. He then said how the appellant was important  in  the  life  of  her
       grandchildren, being his two boys.

   85. He made the point that his mother had visited the United Kingdom  on
       six month visas on many occasions, often taking  unpaid  leave  from
       work to extend a holiday but she had always  returned  to  Mauritius
       when she should and have never overstayed.  She came from  a  rather
       deprived area of Mauritius where there was much  crime  and  it  was
       difficult for her on her own to secure the house properly.

   86. His mother's health was also deteriorating and she coped on her own.



   87. He then gave evidence about their financial circumstances  but  this
       is not controversial and  he  said  that  his  mother  was  learning
       English.

   88. In his more recent statement he adopted the  earlier  statement  but
       said  he  now  had  a  third  child  and  appreciated  his  mother's
       involvement in the life of that grandchild too.  His father's health
       was poorer and he required more assistance.  He also  explained  how
       after his sister Mariam had given birth  it  was  a  very  difficult
       time.  There were lots of severe  medical  complications,  including
       postnatal depression.

   89. He insisted that his mother had never intended to overstay the visit
       visa but his father was "terribly ill" when the visa  was  about  to
       expire and that prompted her to remain.

   90. Mr Melvin pointed out that the witness had  said  in  his  statement
       that his mother retired in April 2018.  He claimed not to be able to
       recall if that was the same month as she came to the United  Kingdom
       but he insisted she retired after she had arrived and after she  had
       seen how his father's health deteriorated.  He claimed not  to  have
       known how long his mother spent contemplating retirement.

   91. He had said that he had been looking after  his  father  before  his
       mother arrived but it was difficult to meet his father's  needs  and
       do his work.

   92. He asked if he could explain why his  mother  had  not  returned  to
       Mauritius and applied to return as a wife.  His  answer  might  have
       been very revealing.  He said:

  "Naivety, not thinking that she would not be able to change the basis  of
  the stay, not understanding the importance of capacity.   She  knew  they
  had the money and they had been married for 40 years and felt it was  the
  best to be here."

   93. He added that it costs in the thousands of pounds to go to Mauritius
       and he did not think it would be a problem to apply  whilst  in  the
       United Kingdom.  It was put to him that this  suggested  the  family
       had not taken advice before his mother applied for her  visit  visa.
       He said that was not necessarily the case  but  he  did  not  expect
       there to be a problem until advised by solicitors.

   94. He was not re-examined.

   95. Maryam Ketty Axelle France  gave  evidence  and  adopted  statements
       dated 25 November 2019 and 12 July 2021.

   96.  In  her  statement  of  25  November  2019  she  commented  on  the
       appellant's personality and her importance to  the  family  and  the
       difficulties the appellant would have on her own.

   97. In her more recent statement of 12 July 2021 she set out some of the
       difficulties she experienced in her recent pregnancy and  her  son's
       poor health.  His  medical  conditions  include  neonatal  seizures,
       kernicterus (which I understand to be a kind of brain  damage  that
       can cause cerebral palsy and hearing loss in  babies  and  sometimes
       problems in vision), patent ductus arteriosus (which I understand is
       a condition that was once commonly called "hole in the  heart")  and
       presumed ABO incompatibility (which I understand is a difficulty  in
       receiving blood  by  transfusion  that  makes  surgery  particularly
       dangerous).

   98. Additionally the witness  said  that  she  suffered  from  postnatal
       depression.

   99. Her partner was supportive but had a high pressure job and  she  had
       moved to be with  her  parents  because  the  baby  needed  24  hour
       supervision.  Her mother had been extremely helpful  as  indeed  she
       was with the other grandchildren.

  100. She said that when her mother came last to the  United  Kingdom  she
       had not intended to overstay a visit visa but her father was  unwell
       when the visa was due to expire.

  101. She described her mother  as  the  "glue"  that  held  together  the
       family.

  102. She was cross-examined.

  103. She could not remember when her mother retired as a nurse.

  104. She said that  her  son  was  suspected  of  a  variety  of  medical
       conditions and may be assessed sooner than  was  thought  but  there
       were hearing problems, movement problems and other things.

  105. She said that her mother had a brother  in  Mauritius  but  did  not
       really talk to him.  She thought her mother sold the house in  about
       2018 but was not sure.

  106. I do have other written evidence which I have considered,  including
       a statement from the appellant other son and  from  the  appellant's
       daughter's partner but these can be summarised fairly  as  "more  of
       the same"  and  do  not  add  much  if  anything  to  the  evidence.
       Nevertheless I am aware of them and have considered them.

  107. It is right to record  there  is  medical  evidence  supporting  the
       evidence I have noted about the condition of  both  the  appellant's
       husband and grandchild.

  108. I remind myself this is a  human  rights  based  appeal  turning  on
       Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  It is for the
       appellant to prove the facts on which she relies on the  balance  of
       probabilities and that the decision complained  of  interferes  with
       the human rights, in this case the private and family life,  of  the
       appellant and/or those who depend on  her  presence  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  Once that is established it is for the Secretary of  State
       to justify any interference.  If it is not proportionate it  is  not
       lawful.

  109. The balancing exercise between public interest and individual rights
       is illuminated by the Rules and I am obliged to take account of part
       5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

  110. It is, I think, common ground that the appeal cannot  succeed  under
       the Rules.  The appellant does not have  the  necessary  status  for
       transfer to leave as a spouse.  That said, I am satisfied  that  she
       substantially satisfies the Rules in other respects.  The  financial
       requirements of the Rules are clearly met.  Mr Melvin  has  conceded
       as much and has made the concession after  conscientious  inspection
       of the evidence.  There is nothing to discuss on this point  but  it
       does not the end of the matter.  The appellant is also  required  to
       prove her competence in the English language by passing a particular
       test at a required standard.  She has not done that.  The  appellant
       has provided  a  certificate  but  it  is  now  old  and  no  longer
       applicable because of the effluxion  of  time.   Nevertheless  since
       then she has spent time in the United Kingdom and by her performance
       before me has proved her claim to be using the English language  and
       using it competently.  I can think of no sensible reason to  suspect
       that the pass that she achieved when she  took  the  examination  in
       2016 would not be achieved if she sat the test again.  The appellant
       speaks English to the required standard even  though  she  does  not
       have the necessary paperwork to prove it.  Mr Metzer has pointed out
       that in any event the appellant will be 65 fairly soon and no longer
       obliged to comply with the language Rules.  It is likely  that  that
       if she did return to Mauritius she would  not  make  an  application
       until after her 65th birthday in September.

  111. I am particularly anxious to work out what is the due weight to give
       to the  public  interest  requirement  that  the  appellant  is  not
       permitted to change categories.

  112. This is illuminated by my conclusion  that  the  appellant  and  her
       witnesses have not been completely frank with me.  If  it  were  the
       case that the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  intending  to
       return and then changed her mind because of  the  condition  of  her
       husband then she could have said so clearly and unequivocally in her
       statement and she did not do that.  I am satisfied that at the  very
       least she had the possibility of remaining in the United Kingdom  in
       her mind when she last applied for a visa.

  113. There is no correspondence relating to her retirement or transfer of
       assets  in  Mauritius  that  might  indicate  when  she  formed  the
       intention to remain in the United Kingdom.

  114. Her children cannot truly know her intentions but I found  that  her
       son was particularly credible when he talked about  the  family  not
       realising how difficult it would be to change capacity.   Indeed  it
       is hard to see from the perspective of an honest lay person  unaware
       of the requirements of Immigration Rules that change of capacity  is
       not a straightforward matter.  Broadly it is not  permitted  at  all
       between certain categories and  "visitor"  to  "spouse"  is  such  a
       category.

  115. I did ask Mr Melvin if he could explain the importance of not  being
       able to change capacity but he could do little more than repeat that
       the Rules made the requirements they did and had  been  approved  by
       Parliament.

  116. That of course is undoubtedly correct.  I have reread the speech  of
       Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood in Chikwamba v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL
       40.  Lord Brown was clearly aware of the relevant policy embodied in
       the Rules but, if I may say so, appeared  to  struggle  to  see  the
       rationale for it.  It was not easy to discern  just  what  evil  was
       being addressed by making it hard for someone to change  categories.
       Although assisted by very experienced Counsel, not much was done  to
       satisfy his concerns, leading him to say at paragraph 44:

  "Rather it seems to me  that  only  comparatively  rarely,  certainly  in
  family cases involving children, should an Article 8 appeal be  dismissed
  on the basis that it would be proportionate and more appropriate for  the
  appellant to apply for leave from abroad."

  117. This appeal  does  not  primarily  involve  a  child.   However  the
       obligations under Article 8 are to promote a  person's  private  and
       family life and that includes promoting a person's marriage.   Where
       married people wish to live together  the  law  should  favour  that
       outcome because living with a spouse is an  important  human  right.
       This does not mean that all foreign nationals can live in the United
       Kingdom  with  their  British  resident  spouses.  The  "right"   is
       qualified.  The most obvious  qualification  concerns  finances  but
       those  are  met  in  this  case.   Another  concerns  the   person's
       willingness to  integrate  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  this  is
       typified by their  willingness  or  ability  to  learn  the  English
       language.  This appellant clearly satisfies those requirements.

  118. The requirement she does not satisfy is  the  requirement  to  apply
       from her country of  nationality.   With  respect  to  Mr  Melvin  I
       struggle to see the point of this.  Of course I  respect  the  Rules
       but I am required to conduct an Article  8  balancing  exercise  and
       there is little before me which indicates the sort of weight I ought
       to give to that element of public policy reflected in the Rules.

  119. I have considered too Mr Metzer's skeleton argument and submissions.
        I find little in part 5A of  the  2002  Act  that  assists  me.   I
       recognise  how  effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
       interest but that does not really illuminate the  question  that  is
       troubling me in this case.   Clearly  this  is  not  a  case  of  an
       appellant being a burden on the taxpayer or unable to integrate into
       society.

  120. I make it plain that the appellant has  established  "family  life",
       not only with her husband but  also  with  her  adult  children  and
       grandchildren. I accept  that  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  a
       pivotal part of their lives and so is important to them all and they
       depend on her at least to some extent because of the care  that  she
       provides. However, not all family life attracts  equal  weight.  The
       relationship between her adult children and her grandchildren is not
       something I find  particularly  significant  save  for  the  present
       relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her  daughter  and   her
       daughter's son.  Clearly grandparents often play an  important  part
       in the lives of their grandchildren and indeed their own children as
       supporters and  sometimes  surrogate  parents,  but  these  are  not
       ordinarily reasons to allow someone to remain in the United  Kingdom
       on the basis they have acquired a human  right  and  are  even  less
       likely to be reasons to say that a short interruption to comply with
       procedures is disproportionate. If I may be permitted to  paraphrase
       Mr Melvin's closing submissions, a person does not acquire  a  human
       right to remain in the United Kingdom by meeting  her  grandchildren
       from  school.   The  weight  needed  to  overbalance  the   ordinary
       requirements of the immigration rules should not normally  be  given
       to relationships of that kind.

  121. The appellant's relationship with her daughter and her grandchild is
       rather different.  I have to make the decision based on  how  things
       are when I make  my  decision  and  at  the  date  of  hearing  that
       relationship is particularly important both  between  the  appellant
       and her daughter and the appellant  and  her  grandson  because  the
       grandchild and his mother have particular needs which the  appellant
       answers.  I do not suggest that this should be seen as  a  long-term
       solution to their problems.  I fear that the grandson might  need  a
       lot of support for a long time to come but the mother will  be  more
       able to meet his needs as she recovers from  the  trauma  of  giving
       birth.  However presently that relationship is important and at  the
       time of making the decision I give it significant weight.

  122. However the really weighty factor here is the  relationship  between
       the appellant and her husband.  It is clear  that  he  could  manage
       without his wife for a while.  He is not a helpless man.   He  is  a
       man who  will  face  up  to  his  difficulties  without  his  wife's
       assistance as he has done previously but his health is declining. He
       will be supported by his children in the United Kingdom and will, no
       doubt, be able to access other kinds of care  although  I  do  agree
       with Mr Metzer that it  is  hard  to  see  the  public  interest  in
       increasing the appellant's husband's dependency  on  the  state  for
       healthcare.  If there is no alternative he will do that but there is
       an alternative and the alternative is the care of his  wife  who  is
       not only emotionally well equipped by reason of a long marriage  but
       is also particularly trained by reason of being a nurse.   It  would
       be an enormous interference with his "private and family life" to be
       deprived of that support and very hard to justify  when  she  is  so
       suited to provide it.  Regrettably  I  do  not  know  how  long  the
       separation might  be.   Obviously  the  longer  the  separation  the
       greater the interference and the harder it is to justify. No  proper
       evidence was adduced  on  this  and  that  is  an  omission  in  the
       appellant's case that necessarily weakens  it.   It  is  regrettable
       that she did not address this point.  I do accept that at  the  time
       of making my decision  she  would  not  be  allowed  into  Mauritius
       because that is the unchallenged evidence before me.  I do not  know
       how long it would take to process an application if she left  and  I
       do not know how she would manage in Mauritius in the  event  of  her
       return.  I accept that her relationship with her family in Mauritius
       is estranged.  She does have access  to  some  capital.   She  could
       maintain herself if that were necessary but it would be  undesirable
       if that reduce her funds to the point where she  could  not  satisfy
       the financial requirements of the Rules.  I do not know if  that  is
       the case as it has just not been considered and I have  no  evidence
       about what it might cost.

  123. Doing the best that  I  can,  I  am  satisfied  that  if  there  was
       immediate separation the appellant could not return  to  the  United
       Kingdom for some months and whilst the appellant and her  family  in
       the United Kingdom could cope without her it would be a burden.  Her
       husband's medical  needs  are  significant.   Eyedrops  have  to  be
       administered many times every day and have to be  administered  with
       some precision.  I accept Mr Metzer's submission that I  should  not
       treat the need to medicate as  if  it  involved  a  proprietary  eye
       solution that people might have because they experienced sore  eyes.
       The medication requires  precise  measuring  and  delivery  and  the
       appellant's husband cannot see what he needs to do.

  124. Further I find that declining sight anticipating blindness is a very
       fearsome thing and not something  to  be  done  by  the  appellant's
       husband on his own if that can be avoided by proper means. It  is  a
       problem  that  benefits  from  practical  assistance   rather   than
       emotional support from afar.

  125. I also understand that the very real possibility of recurring kidney
       stones and the provision of a stent creates  highly  personal  needs
       that the appellant would prefer to share with his  wife,  especially
       as she is a nurse, rather than with his children or strangers. I  do
       not make much of this. Many people cope with all kinds  of  personal
       indignities when faced with medical needs but it is another  element
       in the case the points in favour of allowing the appeal.

  126. I am persuaded that refusing leave and the associated need  for  the
       appellant  to  depart  from  the  United  Kingdom  would   interfere
       significantly with her and her husband's private  and  family  life.
       Other  people  would  be  impacted.  Presently  her   daughter   and
       grandchild depend on her to a high degree; much more than her  other
       children and  grandchildren  who  simply  benefit  from  her  input.
       Depriving them of  her  immediate  care  would  have  a  significant
       interference that on its own might be sufficient to allow the appeal
       but the decision does not depend on that.

  127. I cannot work out what public benefit there would  be  in  requiring
       this particular person in all of the circumstances to  go  back  and
       make an application.

  128. I hope it is understood by the appellant and  anyone  who  might  be
       interested in the case that my decision to allow the appeal  is  not
       to be seen as some sort of green light for flouting the  Immigration
       Rules.  Whatever Parliament's reasons are Parliament has endorsed  a
       system of Immigration Rules which strongly discourages  transfer  of
       category. If the appellant had taken advice in Mauritius when, I  am
       quite satisfied, the idea of settling  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
       beginning to dawn, she may well have achieved what she  wanted  much
       more easily than has proved to be the case.  In particular,  has  Mr
       Melvin pointed out, the appellant would be on the "five year route",
       rather than the "ten year route" to settlement.

  129.  Nevertheless,  the  appellant's  husband  suffers   from   set   of
       significant and disabling health difficulties.  I am persuaded  that
       the  decision  complained   of   amounts   to   a   disproportionate
       interference with the appellant's  and  her  husband's  private  and
       family life and I allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

  130. This appeal is allowed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 July 2021                   |

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 16825 2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2021                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           Marie Mignonette France
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Metzer, Counsel instructed by Huneewoth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

1. This is an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the appeal of the  appellant,  a  female  citizen  of  Mauritius
against the decision of the Secretary of State on 7 October  2019  refusing
her leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  private  and  family  life
grounds. There is no need for and I  do  not  make  any  order  restricting
publicity.

2. The short point is that the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a
visitor as she had done previously but this time she did not return at  the
expiration of her leave but wanted to stay.  She says, in  extreme  summary
form, that her husband is poorly, his health has deteriorated and  that  it
is necessary to support him and indeed her grandchildren  and  son  in  the
United   Kingdom   and   that   refusing    her    permission    interferes
disproportionately with her private and family life and their  private  and
family lives.

3. It is also part of her case, although not established  on  the  evidence,
that she would be able to satisfy the Rules for admission as a wife in  the
event of her return to Mauritius and making the application.

4. The Secretary of State is very concerned that the public interest in  not
permitting people who enter as visitors to remain in any capacity  and  for
any reason is fully recognised.  Of course it does not follow that no  case
can succeed on Article 8 grounds but, according to the Secretary of  State,
it should not be an easy route.  I note that but her general  concerns  are
of limited importance when considering the decision that has been made.

5. Mr Metzer subjected the Decision and  Reasons  to  a  very  thorough  and
searching  dissection  and  made   several   points   but   without   being
disrespectful to them  I  think  they  can  be  summarised  by  considering
paragraph 38 of the Decision and Reasons.  There the judge said:

  "The appellant submits  that  she  has  a  close  relationship  with  her
  children and grandchildren.  I am prepared to accept that an  Article  8,
  family life, is engaged."

6. This at the very best is equivocal.  It is certainly open to the  reading
that the judge found that there was a  family  life  existing  between  the
appellant and her children and grandchildren.  As Mr Metzer  recognised  in
his addresses to me this, on the face of it, is not an obvious finding  but
it is there.  It can only be a rational finding  if  it  is  accepted  that
there is  something  more  than  ordinary  human  family  concerns  in  the
relationship with the adult children and  the  grandchildren.   Whilst  the
judge appears to have accepted that there is "family life" and I find, with
Mr Metzer's help, the that judge lost sight of that when  he  came  to  the
balancing exercise.  There is reference for example to dealing with  adults
but that is not particularly important if the adults enjoy  "family  life".
The judge has not explained what he means about the family life he  appears
to have found exists with the appellant and her grandchildren.

7. The fundamental point is that the  findings  are  inconsistent  with  the
superficiality of the balancing exercise  and  although  Ms  Isherwood  has
characteristically been very determined in her  submissions  and  has  made
perfectly realistic and sensible points,  the  problem  identified  at  the
start of this paragraph  is  one  that  will  not  go  away  and,  I  find,
undermines the determination as a whole.

8. Another matter that concerns me is the absence of  clear  findings  about
just what support the appellant gives and what support her  husband  needs.
There is evidence that is clear that he has certain health  problems.   The
known health problems do not of themselves seem particularly severe.  There
is glaucoma but that is a condition that covers a  very  wide  spectrum  of
disability from something that is  little  more  than  concerning  although
possibly very concerning because of its long-term consequences to something
that is very severe indeed.  I do not think the appellant is at the  higher
end of the scale but there have been no clear findings.

9. Mr Metzer has emphasised that there was  evidence  that  the  appellant's
husband depends heavily on his wife.  This is something about  which  clear
findings need to be made.  The judge has indicated how some  people  manage
perfectly well on their own, as this appellant may have done, but  that  is
not really the point.  There is a subjective element here and there  should
be a clear finding on what the appellant's husband actually  needs  her  to
do, not if similarly disabled people would be  dependent  but  if  in  fact
there is  dependency  here  and  that  will  illuminate  but  probably  not
determine the balancing exercise.

10. I am also concerned about findings that  suggest  that  the  appellant's
son should  be  prepared  to  interrupt  his  education  to  the  point  of
suspending his university course as a stopgap while the appellant makes  an
application to return.  Again  this  might  be  wholly  consistent  with  a
decision to dismiss the appeal but it is not obviously right and it is  not
explained. The finding needs to be explained and  considered,  rather  than
reduced to an observation which seems to be lost in the balancing exercise.



11. If I am not careful I will fall into the danger of doing what I set  out
to avoid at the start which is to make an overly  detailed  examination  of
the decision.  The point that I stand by and the point  that  satisfies  me
that the decision is unsound is that the findings that there is family life
are inconsistent with the lack of detail shown in the balancing exercise.

12. There is one finding here that must be preserved.   It  is  the  finding
set out in paragraphs 36 and 37 of the Decision and  Reasons  and  that  is
that the appellant had not shown she  could  not  return  to  her  home  in
Mauritius.  This finding was not challenged before  me  nor  is  there  any
reason why it should have been and will be a starting point in any  further
reconsideration.  As I  have  indicated  in  argument  I  regard  it  as  a
Devaseelan point (see Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial
Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702).  It is capable of being shifted by
further evidence but that is where any further reconsideration must start.

13. I also make it plain that there has been no finding that  the  appellant
would in fact satisfy the requirements of the Rules for return as  a  wife.
It may well be that she does but as I understand it  the  Chikwamba  points
(see Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL but also Younas (section  117B  (6)  (b);
Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT  129  (IAC))  really  depend  on  a  clear
finding that a person does satisfy the Rules  and  the  balancing  exercise
must be informed by a clear finding.  This  might  be  something  that  the
parties can sort out before a further hearing and the Secretary of State be
invited to concede the point provided that satisfactory evidence  has  been
made.  The appeal really should not be decided  on  an  assumption.   There
should either be a concession or there  should  be  evidence  and  a  clear
finding.

14. I have decided to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  for
the reasons I have given.  The matter will be  heard  again  in  the  Upper
Tribunal because I find there are matters of some subtlety  in  the  appeal
that would perhaps benefit from a hearing here.

15. I make my decision now but I direct that the appeal should  not  be  set
down until the first  open  date  after  5  March.   This  is  because  the
appellant has indicated that she wishes to serve further evidence which may
well be of assistance.  I am not saying that evidence should  be  admitted.
I am saying that  I  understand  why  it  might  be  an  entirely  sensible
application. Some of the fresh evidence is before me and I intended to give
the appellant more than enough time to get everything in order and  make  a
timely application before the hearing to rely on further evidence  if  that
is what she wishes to do.

16. I direct that an interpreter in Mauritian  Creole  is  available  and  I
invite the appellant's solicitors to indicate if that is not required.

17. Mr Metzer has had a long involvement in this case.   I  direct  that  it
should be listed at his convenience if reasonably practicable.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 January 2021                |

