
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16665/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2019                            |On 15 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                   Abdulqayoom Abdulqawi Abdualmajed Nasr
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Sanghera Solicitor from SH Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Yemen,  currently  living  in  Egypt,
    against the decision of the respondent by an  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    refusing him entry clearance to enter the United Kingdom as a  husband.
    The appellant did not prove in  the  required  way  that  he  could  be
    maintained in accordance with the Rules.

 2. The appellant's case was straightforward. He said that he  depended  on
    his wife.  His wife had two strands of  income;  she  had  income  from
    benefit and she had income from  her  employment.   That  she  receives
    income from benefit to which she is perfectly entitled (it is a carer's
    allowance) is not controversial. Neither is it controversial that  that
    is insufficient to maintain the appellant.

 3. The appellant also says that his wife earns money  from  regular  part-
    time employment.  She has produced evidence to support  that.  She  has
    given oral evidence and she has given letters from her employer  which,
    if right, tend to show that she receives sufficient  money.   What  she
    has not done is what the Rules require, which is to evidence the income
    by regular payments into a bank account.  It would be  troublesome  for
    her to do that because she is paid in cash.  The Rules  recognise  that
    not everybody is paid through their banks but the guidance makes  plain
    that it is open to a person to take their cash,  deposit  it  and  make
    withdrawals  if  necessary.   That  might  be  described  properly   as
    something of a nuisance  but  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  it  is
    particularly burdensome.  It is not something that should  be  regarded
    as unfair or wrong at least not routinely in every case.

 4. The appellant's wife has given no explanation for not  doing  what  the
    policy requires other than finding it inconvenient and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was unimpressed with that.  It was argued that the judge
    did not evidential flexibility.  I  find  that  argument  misconceived.
    Evidential flexibility is  something  which  has  created  an  area  of
    argument but really, properly understood, is only applicable in a  very
    small number of cases.  Under Appendix D of  Appendix  FM  of  HC  395,
    under 1D, there is provision for admitting as evidence a document  that
    has been in the wrong format or does not contain all  the  information.
    Clearly this is not a "wrong format" case.

 5. In my judgment it is not a case where the Rule applicable when not  all
    the specified information is on the face of the document.  This Rule is
    clearly intended to apply where there has been a slip, where  something
    has been left out and where the omission can be put  right  by  looking
    elsewhere.  It is to  soften  a  Rule  that  is  otherwise  exceedingly
    inflexible.  It is not intended to encourage or even permit  people  to
    effectively make up their own Immigration Rules by  proving  things  in
    the way that they find convenient.

 6. Neither is it something that comes within the scope of subparagraph  E.
    This is not a case where the document cannot be supplied because it has
    been lost or because it cannot  be  issued,  it  has  simply  not  been
    prepared.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal was quite right to find  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances did not satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   The
    simple truth is that on the appellant's own case the Rules  could  have
    been satisfied but his wife chose not follow them.

 8. It is always necessary in a human rights appeal to consider  the  Rules
    because sometimes people do satisfy the Rules and when they  do  it  is
    very often only a short step to say that the appeal should  be  allowed
    on human  rights  grounds.   This  is  a  human  rights  based  appeal.
    Generally it is the view of society that relationships between  husband
    and wife are relationships to promote and people who  are  married  and
    who wish to be together, should be together.  But that  is  subject  to
    considerable qualification, mainly,  in  this  case  that  the  joining
    partner can be maintained without being a burden to the state.  This is
    something which has to be proved in a particular way and, based on what
    I have been told, could be proved in a particular way.  I  see  nothing
    disproportionate in the First-tier Tribunal deciding that even  if  the
    claims made on the evidence are true and that the  money  is  payed  as
    alleged, it would be wrong to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds
    because the interference is  not  disproportionate.   Such  a  decision
    gives effect to a policy which is intended to simplify decision  making
    and also ensure that evidence of high quality is relied on.   There  is
    no evidence here to suggest that this  is  a  case  where  there  is  a
    compelling or exceptional reason for husband and wife to  be  together.
    Occasionally, for example in cases where there has been a  very  severe
    illness, humanity requires a slightly more softened approach.   However
    this is a case where the appellant would appear be able to satisfy  the
    Rules if a proper application was made.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    chose not to test that proposition because he said that it  would  have
    made no difference  anyway.   In  the  circumstances  I  find  that  an
    entirely permissible approach.

 9. The judge did not err.

10. It is open to the appellant to apply again having gone to  the  trouble
    to get the evidence in the required form.  I make no finding about  the
    quality of that evidence. It was not before me, but if it stands up  to
    scrutiny then the appellant can expect to succeed but that is  not  for
    me to decide now.

    Notice of Decision

11. I see no error of law established by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    dismiss the appeal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 March 2019                  |




