
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16812/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 July 2019                             |On 10 July 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  EDMIR [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Yusef of Kingswood Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant, a citizen of Albania born on 17 June  1981,  applied
        to the respondent for the revocation of a deportation order  on  12
        August 2015. That order, dated 22 March 2010, was imposed following
        the   appellant's   conviction   at   Luton   Crown    Court    for
        possessing/improperly obtaining another's identity for which he was
        sentenced to 18 months imprisonment. The appellant was removed from
        the United Kingdom on 8 April 2010 in accordance with the terms  of
        the order.
     2. In 2012 the appellant re-entered the United  Kingdom  illegally  in
        breach of the deportation order. On 27 July 2015 the appellant  was
        convicted at  Birmingham  Magistrates  Court  of  driving  a  motor
        vehicle with excess alcohol and other  road  traffic  offences  for
        which he was sentenced to 35 days  imprisonment.  On  21  September
        2015 the appellant pleaded guilty  and  was  sentenced  at  Lincoln
        Magistrates Court to 4 months imprisonment for entering the  United
        Kingdom in breach of the deportation order.
     3. The current appeal is against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
        the appellants human rights claim relied  upon  as  the  basis  for
        claiming the deportation order should be revoked.



Background


PROCEDUREAL HISTORY:

     4. The appellant's appeal against the decision came before  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Clarke at Taylor House on 20  October  2017.   Judge
        Clarke allowed the  appeal  to  a  limited  extent  concluding,  by
        reference to the decision of the Supreme Court  in  R  (Kiarie  and
        Byndloss) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC
        42, that as a result of his removal from  the  United  Kingdom  the
        appellant  was  not  properly  availed  of   the   opportunity   to
        participate in the  appeal  The  Judge  noted,  however,  that  the
        appellant has family none of whom attended the hearing and that  he
        has no representatives. At [7] of that the  original  decision  the
        Judge finds:

             "7.  The Appellant's representatives came off the  record  and
                  directions were sent to the  Appellants  address  inviting
                  him to apply to have the hearing by Skype and to serve any
                  additional evidence he  wished.  No  application  for  the
                  hearing to  be  by  way  of  Skype  was  received  and  no
                  additional evidence was served. No  witnesses  arrived  in
                  support  of  the  appeal.  I  heard  submissions  by   the
                  representative and a note of what was said is contained on
                  the court record."

     5. The Secretary of State challenged the Judge's decision on the basis
        that allowing the appeal "to a limited extent" was not  an  outcome
        available to the Judge in light of it not being a ground  available
        to the Judge post the 2014 amendment s to the available grounds  of
        appeal.
     6. It was found the Judge had erred in law in a manner material to the
        decision in the error of law finding promulgated on 1 March 2019 in
        which it is recorded that the appellant's  current  representative,
        Mr Yusef, accepted  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's  decision  is
        infected by legal error for the reasons set out in the Secretary of
        States grounds.
     7. It is also recorded in the Error of Law finding that Mr  Yusef  had
        been told by the appellant's family members who were  with  him  in
        court that the appellant had re-entered the United Kingdom,  again,
        in breach of the terms of the deportation order. As  Mr  Yusef  had
        been previously unaware of  this  development  and  was  not  in  a
        position to proceed to enable the decision to be remade, especially
        as  he  still  awaited  the  file  from  the  appellant's  previous
        representatives, the appeal was adjourned to  enable  Mr  Yusef  to
        ascertain the current situation and to enable further  constructive
        discussions in relation to this matter to take place.
     8. The case was next before the Upper Tribunal for a  Case  Management
        Review hearing on 2 April  2019  at  Bradford.  At  that  Mr  Yusef
        confirmed Mr [A] had returned to Albania  but  that  he  was  still
        awaiting the file  from  the  previous  representatives  for  which
        further time was required. It had been established it was  possible
        for video link evidence to  be  given  from  Tirana  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal sitting at Birmingham as a result of  which  a  number  of
        case management directions were made, one  of  which  was  for  the
        appellant no later than 4 PM 28  May  2019  to  file  and  serve  a
        consolidated, indexed  and  paginated  bundle  containing  all  the
        documentary  evidence  he  intended  to  rely  upon.  It  was  also
        specifically directed that as  the  appellant  is  in  Albania  his
        representative shall make the necessary arrangements in  accordance
        with any  published  guidance  for  video  evidence  to  be  given.
        Directions were given for the substantive hearing to be  listed  on
        the first available date after 1 June 2019.
     9. No bundles  or  further  documentary  evidence,  including  witness
        statements, have been received in relation to this appeal.
    10. On  24  June  2019  the  appellant's  representative  submitted  an
        adjournment request to the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:


             "Dear Sirs


             RE: URGENT ADJOURNMENT REQUEST MR EDMIR [A]
             HEARING SCHEDULED FOR WEDNESDAY 03 JULY 2019


             Following a recent telephone conversation with our  client  it
             became apparent that  he  is  not  able  to  draft  a  witness
             statement nor is he in any position to give oral evidence  via
             video link.


             I have been advised by Mr Alushi's family that he is suffering
             from  alcohol  withdrawal  symptoms  as   he   was   extremely
             incoherent during our telephone interview which resulted in us
             abandoning the interview and advise the family  that  he  seek
             professional medical help.


             We apologise for the late  correspondence  but  have  felt  we
             needed to give the appellant all the  opportunity  to  improve
             his mental health however following today's meeting  with  his
             family it was mutually agreed that Mr [A]'s mental health  was
             still too fragile for him to  offer  any  personal  supporting
             information in his case.


             We have asked the  family  to  encourage  Mr  Alushi  to  seek
             professional medical support in Albania which mean that we are
             not in a position to provide any such evidence at this stage.


             We also wish to bring to your attention that we were unable to
             obtain Mr Alushi's file  from  his  previous  solicitors  even
             though we have tried on several occasions but with  no  avail.
             However the Presenting Officer for the Home Office  have  been
             kind  enough  to  provide  our  office  with  a  copy  of  the
             respondent's bundle on the 24 June 2019,  which  unfortunately
             does not provide  our  office  with  the  sufficient  time  to
             prepare an adequate defence.


             Secondly we it is also noted from the facts of this case  that
             the  appellant's  appeal  is  based  on  the  fact  that   his
             deportation had impacted on the  lives  of  his  two  children
             currently  residing  in  the  UK.  We  therefore  feel  it  is
             imperative  that  the  court  are  given  the  opportunity  to
             establish the precise impact the separation is having  on  his
             children.


             However given the ages of  these  children  it  would  not  be
             possible for them to give such evidence in person. It  is  for
             this reason we have suggested to  the  family  to  obtain  the
             services of an independent social worker specialising in  such
             matters and who will be able  to  interview  the  children  to
             establish their views.


             Therefore given the above we feel it is  imperative  that  the
             appellant are given the opportunity to provide  oral  evidence
             via video link or a detailed witness statement especially;


                   1. As the refusal is based on the fact that the SSHD did
                      not take into effect the impact his removal is having
                      on the life of his children currently residing in the
                      UK.
                   2. It is clear that the appellant's case  raises  issues
                      relating to Article 8(2) of the ECHR, Section  55  of
                      the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and
                      Article 3(1) UNCRC which reiterates the fact that the
                      rights and best interests of any child should  be  of
                      utmost importance in all immigration matters.
                   3. To ensure the appellant can receive a fair hearing in
                      the interest of justice and procedural fairness.

             It is for this reason we would humbly request that you  accept
             this request and allow Mr [A] an adjournment,  to  ensure  all
             relevant parties in this case will be represented correctly on
             the day which also coincide with his fundamental  right  under
             Article 47 which states that everyone  has  the  right  to  an
             effective remedy and a fair trial.


             Lastly we again request that you accept our severer  apologies
             on such short notice which is unfortunately out of our control
             given the appellant's untimely situation.


             We hope the above information is be suffice however if we  can
             be of any further assistance please do not hesitate to contact
             us


             Yours faithfully"

    11. The application was refused by  a  lawyer  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
        pursuant to delegated judicial  powers  on  25  June  2019  in  the
        following terms:


             "The Appellant's application  to  adjourn  a  resumed  hearing
             currently listed on 3 July 2019 is refused.


             Reasons:


             1.  By  letter  dated  24  June  2019  the  Appellants   legal
                representatives have applied to adjourn the resumed hearing
                currently listed on 3 July 2019. They have  explained  that
                the Appellant is suffering from alcohol withdrawal symptoms
                and was incoherent during their  telephone  interview  from
                him. Following discussions  with  the  Appellant's  family,
                they have explained that the Appellant's mental  health  is
                too fragile  for  him  to  offer  any  personal  supporting
                information   in   his   case.   The   Appellant's    legal
                representatives have also explained that they do  not  have
                sufficient time to prepare an adequate defence  given  that
                they were unable to obtain the Appellant's  file  from  his
                previous legal representatives and have only been  provided
                with the Respondent's bundle on 24 June 2019. Finally,  the
                Appellant's legal representatives have submitted that  they
                would like to instruct a social  worker  to  interview  the
                Appellant's children in  order  to  establish  the  precise
                impact the Appellant separation is having on his  children.
                For all these reasons,  they  submit  that  it  is  in  the
                interest of justice for the appeal hearing to be adjourned.


             2. No medical evidence has been provided  by  the  Appellant's
                legal representatives in support of this  application.  The
                Appellant's legal representatives  are  solely  relying  on
                information  received  from  the  Appellant's  family   and
                following their telephone interview with him. Although they
                have asked the family to encourage the  Appellant  to  seek
                medical help, there is no indication that  assistance  will
                be sought by the Appellant and  for  what  period.  If  the
                Appellant is unwell then the resumed hearing can proceed in
                the absence of the Appellant.

             3. I note that the Appellant's current  legal  representatives
                attended the case management  review  hearing  on  2  April
                2019. In view of this, they have  had  sufficient  time  to
                request  the  case   papers   from   the   previous   legal
                representatives and  to  familiarise  themselves  with  the
                issues in this appeal. I do  not  accept  their  submission
                that they have inadequate time to prepare for this  appeal.
                In  any  event,  they  have  now  been  provided  with  the
                Respondent's bundle of documents.  Accordingly,  they  have
                sufficient time to read the case papers before the  resumed
                hearing.

             4. Moving on to the issue of instructing a  social  worker  to
                draft a report, no reasons have been  advanced  to  explain
                why this is being done at this late stage. Given  that  the
                last hearing in this  appeal  was  on  2  April  2019,  the
                Appellant's legal representatives have had  ample  time  to
                instruct a social worker to draft a report. The Appellant's
                legal representatives can call the  Appellant's  family  to
                give evidence. There is no reason why  the  mother  of  the
                Appellant's  children  cannot  attend  the  hearing  and  a
                witness statement be prepared and filed in accordance  with
                Rule 15 (2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
                Rules 2008.

             5. For the reasons I  have  set  out  above,  I  am  also  not
                prepared  to  adjourn  the  resumed  hearing.   The   Upper
                Tribunal's resources are limited and an  adjournment  would
                cause   unnecessary   delays   and   add   further   costs.
                Accordingly, the resumed hearing will proceed as listed  on
                3 July 2019 in Birmingham."


THE ADJOURNEMT APPLICATION

    12. Mr Yusef attended  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  together  with  Mr
        Howell. It transpired in the course of  the  hearing  that  he  had
        failed to bring his file of case papers with him but that  he  felt
        able to procced. There was no other person in attendance.
    13. Mr Yusef confirmed the telephone conversation he had had  with  the
        appellant arose as a result of a prearranged telephone  appointment
        with the assistance  of  an  Albanian  interpreter.  In  answer  to
        questions he stated he was  not  sure  whether  Mr  [A]  was  drunk
        although he had been told that he had not had a drink for a week or
        two by members  of  the  family.  Mr  Yusef  confirmed  he  himself
        terminated the interview as he had the impression that Mr [A] could
        not understand what he was saying to him. He stated he  formed  the
        opinion Mr [A] was disorientated and saying  things  that  did  not
        make sense.
    14. Mr Yusef confirmed there was no  medical  evidence  despite  having
        advised Mr [A] during the course of the telephone  conversation  to
        get  medical  evidence  and  similar  advice  being  given  by  the
        Independent Social worker who advised the family to obtain help.
    15. Mr Yusef confirmed that the date of  the  telephone  interview  was
        Friday, 28 June 2019. When asked why it occurred so late  Mr  Yusef
        indicated that it was arranged when he received a bundle  from  the
        Secretary of States representative after he which he  arranged  the
        telephone call.
    16. Mr Yusef also confirmed he had spoken to  the  family  and  advised
        them that evidence was required. It was stated that there  will  be
        no evidence forthcoming from the mother  of  the  children  in  any
        event as a result of her hostility towards Mr [A].
    17. When asked why no evidence had been called or provided  in  written
        form from the appellant's daughter, Mr Yusef stated it was  because
        the child was only 14 years of age and  was  too  young.  Mr  Yusef
        indicated that he had instructed an Independent Social Worker  last
        week to speak to the children as a means of conveying their  views.
        When asked why there had been delay in making such  an  instruction
        when the issues in the appeal would have been  clearly  known,  the
        determination  of  Judge  Clarke  noting  that  the  human   rights
        application of 12 November 2015  had  been  refused  and  that  the
        appellant appealed that  decision  asserting  his  deportation  was
        unduly harsh on the children, Mr Yusef replied by stating there are
        cost implications of instructing the social worker.
    18. Mr Yusef had  spoken  to  the  social  worker  as  the  appellant's
        representative, as had an uncle  of  the  children  and  the  elder
        daughter, but not the children's mother who would not speak to him.
    19. When the issue of why the 14-year-old daughter was  considered  not
        able to speak directly to the court was explored with him Mr  Yusef
        repeated that it was due to the child's age that she was  not  able
        to speak to the court or make a  statement.  Mr  Yusef  stated  the
        absence of  the  appellant  impacted  upon  the  child's  schooling
        although  when  asked  whether  there  was  any  correspondence  or
        evidence from the school to support such a claim he confirmed there
        was not. Mr Yusef also claimed there  were  behaviour  problems  at
        home as the 14-year-old daughter  is  very  close  to  her  father,
        closer to her father than her mother, and that  she  has  a  strong
        bond with  her  father  and  blames  her  mother  for  the  current
        situation. Mr Yusef stated the child had told her  father  to  stop
        drinking and that the appellant is an alcoholic a fact it is stated
        was also mentioned by the social worker.
    20. Mr Yusef then stated that the social worker had spoken to Mr [A] on
        2 July 2019 on the telephone with his daughter's help  although  he
        himself had made no further attempt telephone Mr [A] despite  being
        aware of the other conversation. Mr Yusef advised that  the  social
        worker had doubts that Mr [A] had the capacity  to  understand  the
        issues or to weigh up the consequences of his behaviour although it
        was accepted he has the capacity to give instructions to  Mr  Yusef
        when he has been able to speak to him. It was  stated  that  during
        previous conversations he came across as a different person to  the
        one Mr Yusef spoke to on Friday last.
    21. Mr Yusef repeated that he was not calling the 14-year-old  daughter
        to give evidence due to her age.
    22. When Mr Yusef was asked why other family members had not  attended,
        there having been another family member in attendance at  both  the
        error of law hearing and case  management  hearing  previously,  Mr
        Yusef confirmed that an uncle had been told  of  the  hearing  date
        three weeks ago but had stated he was not coming to court as he had
        problems at work. When asked when this  information  was  known  Mr
        Yusef claimed it was Friday 28 June 2019. When asked why there  was
        no witness statement from the uncle Mr Yusef stated  he  had  asked
        the uncle to come into his office and give a witness statement, but
        the uncle claimed he was too ill to travel to  the  representatives
        office. The uncle lives in Birmingham with no medical  evidence  to
        support his claim of being unwell to the extent  it  prevented  him
        making the short journey to his representatives  office.  Mr  Yusef
        also confirmed he had not spoken to the uncle on the telephone with
        a view to obtaining a witness statement through such means.
    23. The information provided by Mr Yusef  indicated  (a)  that  he  had
        faced  difficulties  taking  instructions  from  his  client  whose
        incapacity was such that he  was  not  in  a  position  to  provide
        written or oral evidence  to  assist  the  Tribunal,  (b)  that  no
        attempt had been made to obtain any evidence from schools or  other
        sources, and, (c) that although it was  claimed  there  were  other
        witnesses such as the uncle no witness statements were provided and
        none had attended the hearing despite being aware of  the  date  of
        the same. It is also not accepted that Mr Yusef was unaware of  the
        relevant issues in this appeal as he attended the  hearings  before
        the Upper Tribunal and had had  sight  of  the  decision  of  Judge
        Clarke for some time.
    24. Mr Howells confirmed the nature of the further evidence sent by the
        Secretary of State which included the  respondent's  bundle  before
        the First-Tier Tribunal, which will have included a  full  copy  of
        the refusal  decision  under  challenge,  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
        documents which  will  have  been  served  upon  Mr  Yusef  as  the
        appellant's representative in any event.
    25. It is also the case that when the issue of the 14 year old daughter
        and the lack of any evidence from her was  further  discussed,  and
        the issue of the child's age and understanding raised  in  relation
        to which  the  child  clearly  had  shown  she  is  a  capable  and
        intelligent individual, Mr Yusef then accepted that the appellant's
        daughter had sufficient age and understanding to take part  in  the
        proceedings.
    26. Mr Yusef also brought with him a short report from the  Independent
        Social Worker who confirmed a meeting with the  appellant's  eldest
        daughter and her uncle on 2 July 2019 at their home in  Birmingham.
        The section of the report headed "Summary of Initial  Instructions"
        is in the following terms:


             "14)     I  can  confirm  that  I  had  an  initial  telephone
                  conversation with Mr [A] this morning who I understand  is
                  currently in Albania and this was in the presence  of  his
                  daughter and cousin.


             15)  I unfortunately had to terminate our conversation  as  it
                  became apparent that Mr [A] may suffer from some  form  of
                  hallucination.


             16)  His daughter explained that her father's symptoms started
                  recently as he is currently in the process of  'trying  to
                  stop his drinking habit'.


             17)  I have explained to his daughter and Mr  Alushi's  cousin
                  that it is  most  likely  he  is  experiencing  withdrawal
                  symptoms, which is  a  sign  that  he  may  be  physically
                  dependent on alcohol. I have advised if this is the case I
                  believe he should seek immediate medical attention as  his
                  condition could deteriorate.


             18)  Due to the short  notice  and  time  constraints  I  have
                  advised the family that I would not be able to assess  the
                  impact upon Mr [A]'s children at this  stage  as  I  would
                  need adequate time to interview Mr [A]  and  his  children
                  independently.


             19)  Usually, when I undertake an assessment of this  sort  my
                  principal aim is to assess the wishes and feelings of  the
                  child/ren concerned; the impact of the removal of a parent
                  or parental figure may have on them.


             20)  It is for this reason I do  not  feel  that  I  am  in  a
                  position to complete such  an  assessment  at  such  short
                  notice and advise the family that I will need more time to
                  complete my current workload.


             Action required


             21)  I would anticipate to complete my current workload in the
                  next three - four weeks whereby I will then  need  further
                  time to complete my report on the findings  following  the
                  assessment.


             The parties involved


             Those involved in the case are as follows:


                 . [IA]
                 . [AA]
                 . Edmir [A]"

    27. [IA]'s date of birth is 17 July 2004, [AA] 15  February  2013,  and
        Edmir is the appellant in these proceedings.
    28. The report seems to suggest an  enquiry  into  the  impact  of  the
        removal of a parent but this is the issue that has always  been  at
        large from the outset of these proceedings and is the basis of  the
        appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision.
    29. The adjournment  application  was  refused  having  considered  the
        submissions made,  the  overriding  objectives,  and  principle  of
        fairness.
    30. This is not a case in relation to which issues have arisen of which
        parties did not have  adequate  knowledge.  Issues  concerning  the
        appellant and alcohol arose in July 2015  when  the  appellant  was
        convicted of driving with excess alcohol.  Whilst  the  appellant's
        inability to  provide  clear  instructions  or  take  part  in  the
        proceedings may not have been appreciated until the discussion with
        the Independent Social Worker and Mr  Yusef,  the  reality  of  the
        situation is that the appellant is not going  to  take  any  active
        role in the proceedings and so adjourning for this reason serves no
        useful or realistic purpose.
    31. So far as [AA] is concerned, the child is only 6 years of  age  and
        has not been shown to have sufficient age and understanding  to  be
        able to take an  active  role  in  these  proceedings.  It  is  not
        unrealistic to assume that the child's position  will  be  that  he
        would like his father to be able to return to the United Kingdom.
    32. In relation to Imelda, she is nearly 15 years of age. [IA] attended
        both hearings before the Upper Tribunal previously and was able  to
        provide information to both the Tribunal and Mr Yusef regarding her
        father's situation. There is nothing to  suggest  that  this  young
        lady is  anything  other  than  a  person  of  sufficient  age  and
        understanding to enable her to play a role in the proceedings  such
        as the provision of a witness statement  and/or  to  have  attended
        court on  the  day.  Although  Mr  Yusef  initially  suggested  the
        opposite he accepted,  as  noted  above,  that  this  is  the  true
        position.  Notwithstanding  this  fact  no  witness  statement  was
        provided from [IA]  who  did  not  attend  the  hearing,  Mr  Yusef
        repeatedly claiming that the Independent  Social  Worker  had  been
        instructed to record the child's views in a case in which  [IA]  is
        quite capable of  expressing  such  views  herself.  No  acceptable
        reason was provided for why  such  evidence  was  not  provided  in
        accordance with the directions to establish was appropriate in  all
        the circumstances to adjourn the matter further for something  that
        could easily have occurred.
    33. It was not made out it was appropriate  to  adjourn  to  allow  the
        uncle to attend as clearly he had been fully aware of  the  hearing
        yet had not provided a witness statement, despite being asked by Mr
        Yusef, and had failed to attend before the Upper Tribunal  claiming
        work-related issues when there was no evidence  supporting  such  a
        claim.
    34. There has been ample time to obtain  reports  from  the  school  or
        other sources yet no action had been undertaken to secure the same.
        Mr Yusef stated  he  had  told  the  family  such  information  was
        required but, again, none was forthcoming.
    35. It is not considered there  is  any  need  for  a  report  from  an
        Independent Social Worker as the evidence for which  the  same  had
        been instructed to obtain could be obtained from other sources  and
        there  was  no  need  established  in  the  submissions  that   any
        particular expertise required in this case to enable best  evidence
        to be obtained.
    36. Whilst it is accepted there may be difficulties  in  a  case  where
        there is conflict between the appellant and the  children's  mother
        this does not explain the issues that have arisen  with  regard  to
        the evidential aspects of this appeal. Indeed, Judge Clarke at  [7]
        of the determination of 21 November 2017 notes that no  application
        had been made for evidence to be given from Albania and no  witness
        statements or other documentary evidence had been  served  nor  any
        witnesses attended to support the appeal on that occasion too. This
        this reflects the situation that exists again.
    37. The adjournment application was refused. Having asked Mr Yusef  his
        position in light of the same he confirmed he was in a position  to
        make submissions behalf of  the  appellant.  The  matter  therefore
        proceeded to the substantive hearing on the  basis  of  submissions
        received from both Mr Howells on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
        and Mr Yusef on behalf of the appellant.


Discussion



    38. The factual history in  relation  to  the  appellant's  immigration
        history and criminality is not in dispute. There is arguable  merit
        in Mr Howell's submission that the appellant's conduct demonstrates
        a clear disregard for the  laws  of  the  United  Kingdom,  a  fact
        further demonstrated by the appellant entering the UK in breach  of
        the deportation order on a further occasion.
    39. The appellant had the  opportunity  to  appeal  the  order  of  his
        deportation from the United Kingdom, but such challenge failed, and
        he was deported.
    40. It was noted that Mr [A] lived in the United Kingdom and it is  not
        disputed that his daughter and stepson remain  here.  The  children
        will however remain in the UK with their mother.
    41. The issue in this appeal  has  always  been,  as  accepted  by  the
        appellant, whether his continued exclusion from the United  Kingdom
        will be unduly harsh upon the children.
    42. Whilst 9 years have passed since  the  making  of  the  deportation
        order it has not been established to be such a period that warrants
        the granting of the appellant's appeal per se, especially in  light
        of the unlawful re-entry to the United Kingdom  in  breach  of  the
        deportation order.
    43. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules state:


             Revocation of deportation order


             390.     An application for revocation of a deportation  order
                  will be considered in the light of all  the  circumstances
                  including the following:


                  (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;
                  (ii)      any   representations   made   in   support   of
             revocation;
                  (iii)    the interests of  the  community,  including  the
                      maintenance of an effective immigration control;
                  (iv)     the interests of  the  applicant,  including  any
                      compassionate circumstances.


             390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be
             outweighed by other factors.


             391.     In the  case  of  a  person  who  has  been  deported
                  following  conviction  for   a   criminal   offence,   the
                  continuation of a deportation order  against  that  person
                  will be the proper course:


                  (a)  in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                      the person was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
                      of less than 4 years, unless 10  years  have  elapsed
                      since the making of the deportation order when, if an
                      application for revocation is received, consideration
                      will be given on a case by case basis to whether  the
                      deportation order should be maintained, or
                  (b)  in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                      the person was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
                      of at least 4 years, at any time,


                  Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary
                  to the Human  Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and
                  Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, or there  are
                  other exceptional circumstances that mean the continuation
                  is outweighed by compelling factors.


             391A. In  other  cases,  revocation  of  the  order  will  not
                  normally be  authorised  unless  the  situation  has  been
                  materially altered, either by a  change  of  circumstances
                  since the order was made, or by fresh  information  coming
                  to light which was not before the appellate authorities or
                  the Secretary of State. The  passage  of  time  since  the
                  person was deported may also in itself amount  to  such  a
                  change of circumstances as to warrant  revocation  of  the
                  order.


    44. The grounds on which the order was made was that as a result of the
        appellants offending the public interest requires his removal  from
        the  United  Kingdom.  The  evidence  available  to  this  Tribunal
        supports Mr Howell's submission the appellant's continued exclusion
        is conducive  to  the  public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
        especially in light of the alcohol in other issues  identified  and
        the appellant's conduct in breaching the terms of  the  deportation
        order; indicating that it is inappropriate to find  there  is  non-
        ongoing reason for his continued exclusion.
    45. Mr Yusef in his submissions in  support  of  revocation  refers  to
        family circumstances and the impact of  the  appellant's  continued
        exclusion. There is no relationship between the appellant  and  his
        wife any longer.  Submissions made that the  appellant's  exclusion
        will have a detrimental effect upon his children, particularly  his
        daughter, such as to impact  upon  her  schooling  and  possibility
        chance of accessing university and future employment prospects  are
        not supported by any evidence and are speculation. Whilst there  is
        no reasons to doubt the claim [IA] has a close bond with her father
        and would like her father to return to the United  Kingdom  so  she
        could continue to have a direct relationship with him, it  has  not
        been established that the consequences of the appellant's continued
        exclusion from the United  Kingdom  will  result  in  unduly  harsh
        consequences for her or any other member of this family unit.
    46. The interests of the community, including  the  maintenance  of  an
        effective immigration control are clearly issues that count against
        the appeal being allowed. There is no evidence that  the  appellant
        is a reformed character and indeed the evidence suggests  he  is  a
        person who will continue to breach the laws of the  United  Kingdom
        if it suits him to do  so.  Alcohol  appears  to  be  in  issue  in
        relation to which there is no evidence to show the  appellant  will
        not continue to pose a threat to the interests of the community  in
        the United Kingdom by breaching the U.K.'s laws by  the  commission
        of further  offences.  There  is  a  strong  deterrent  element  in
        enforcing the effectiveness of immigration control,  especially  in
        relation to a person who on more than one occasion has breached the
        terms of deportation order by re-entering the  United  Kingdom.  It
        appears only to have been when  it  was  indicated  at  an  earlier
        hearing  that  he  could  be  sentenced  to  a  further  period  of
        imprisonment having entered the United Kingdom  in  breach  of  the
        deportation order on a second occasion that the appellant chose  to
        return to Albania. Why it was thought appropriate or acceptable  to
        re-enter the United Kingdom in  breach  whilst  he  had  an  appeal
        pending has never been explained.
    47. There is no evidence to support the claim that the interests of the
        appellant warrant the deportation order being revoked. On the basis
        of the available  evidence  the  only  compassionate  circumstances
        which could be relied upon are those relating to the  children  and
        in particular [IA]. As noted above, it is accepted that  she  would
        like her father to be allowed to renter the United Kingdom and that
        she misses him greatly. This is the understandable  reaction  of  a
        young teenager who has a bond with her father. The reality  of  the
        situation is, however, that [IA] and her brother will  continue  to
        reside in the United Kingdom with their mother. It was not made out
        that any difficulties that may exist between [IA]  and  her  mother
        are other than  the  normal  conflict  that  may  exist  between  a
        teenager and a parent. There was no evidence to  suggest  otherwise
        and as [IA]'s mother refuses to  take  any  active  part  in  these
        proceedings, and in light of the failure to  obtain  evidence  from
        [IA], there is nothing to suggest otherwise. [IA]  is  upset  as  a
        result of the continued  separation  but  that  is  not  enough  to
        establish that the decision to maintain the deportation order  will
        be unduly harsh. The best interests of both children will  continue
        to be met by remaining in their current family home in  the  United
        Kingdom. It is not made out that  any  emotional  or  developmental
        issues arise in relation to the  children  other  than  the  normal
        consequences of being separated from their father as  a  result  of
        his  deportation.  There  was  no  credible   evidence   that   the
        educational needs of either of  the  children  will  be  materially
        prejudiced such as to amount to unduly harsh consequences.
    48. Whilst it is accepted that indirect contact  is  not  the  same  as
        direct contact it was not made out that the children would  not  be
        able to visit their father in  Albania  for  the  purposes  of  the
        holiday or otherwise or that the current contact  arrangement  will
        not continue.
    49. Having considered  all  the  evidence  in  the  round  I  find  the
        appellant fails to establish an entitlement to have the deportation
        order revoked  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  find  the
        respondent has discharged the burden  of  proof  upon  him  to  the
        required standard to establish that the decision not to revoke  the
        deportation order is proportionate to  any  continued  interference
        with the family life that exists  between  the  appellant  and  his
        children who continue to live in the United Kingdom on the facts of
        this matter.
    50. The appeal is dismissed. There is insufficient evidence to  warrant
        any other finding.


Decision

    51. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

   Anonymity.


    52. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 as no such order was requested.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4 July 2019












