
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16571/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 October 2020                   |On 10 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                               Mr Davinder [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could  be  determined  in  a  remote  hearing.  I  did  not  experience  any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of India who resists deportation primarily on
the basis of his relationship with his British national children, one of
whom has been diagnosed as autistic.

He is appealing against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Baldwin ("the judge") promulgated on 14 February 2020 in which it was found
that (a) he is a persistent offender within the meaning of s117D(2)(iii) of
the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"); (b) his
deportation would not be unduly harsh for his wife and children under
s117C(5) of the 2002 Act; and (c) there are not very compelling
circumstances under s117C(6) of the 2002 Act.

On the question of whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's
eldest son, who has been diagnosed with autism, to be separated from the
appellant as a consequence of the deportation, the judge stated at
paragraph 31 of the decision:

"For the elder boy, the impact may be harsh, but large numbers  of  children
have special  needs  of  one  kind  or  another  and  his  needs  have  been
identified and are now  being  addressed  within  the  community  and  in  a
mainstream school.  Even for him, I conclude, the  impact  of  his  father's
deportation will not be unduly harsh."

Mr Bazini, in the grounds of appeal and in his oral submissions, made a
range of arguments.  However, it is not necessary to consider all of them
because there is one clear error in the decision.  The error is that, as is
apparent from paragraph 31, the judge relied on a comparator with other
children with special needs to assess whether the effect of deportation on
the appellant's autistic son, which he accepted would be harsh, reached the
threshold of being "unduly harsh". In so doing, the judge fell into the
error identified in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, where it was
described as "dangerous" to compare an individual to "some commonly
encountered pattern".  At paragraph 56 Underhill LJ stated:

"The test under Section  117C  (5)  does  indeed  require  an  appellant  to
establish a degree of harshness going beyond a threshold  acceptable  level.
It is not necessarily wrong  to  describe  that  as  an  ordinary  level  of
harshness, and I note that Lord Carnwath did not jib at UTJ  Southern's  use
of that term.  However, I think the appellants are right to point  out  that
it may be misleading if used incautiously.  There  seem  to  me  to  be  two
(related) risks.  First, ordinary is capable of being understood as  meaning
anything which is not exceptional, or in any event rare.  That  is  not  the
correct approach, see para. 52 above.  There is no reason in  principle  why
cases of undue  harshness  may  not  occur  quite  commonly.   Secondly,  if
Tribunals treat the essential question as being is this level  of  harshness
out of the ordinary? they may be tempted to find that Exception 2  does  not
apply simply on the  basis  that  the  situation  fits  into  some  commonly
encountered pattern.   That  would  be  dangerous.   How  a  child  will  be
affected by a parent's deportation  will  depend  on  an  almost  infinitely
variable range of circumstances  and  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  a
baseline of ordinariness."

Mr Lindsay argued that the judge properly considered the particular
circumstances of the appellant's eldest child. He noted, for example, that
at paragraph 15 of the decision the judge considered his statutory care
plan and specific needs. That may be the case but the error is not that the
judge failed to properly consider the evidence about the appellant's eldest
son, it is that when determining whether the unduly harsh threshold was met
the judge gave weight to whether the situation fit a commonly encountered
pattern (in this case, provision for disabled children) in a way that is
inconsistent with HA (Iraq).

This error, although understandable given that HA(Iraq) had not been
promulgated when the decision was made, is clearly material; and it renders
the decision unsafe.

Mr Lindsay and Mr Bazini disagreed on whether any findings of fact in the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be preserved for the remaking of
the decision. Mr Bazini argued that the decision contains findings that are
unreasonable and inappropriate, and which undermine the assessment of the
evidence as a whole. He pointed to paragraph 25 where it appears that the
judge attached weight to the demeanour of the appellant's children during
the hearing, as he stated that they showed "little apparent interest in
their father who was seated alongside them". I agree with Mr Bazini that it
is unclear why the judge considered the behaviour of the children during
the hearing relevant or in any way indicative of the relationship between
them and the appellant. Mr Bazini also highlighted the judge's comment at
paragraph 30, where it is stated that the appellant's wife "may still love
him but she must surely know that he has most certainly not proved he
loves her and his children enough to sort himself out...". I agree with Mr
Bazini that this is speculative and is not a conclusion that can reasonably
be inferred from the evidence. Mr Lindsay submitted that I should be slow
to interfere with findings of fact and that it could not be said that the
judge's findings were perverse. Although for the most part the judge made
sustainable and reasonable findings, the findings at paragraphs 25 and 30
identified by Mr Bazini and referred to above in this paragraph are not.

The remaking of the decision will require, inter alia, careful
consideration to be given to (preferably, up-to-date) evidence concerning
the circumstances of (and the effect of the appellant's deportation on)
each of the appellant's two children and his wife's daughter. Considering
the matter in the round, and noting the problematic findings referred to
above in paragraph 7 of this decision, I am in agreement with Mr Bazini
that no findings of fact should be preserved. Given the extent of further
fact-finding necessary, I also agree that the appeal should be remitted to
the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a
different judge. No findings of fact are preserved.


Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan                                  29 October
2020
