
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16801/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2019                      |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          CADONIUS DE-HAVALAN LOWE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by Fisherwrite
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the start of the hearing Mr Whitwell asked to amend the grounds.  Mr
    Lams opposed the application and I refused leave.  As  I  said  at  the
    hearing, the application was unsatisfactory for two  reasons.   It  was
    raised very late (I think on Friday 1 March for a hearing on  Monday  4
    March) and  it  was  not  accompanied  by  draft  grounds.   Two  quite
    different points were taken.  First, it is said that the  claimant  has
    been convicted of a further offence.  That seems to be correct  but  it
    is  something  that  occurred  after  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I do not see how it can be said  that  failing  to  consider
    something that had not happened  can  be  an  arguable  error  of  law.
    Second, it is  said  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  materially
    because, at paragraph 31 of the  Decision  and  Reasons,  he  referred,
    wrongly,  to  a  "significant  obstacles"  test   rather   than   "very
    significant obstacles" test.  This, on the face of it, seems a material
    and important point but it was not taken in the  respondent's  grounds,
    which seemed to accept that the correct  "very  significant  obstacles"
    test was applied.  The plain meaning of paragraph 2 of the  grounds  is
    that the correct test was applied.  Mr Lams pointed out that the  judge
    quoted directly from Part 5A of the 2002  Act  and  the  Rules  in  the
    Decision and Reasons. Rather than indicating that the  wrong  test  was
    applied, the failure to use the qualifying word  "very"  is  clearly  a
    slip because it is inconsistent with the rest  of  the  decision.   The
    failure to take the point in the  grounds  was  not  an  ill-considered
    omission but a recognition of the correct test  was  in  fact  applied,
    albeit on the Secretary of State's case applied incorrectly.  I refused
    permission mainly because I do not accept there is actually anything in
    the points.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant" to refuse an application for  permission  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds on 1 August 2018.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica.  He was born in April 1999 and so
    is now almost 20 years old.  He entered the  United  Kingdom  with  his
    mother sometime in 2002 and has  remained.   His  mother's  immigration
    history is imperfect.  She has not always had leave.  Nevertheless, she
    lives in the United Kingdom and has leave to remain.  The claimant  was
    given leave in line with his mother. Most recently, on 29 December 2016
    the claimant was given indefinite leave to remain. He was then still  a
    minor.  If there are any failings in his immigration history  they  are
    not the fault of the claimant.  He was a minor acting on the advice  of
    his mother.

 4. On 30 October 2017 the Secretary of State wrote to the claimant to tell
    him  that  he  was  liable  to  deportation  because  of  his  criminal
    behaviour.  The letter was served on 31 October 2017.   On  9  November
    2017, 14 November 2017 and 21 November 2017 solicitors made submissions
    on his behalf.

 5. The papers include a Decision to Deport pursuant to the Immigration Act
    1971 and the UK Borders Act 2007 dated 30 October 2017.   The  claimant
    was  arrested  in  March  2017.  I   assume   that   the   arrest   was
    contemporaneous with the offence.  It follows that he was not quite  18
    years old when he committed the offence.   The  sentencing  judge  gave
    full credit for a guilty plea and imposed a term of two years and  four
    months' custody.  The circumstances of the offence are set out  in  the
    judge's opening remarks where he said:

         "I have got to deal with you for your involvement in  serious  drug
         dealing.  You came down from London, you were sent down  to  assist
         an  operation,  essentially  it  being  run  from  London,  it  was
         effectively what is described in the case of, R  v  Ajayi  &  Limby
         [2017] EWCA Crim 1011.  You involved  yourself  in  a  county  line
         operation, you were not here as a user feeding a habit.   You  were
         part of a cuckooing process and you divvied up  the  drugs  at  the
         address and also went out occasionally on the streets selling  them
         and that is just really serious, that is just a terrible  thing  to
         do".

 6. I understand a "cuckooing process" to be a process  by  criminal  gangs
    where  gang  members  befriend  someone  who  is  vulnerable  with  the
    intention of taking over his or her resources, typically home,  to  use
    in criminal activities.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence and set out  the  correct  legal
    tests.

 8. The Tribunal found that the claimant has always lived with  his  mother
    apart from a short period of time when he had lived with his father and
    when he was detained.  He said he intended to continue living with  his
    mother in Birmingham.  The judge was satisfied that  the  claimant  was
    dependent on his mother for accommodation and for finance.  He had  not
    formed his own family  unit.   The  judge  concluded  that  there  were
    "elements of dependency, involving more than the normal emotional ties"
    and decided that the claimant has "family life" with his mother.

 9. Unremarkably the judge found also that the claimant had private life in
    the United Kingdom.  He accepted that the claimant  had  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life.  He speaks English
    which is the national language of Jamaica, and  there  was  no  medical
    evidence to suggest he was suffering from any disabling condition.   He
    had a BTEC qualification.  It is clear  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    decided that the claimant's father and extended family lived in Jamaica
    at the time of making the decision (see "Decision  to  Refuse  a  Human
    Rights Claim" dated 1 August 2018).

10. The First-tier Tribunal accepted evidence that  the  claimant's  father
    left Jamaica about twenty years before the  decision,  and  the  mother
    about sixteen years before the decision.   The  judge  found  that  the
    claimant's mother is unlikely to have maintained contacts and that  her
    siblings have relocated to the United States  of  America.   The  judge
    found the claimant does not have any family  or  other  connections  in
    Jamaica.

11. The judge found that the claimant had  always  been  dependent  on  his
    mother  or  father  or  the  state  through  the  Prison  Service   for
    accommodation and support.  The judge accepted the appellant's parents,
    mainly his mother, sent him an income while he was in  prison  but  the
    family had "limited means and they would not be able to provide  either
    a lump sum or regular income to assist" the claimant in  the  event  of
    his return to Jamaica.

12. Putting these things together  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decided  that
    there were very significant obstacles  to  the  claimant's  integration
    into Jamaica within the meaning of the phrase in Section 117C(iv)(c) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

13. The judge allowed the appeal.

14. The Secretary of State's grounds take five paragraphs.

15. Paragraph 1 is narrative and refers correctly  to  the  relevant  legal
    test and the accepted conviction.

16. Paragraph 2 asserts baldly that "it is irrational" to find  there  were
    very significant obstacles in the way of integration.  That is the main
    ground and I return to it later.

17. Paragraph 3 accuses the First-tier Tribunal Judge of  considering  only
    "negative  factors  rather  than  the   multidimensional   aspects   of
    integration".

18. Paragraph 4 says the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  failed  to  give
    adequate consideration to the seriousness of  the  claimant's  criminal
    conduct and the high public interest in deportation.

19. Paragraph 5 says that it is "irrational" to accept that the claimant is
    dependent on his family  in  a  Kugathas  sense".  Clearly  this  is  a
    reference to the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

20. Ground 4 I find to be without merit.  The judge did  not  underestimate
    or wrongly evaluate anything about the criminal offence.  He was  fully
    aware of the criminal offence.  What the judge did do was apply Section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which he  was
    required to do, and conclude that Exception 1 applied and therefore the
    public  interest  did  not  require  deportation.   Having  made   that
    decision, there was no error in the assessment of the criminal conduct.
     The assessment of  the  criminal  conduct  is  best  measured  by  the
    sentence imposed.  The sentence imposed was a sentence  that  permitted
    the possibility of Exception 1 applying and the  judge  found  that  it
    did.

21. Neither is there any error in finding that "family life" existed.  I do
    find the Secretary of State's delight in separating "family  life"  and
    "private life" as if they were two separate concepts to  be  considered
    individually frustrating.  The  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    obliges the United Kingdom to consider a person's "private  and  family
    life, home and correspondence".   "Private  and  family  life"  is  one
    thing, not two, which can arise in a variety of ways.  It is  described
    sometimes as "physical and moral integrity".   It  is  ejusdem  generis
    with "home" and "correspondence" and the article is about stopping  the
    state interfering unnecessarily with people.  It is not about  how  the
    rights of an auntie might be different from the right of a mother.

22. Here, the judge was satisfied on the evidence that the claimant's  only
    experience of adult life was in the context of life  with  his  mother.
    Previously he had lived for a short time with his  father  and  he  had
    lived in custody.  There is no error in describing the  arrangement  as
    "family life" provided that it was  appreciated  that  it  was  a  less
    important kind of family life, being the family life  between  a  young
    adult who should be ready for independent living. It is not entitled to
    the same kind of weight  that  should  be  given  to  the  relationship
    between, for example, a parent and a small child.

23. However, as this case has been decided on the basis of Exception 1  and
    not independently on human rights grounds as a  separate  consideration
    outside the Act, I see nothing in the point.  The contention  that  the
    judge has wrongly appraised the negative factors rather than the  whole
    aspect of integration does not, I find, add anything to ground 2.

24. The essential point taken here is that the judge should not have  found
    there were very significant obstacles.

25. Mr Lams argued his case clearly and without fanfare, and all  the  more
    effectively as a result.  He reminded me, correctly, that my first task
    is to decide if there has been an error  of  law.   The  error  of  law
    identified by the Secretary of State is perversity and that is not easy
    to prove.  Here, the First-tier Tribunal has directed itself correctly.
     I can only interfere if it is a case where the conclusion  it  reached
    was not open to it.  All of this I accept.

26. However, I asked Mr Lams to identify the very significant obstacles  in
    the way of integration and I struggled to follow his answer.  This  was
    not because of any deficiency on his part but because the case  is  not
    made out.

27. Certainly, the claimant is a young  man  with  no  real  experience  of
    independent living.   Certainly,  he  has  no  experience  of  life  in
    Jamaica, and certainly he would be on his own in the sense  that  there
    is no evidence of financial support from  the  United  Kingdom  or  any
    relatives in Jamaica having the slightest interest  in  him.   However,
    the claimant had not produced any evidence that showed he had made  any
    real attempt to sort out how he might  live  in  Jamaica.   I  am  told
    nothing about employment difficulties or opportunities or how he  might
    or might not be able to obtain accommodation.  The evidence was  silent
    about these things.

28. Given that the claimant had sufficient  wit  (albeit  of  a  thoroughly
    discreditable kind) to be part of a  drug  ring  enterprise,  I  cannot
    accept that he can be regarded a helpless babe.  Neither can  I  accept
    in the absence of clear evidence, that a person who has been locked  up
    for whatever is necessary in a sentence of two years and  four  months,
    had not learned some street wisdom of a kind that would assist him.

29. The claimant does have qualifications of sorts.  He does speak the main
    local language.  I can see many reasons why he will not wish to  return
    to Jamaica and I can see many things that will  be  difficult  for  him
    there, or which could be expected to be difficult which is probably all
    that is necessary but I cannot see anything here that I would  describe
    properly as a "very significant obstacle".

30. Mr Lams relied in part on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Kamara
    v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  Mr Lams reminded me  of  the  judgment  of
    Sales LJ emphasising there needs to  be  a  broad  assessment,  that  I
    should take into account the claimant having no  emotional  support  in
    the country and at the least accept that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the obstacles would be very significant.

31. It is important to sit back here  and  reflect  a  little  on  what  is
    happening.  It is proposed to remove to Jamaica a  person  who  has  no
    meaningful links with the country except a passport which he has  as  a
    consequence of being born there.  He has no  adult  experience  of  the
    country and no support there.  He  probably  has  no  memories  of  the
    country.  He was 3 years old or thereabouts when he left  it.   Exactly
    why this young man is being returned  to  that  country?  He  has  been
    justly punished for the offences that  he  has  committed  but  he  had
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom at the  material  time
    and will be a stranger in his country of nationality.  However, that is
    not really something that I have to answer.  Parliament has set out the
    law  and  the  only  relevant  exception  here  is  "very   significant
    obstacles" to integration.  The decision has been made that  it  is  in
    the public interest to deport a person such as the claimant unless  the
    exception applies.  I agree with Mr  Lams'  observation  that  this  is
    "exile" rather than "deportation" but as far  as  I  can  see  that  is
    precisely what Parliament requires.

32. If this decision is right then many decisions against young people  who
    are being removed to their country of nationality where  they  have  no
    experience would be contrary to the law.  Maybe that is precisely  what
    Parliament intended.  Maybe that is the balancing  measure  to  prevent
    excessive consequences in the case of young people who have no  contact
    in the country of which they happen to be a national.   However,  I  do
    not accept that.   Parliament  has  decided  there  needs  to  be  very
    significant obstacles.  Clearly the Secretary of State did not consider
    there were else he would not have made the decision in the first place.
     The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that there  were  but  I  cannot
    work out why.  Not only is there nothing here that I would identify  as
    a "very significant obstacle" but in my judgment there is nothing  that
    can be identified as a  "very  significant  obstacle".   Whilst  it  is
    necessary to make a rounded assessment of all the circumstances, it  is
    also necessary to apply the law in statute.  The  exception  will  only
    apply  in  strong  circumstances.   I  do   not   accept   that   those
    circumstances have been identified in the evidence here.   I  find  the
    Secretary of State's grounds are made out.  The decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal was irrational.  I set aside its decision and I re-make a
    decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.




Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred. I set aside its decision and I substitute  a
decision dismissing the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
decision.




|Signed                   |                       |                        |
|Jonathan Perkins         |                       |                        |
|Judge of the Upper       |                       |Dated 8 April 2019      |
|Tribunal                 |                       |                        |


