
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/16793/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On April 30, 2018                          |On May 09, 2018                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                MR AJAY KUMAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Howson Semega-Janneh, Counsel, instructed by
Knights Law
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  student  in  July
    2010. He met his wife the same year and they began a relationship.  His
    Tier 4 leave was extended until March 30, 2013  whereupon  he  made  an
    application to extend his stay further but this application was refused
    and an appeal against that decision was dismissed on February 12, 2014.



 3. The appellant began cohabitating with his future-wife in September 2014
    and on October 3, 2014 he again made an application to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. The respondent refused this, with no right  of  appeal,
    on December 4, 2014. The appellant then lodged an application on  March
    5, 2015. This was refused on March 27, 2015 and the appellant  appealed
    that decision but Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davies  dismissed
    that appeal in a decision promulgated on September 14, 2015.

 4. On March 13, 2015 the appellant and his wife married and the  appellant
    lodged a further application to remain on June 1, 2016. The  respondent
    refused the application on June 23, 2016.

 5. His application came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Rhys-
    Davies (hereinafter called "the Judge") and in a  decision  promulgated
    on July 20, 2017 the Judge dismissed his appeal under ECHR legislation.



 6. On August 4, 2017 an application to appeal that decision was lodged and
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Scott-Baker  granted  permission  to
    appeal on February 5, 2018 on the basis it  was  arguable  the  Judge's
    assessment of the children's best interests and the  reasonableness  of
    requiring them or the appellant to leave the United Kingdom was flawed.



    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Semega-Janneh relied on the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that
    when considering reasonableness the Judge  failed  to  give  sufficient
    weight to all of the factors that  were  presented  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant's stepchildren.

 8. The Judge had accepted that the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with the children but attached too much weight to what was
    available in India and paid too little regard to  the  length  of  time
    they had been here, the fact that English was  their  spoken  language,
    the stages they had both reached in their  education  with  the  eldest
    child being in the middle of his GCSE A-level course  and  the  younger
    child in the middle of his GCSE  O-level  course,  the  fact  that  the
    appellant provided a father figure in their lives and had done so for a
    number of years against the background that they had no direct  contact
    with their natural father due to  the  granting  of  a  non-molestation
    order  and  any  removal  would  decimate  friendships,  relationships,
    activities and other ties formed since they  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. Mr Semega-Janneh further  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
    sufficient  regard  to  the  decisions  of  Azimi-Moyaed   and   others
    (decisions affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 and EV
    (Phillippines) and others [2014] EWCA Civ 874  and  most  significantly
    failed to  attach  any  weight  to  the  fact  that  they  had  already
    accumulated almost 5 years discretionary leave in  the  United  Kingdom
    and almost certainly would have that leave extended  prior  to  October
    2018 when their current leave expired.

10. Mr McVeety opposed  the  application  and  submitted  that  whilst  the
    Judge's decision could be viewed as harsh nevertheless he submitted the
    Judge had considered all the evidence and had reached a  decision  that
    was open to him. He argued that the grant of permission to  appeal  was
    flawed and invited me to uphold the decision.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The appellant came to the United Kingdom as a  student  and  in  normal
    circumstances  his  immigration  status  would  always  be  viewed   as
    precarious unless his circumstances changed.

12. The appellant met his future wife shortly after he entered  the  United
    Kingdom and his relationship with her therefore  commenced  at  a  time
    when he was here lawfully and that relationship continues.

13. The Judge noted in his decision that when the appellant's status  as  a
    student came to an end he unsuccessfully tried to extend  his  stay.  A
    previous appeal went before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davies
    although it seems  the  main  thrust  of  that  appeal  centred  around
    problems the appellant and his wife would face if they had to leave the
    United Kingdom. His wife had been married and that  marriage  ended  in
    divorce and according to the documents his wife and  her  children  had
    the benefit of a  non-molestation  order  and  the  children's  natural
    father had no direct contact to them.

14. The appellant's  wife  and  stepchildren  currently  have  leave  until
    October 2018 and it was argued that the Judge should at the very  least
    have granted this appellant leave alongside their leave but  the  Judge
    had no such power to what was being argued. The  Judge  had  to  either
    allow the appeal in which case the respondent would decide  the  length
    of leave or alternatively dismiss it.

15. I indicated during submissions that my main area of concern centred  on
    the Judge's approach to the stepchildren's lives in the United Kingdom.
    His findings can be found from paragraph 62 onwards.

16. It is clear that the Judge noted that the  children  and  their  mother
    were, like the appellant, Indian nationals and able to  travel  to  and
    from India without restriction. The Judge also noted that India  has  a
    "more than adequate education system". The Judge  was  sceptical  about
    the claim the children spoke very little  Punjabi  on  the  basis  that
    their mother spoke Punjabi as well as Urdu and English  in  the  family
    home. The Judge concluded that even if they did not speak Punjabi  they
    would be able  to  acquaint  themselves  with  this  language  if  they
    accompanied the appellant to India.

17. The Judge was not satisfied that the children's private life added  any
    weight to the proportionality exercise  but  he  attached  considerable
    weight to the fact that their status remained precarious as their leave
    expired in October 2018. At paragraph 68 the Judge  concluded  that  it
    was the appellant's wife's choice whether she returned  to  India  with
    her children.

18.  Lacking  in  this  decision  is  any  proper  consideration   of   the
    stepchildren's  personal   circumstances   in   the   United   Kingdom.
    Insufficient weight was given to the fact the children had lived in the
    United Kingdom, lawfully, for 13 years. No weight was attached  to  the
    fact that these children were in the middle of  their  A-level  and  O-
    level courses respectively. The fact they had  been  here  for  such  a
    substantial  period  of  time  would  indicate  that  they  would  have
    established a strong private life with both children associating  their
    lives in the United Kingdom as against their short lives in India.

19. The Judge  had  to  consider  whether  the  effect  of  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal would or would be likely to result in  the  children
    having to leave the United Kingdom.

20. The Judge did consider this but ultimately concluded it  was  a  matter
    for the appellant's wife whether she accompanied the appellant back  to
    India in the event that his appeal failed.

21. However, as it was accepted there was a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship between the appellant and the children the  Judge  had  to
    consider  whether  the   appellant's   removal   would   disrupt   that
    relationship. The Judge had to consider  whether,  in  the  round,  the
    appellant's removal was appropriate in light of all  the  circumstances
    of the case, taking into account the best interests of the children  as
    a  primary  consideration  and  the  impact  on  the  children  of  the
    appellant's departure from the United Kingdom.

22. It is here that I find that the Judge erred.

23. The Judge's decision concentrated on what was available  in  India  for
    the children and failed to give any real consideration to what they had
    been enjoying  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  previous  13  years.
    Importantly the Judge attached insufficient weight  to  the  role  that
    this appellant played in their lives.

24. I raised with Mr McVeety whether he had any further submissions on this
    issue and he accepted that it was likely the children's leave would  be
    further extended (although that was not something he  could  guarantee)
    and on further reflection he conceded that the Judge had not  addressed
    the issues identified above.

25. I therefore find there was an error of law in this  decision  and  that
    that error was material.

26. I see no need for any further evidence. I conclude  that  refusing  the
    appellant's appeal would lead to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
    the appellant, the children and his wife.

27. There are exceptional circumstances  meriting  a  ground  of  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules and in doing so I have had  regard
    to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    DECISION

28. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

29. I have remade the decision and I  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Signed                              Date     30/04/2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award in this because the appeal was allowed following
the service of evidence after the date of decision.

Signed                              Date     30/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
