

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/16906/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |    Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th March 2019                     |    On 19th March 2019               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                         Mr Mohammad mizanur rahman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Balroop (Counsel )
For the Respondent:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge S. Meah)  (FtT)  promulgated
    on 4th January 2019 in which the appellant's human  rights  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Background

2.    The appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  born  on  8.1.1986.   He
    entered the UK as a tier 4 student on 23.9.2009 and was  granted  leave
    until June 2014.  His application on human rights grounds on the  basis
    of family life with his British citizen (BC) partner, was refused.   He
    failed to meet the Suitability requirements because he  had  previously
    used a fraud to obtain his English language certificate.

3.   The FtT found that the SSHD had discharged the initial burden of  proof
    and that the appellant failed to provide an innocent explanation.   The
    FtT found that he had used a proxy taker.  The FtT  further  considered
    if there was family life under Article 8 and  where the best  interests
    of the BC child lie.  The FtT  concluded  that  although  a  qualifying
    child, aged 14 months, it was reasonable for the child  and  family  to
    return to Bangladesh.

Grounds of appeal

4.  In grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the FtT erred by  placing
    too high a burden on the appellant to  show  an  innocent  explanation,
    which only needed to satisfy the minimum level of plausibility.

5.  The FtT inadequately reasoned the finding that  there  was  no  innocent
    explanation, having regard to the appellant's evidence  and  failed  to
    consider emails with ETS (A/B page 4-7).

6.  The FtT failed to give sufficient weight to the fact that the child  was
    a qualifying child in assessing where his best interests  lie  and  the
    reasonableness of relocation.

Permission to appeal

7.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted  by  FTJ  L.
    Murray on 4.2.2019 in respect of ground one.   In  granting  permission
    the FTJ took the view that it was arguable that the FtT placed too high
    a burden of proof on the appellant re innocent explanation and  failing
    to take into account the email communication. First tier Tribunal Judge
    Murray found no arguable errors in the remaining grounds.

8.     A renewed  application  to  the  UT  was  refused  by  UTJ  Blum  who
    considered that the  FtT had fully dealt with the  issues  relating  to
    the qualifying child and his best interests.


Preliminary issue

9.   Mr Balroop raised a preliminary issue and sought to rely on part 2
    Regulation 5(2) of the  Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal )Rules 2008
    to make a further application to renew  his application for permission
    to rely on grounds of appeal as to the FTT's finding and conclusions as
    to the best interests of the British citizen child (SF & ors(guidance,
    post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).  Mr Kandola opposed the
    application.  I rejected the application as there was no such power for
    renewal of grounds of appeal in Regulation 5 and further the appellant
    had exhausted all steps open to him; his application  having  been
    rejected by the FTTJ and on renewal by UTJ Blum with which I concur.  I
    proposed to deal only with the error of law argument as to the FfT's
    approach to the ETS issue.

Submissions

10.  Mr Balroop contented that the FtT failed to  refer  to  and  take  into
    consideration the evidence of the communications by email  between  the
    appellant's solicitors and the ETS requesting copies of the transcript.
     This was relevant to the assessment of innocent explanation.  The  FtT
    failed to give anxious scrutiny to the appellant's oral evidence  about
    his attendance at the test centre and taking the test,  which  met  the
    minimum level of plausibility.  The appellant had not  been  asked  for
    further information in cross examination or by the FtT which would have
    enabled the FtT to reach proper findings.  As it was the FtT found that
    the appellant's evidence was vague and lacked tangible detail and there
    was  no  evidence  to  support  such  a  finding.  The  appellant   had
    established evidence that reached the minimum level of plausibility and
    given reasons why he had chosen the particular hearing centre.  The FtT
    disregarded other factors as to the  reasons  why  he  would  not  have
    cheated.

11.   Mr Kandola argued that there was no error  of  law  in  the  decision.
    The FtT had carried out a  fact  sensitive  analysis  in  reaching  its
    findings and decision. The FtT found that the initial burden  had  been
    made out by the respondent and thereafter looked at the evidence for an
    innocent explanation [28].  The FtT was able to  test  the  appellant's
    evidence and reach a conclusion  that  it  was  vague  and  lacking  in
    detail.  The record of proceedings showed  that  there  had  been  some
    questions put to the appellant and there was adequate cross examination
    on which the FtT based its findings of fact  at  [29]  in  addition  to
    which the appellant had produced a witness statement.  It was  accepted
    that there was no reference to the emails  in  the  decision,  but  the
    appellant had been asked about that as per the ROP.

Decision

12.  I find that there was no material error of  law  in  the  decision  and
    reasons of the FtT which shall stand.  It is  contended  that  the  FtT
    failed to consider the minimum level of plausibility in  terms  of  the
    raising of an innocent explanation.  In particular the  FtT  failed  to
    refer to the emails appearing at pages 4-7 of the  Appellant's  bundle.
    The FtT was entitled to  reach  the  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
    evidence that it was vague and lacking in tangible detail.  The FtT had
    the opportunity to assess the appellant at the hearing and to also take
    into account the content of his witness statement.  He was  represented
    at the hearing and  so  had  every  opportunity  to  raise  matters  of
    relevance to his appeal.  I consulted the record of  proceedings  (ROP)
    and read out those excerpts that were legible which in  general  showed
    that there was some cross examination of the appellant, who had  stated
    that he selected the centre because  it  was  near  his  home.   Whilst
    acknowledging that he was not asked for detail about this, it was clear
    that such evidence could have been adduced in any event and was in  the
    appellant's witness statement.  The evidence of the emails was  in  the
    appeal bundle and it is apparent that the  appellant  was  asked  about
    them.  The emails consist of a request for further information and  the
    tape  recordings  of  the  tests,  and  do  not  add  anything  to  the
    appellant's case.  The FtT found that the respondent had established  a
    prima facie case to show  that  there  was  deception  [26].   The  FtT
    considered the appellant's evidence that he  attended  the  centre  and
    took the test, and  it found his evidence to be  vague  and  incredible
    [29-30].  The FtT also took into account that the appellant's test  was
    one of the 10% to be found invalid [32].  The FtT  concluded  that  the
    respondent's evidence  was  more  than  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    appellant cheated in obtaining the TOIEC [36].

13.  I am satisfied that the FtT followed the proper legal approach  [17]  &
    [25] having regard to the various burdens of proof and having regard to
    the evidence before it and did not in my view impose a higher burden on
    the appellant to establish an innocent explanation.  The FtT considered
    all of the evidence before it and found that the  appellant's  evidence
    was not reliable and failed to reach the minimum level of plausibility.

Decision

14.  I dismiss the appeal.  There is no material error of law  disclosed  in
    the decision which shall stand. The appellant's appeal on human  rights
    grounds is dismissed.







                               Signed                     Date 13.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 13.3.2019
                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

