
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16248/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2020 by Skype             |On 3 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MD ABDUR RASHID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Karim, Counsel instructed by Liberty Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT").  The respondent's decision which is the  subject
    of this appeal is dated 20 September 2019, being a decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain on the basis of private life.

 2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was allowed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Young-Harry ("the FtJ"), following an appeal heard on  3
    February 2020.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born in 1985. He  arrived  in
    the UK in November 2010 as a student. His leave was extended on various
    occasions until November 2015. An application made on 25 November  2015
    for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds  was  refused  in  a  decision
    dated 4 July 2016, with the human rights  claim  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded. This afforded the appellant an out-of-country appeal.

 4. It appears from the narrative in the FtJ's decision that following  the
    4 July 2016 decision the appellant made another Article  8  application
    on 18 November 2016, which was also refused, in  a  decision  dated  18
    July 2018. Following  a  threatened  judicial  review,  the  respondent
    withdrew that decision.

 5. On 1 April 2019, the respondent again refused the application  "on  ETS
    grounds" (FtJ [29]) but the appellant was afforded an in-country  right
    of appeal. The appeal was listed to be heard on 30 July  2019  but  two
    weeks prior to the hearing, by letter dated 12 July 2019 the respondent
    again withdrew the decision and invited the appellant to  withdraw  his
    appeal. The application for leave to remain which  is  the  subject  of
    this appeal is that which was made on 18 November 2016.

    The appeal to the FtT

 6. The FtJ referred  to  the  various  documents  that  were  before  her.
    Although the appellant had an asylum appeal  outstanding,  the  parties
    confirmed that it was only Article 8 with which she was  concerned.  At
    that time, a Case Management Review was expected in the  asylum  appeal
    in February 2020.

 7. The FtJ made a number of clear  findings.  She  found  that  since  his
    arrival in the UK in 2010 the appellant  had  been  granted  successive
    periods of leave and had, since the application for further  leave  was
    refused in July 2016, continued to  make  attempts  to  regularise  his
    stay. She accepted that  he  had  integrated  well  and  established  a
    private life which includes his relationships with his  family  members
    and friends in the UK.

 8. She found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") in that he had failed  to
    show that there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
    on return to  Bangladesh.  He  was  likely  to  have  retained  social,
    linguistic and cultural ties there.

 9. She noted that the expectation was that he would return  to  Bangladesh
    at the end of his studies. She also noted that, on  his  own  evidence,
    his parents remained in Bangladesh in the family home, and that he  had
    visited them there as recently as April 2015. She found that the skills
    and qualifications that he had obtained in the UK could be used to  aid
    his resettlement on return, and to  secure  employment.  There  was  no
    reason that the financial support provided by his  brother  should  not
    continue on return to Bangladesh.

10. The appellant's failure to meet the Rules was  a  matter  that  carried
    substantial weight on the respondent's side of the balance, she said.

11. The FtJ then referred to the need to  have  regard  to  any  additional
    factors, outside the Rules,  "compelling  or  otherwise",  which  would
    render the decision  disproportionate.  She  found  that  although  the
    appellant said that he suffered from anxiety and depression,  he  could
    continue to receive treatment for those conditions in  Bangladesh,  and
    any disparity of treatment  between  Bangladesh  and  the  UK  was  not
    sufficient to render the decision disproportionate.

12. She found that his relationship with his niece was not one of  parental
    responsibility and was not,  therefore,  significant  in  terms  of  s.
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002
    Act").

13. In  considering  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  she  was  not
    persuaded that the respondent's decision of 4 July  2016  was  unlawful
    (having regard to Ahsan v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA civ 2009), or at least that  was  not  a  matter  that  was
    before her for consideration, her focus needing to be  on  the  instant
    decision of 20 September 2019.

14. The FtJ quoted part of the respondent's letter of 12  July  2019  which
    was the means by which her decision of 1 April 2019 was reviewed  prior
    to the hearing listed for  30  July  2019  and  which  meant  that  the
    decision of 1 April 2019 was withdrawn. The letter  said,  in  summary,
    that  the  original  refusal  decision  had  been   withdrawn   and   a
    recommendation made to issue "the relevant documentation". It also said
    that it would only be in rare circumstances that the  withdrawal  would
    not result in the issue of the documentation the appellant had  applied
    for.

15. The FtJ found that that letter did not constitute a  promise  to  grant
    leave, although it may have created that expectation in the  appellant.
    She also said that based on the respondent's 12 July  2019  letter  the
    appellant withdrew  his  appeal,  and  that  "Beyond  all  reason"  the
    respondent again  refused  the  application  in  the  instant  decision
    subject to this appeal.

16. She noted that the appeal was listed for hearing on  22  November  2019
    but was adjourned  for  the  respondent  to  provide  reasons  for  the
    "confusion and delay". Before her, the respondent had failed to provide
    reasons, as directed to do so in accordance with directions given on 22
    November 2019.

17. At [34] the FtJ said that she found the respondent's  handling  of  the
    case and inordinate delay unacceptable. The appellant had made  an  in-
    time application and had, since November 2016, been awaiting an outcome
    of his application and he had effectively had to put his life on  hold.
    She said that this, "no doubt", had come at great expense and  distress
    to the appellant. To date, the respondent had  failed  to  provide  any
    reason for her conduct in the case.

18. At [35] she said that whilst the respondent's letter dated 12 July 2019
    did not constitute any promise or guarantee, it inevitably  created  an
    expectation in the appellant which had not been met. She found that the
    delay and poor handling of the appellant's case  significantly  reduced
    the weight  of  the  public  interest.  She  found  that  that  carried
    substantial weight on the appellant's side of the balance such that the
    balance "just" tipped in his  favour.  Thus,  she  concluded  that  the
    appellant's private life considerations outweighed the public  interest
    and there was  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  Article  8
    (private life) rights.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

19. The following is a summary of the grounds and submissions.

20. It is argued on behalf of the respondent that the FtJ failed  to  carry
    out a proportionality balancing exercise and had  failed  correctly  to
    consider the public interest factors in s.117B of the 2002  Act.  Thus,
    there had been a failure to apply  the  "little  weight"  provision  in
    relation to his private life, she failed  to  determine  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant was financially independent  and  had  failed  to
    consider the issue of his ability to speak English.

21. Furthermore, there had been a  failure  on  the  part  of  the  FtJ  to
    identify the "unjustifiably harsh" consequences  in  his  removal  that
    would outweigh the public  interest.  Therefore,  the  delay  and  poor
    handling of the case would not, in itself, lessen the  public  interest
    in the appellant's removal.

22. In his submissions, Mr Tufan relied on the  grounds,  reiterating  that
    the FtJ had nowhere referred to the s.117B considerations. He  referred
    to various aspects of the FtJ's decision in terms of the  factors  that
    weighed against him, for example, that he did not meet the Rules,  that
    he could reintegrate on return, and that he would have been expected to
    return at the end of the period of his leave.

23. The "unjustifiably harsh consequences" had not been considered  in  the
    light of Agyarko v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]
    UKSC 11. Furthermore, this was not a case of inordinate delay, as in EB
    (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  UKHL  41.
    The delay here was only 20 months. She found that there  was  no  clear
    promise made to the appellant. His immigration status was precarious.

24. In answer to my enquiry as to whether the respondent's poor handling of
    the appellant's case could be said to reduce the public interest in his
    removal, Mr Tufan denied that this was so, stating that the  letter  of
    12 July 2019 was issued in error. He acknowledged, however, that  there
    was nothing to support that  contention  and  that  he  may  have  been
    thinking of a different case entirely.

25. Mr Karim relied on his 'rule 24' response. He also referred to  various
    aspects of the  FtJ's  decision,  arguing  that  she  had  adopted  the
    appropriate 'balance sheet' approach (Hesham Ali v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60).

26. It was accepted that the FtJ did not refer to all aspects of s.117B but
    it was submitted that she clearly had those  provisions  in  mind.  The
    documents before her included English  language  certificates  and  the
    appellant had given evidence in English. There was evidence that he was
    financially supported by his brother, and he was entitled  to  rely  on
    such support (see Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2018] UKSC 58).

27. He had made efforts to regularise his stay and the FtJ found that there
    was an expectation created by the respondent's letter of 12 July  2019.
    She found that  no  reasons  or  explanation  had  been  given  by  the
    respondent for her conduct. An earlier hearing was adjourned  to  allow
    the respondent to provide an explanation which was not forthcoming. The
    delay went back to the original application of 2016; it was not a delay
    only from 2019.

28. Even if it could be said that the FtJ's decision was  a  generous  one,
    that was not capable of establishing an  error  of  law  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside, simply because the respondent disagreed  with
    the decision.

29. Here there were exceptional and unique factors.  There  was  delay  and
    poor  handling  by  the   respondent.   Although   Agyarko   spoke   of
    unjustifiably harsh consequences, there was no explanation of  why  the
    respondent reneged on what was said in the letter of 12 July 2019.

    Assessment and Conclusions

30. Although not of particular  relevance  to  the  circumstances  of  this
    appeal, it is as well to note that  the  appellant  no  longer  has  an
    asylum appeal outstanding, his appeal having been withdrawn on 13 March
    2020. Mr Tufan confirmed that that accorded with his understanding.  Mr
    Karim had no information on the matter.

31. As regards s.117B, there is some merit in the contention on  behalf  of
    the respondent in terms of the FtJ's failure expressly to refer to  its
    provisions. She did  expressly  consider  s.117B(6)  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his niece, and found against him in  that
    respect, but the other facets of s.117B were not expressly referred to.

32. However, it is plainly the case that the FtJ had regard to  the  public
    interest, which she expressly referred to at [13], [14], [35] and [36],
    and  indirectly  referred  to  in  other  places,  for   example   when
    undertaking the necessary balancing exercise.

33. In addition, there is merit in Mr Karim's argument that in terms of the
    English  language  requirement  there  was  evidence  before  the   FtJ
    establishing that the appellant is able to speak English, and  evidence
    that he is financially independent. As  regards  the  latter,  the  FtJ
    referred to the financial support that he receives from his brother.

34. She also referred in detail to  his  immigration  history  noting,  for
    example, at [16] that he came to the UK for temporary purposes  on  the
    understanding that he would return to Bangladesh, and referring at [12]
    to the refusal of leave in 2016 but his continued efforts to regularise
    his stay.

35. Whilst, therefore, I do consider  that  the  FtJ  ought  to  have  made
    express reference to the terms of s.117B, I am not satisfied  that  she
    erred in law in not doing so, or that if she did, any error of  law  in
    that respect is material.

36. When considered the public interest, which at  [14]  the  FtJ  properly
    described as "weighty", she was entitled to express particular  concern
    about the respondent's conduct. The respondent's letter of 12 July 2019
    said this:

         "I am writing to inform you that the decision made on 1 April  2019
         to refuse your client's application has now been reviewed.

         The  original  refusal  decision   has   been   withdrawn   and   a
         recommendation made to the team where your original application was
         decided to issue the relevant documentation.

         It will only be under rare circumstances that this withdrawal  will
         not result in the issue of the documentation that you applied  for.
         Such circumstances would be those that, even in  the  event  of  an
         allowed appeal, would cause the Secretary of State not to issue the
         documentation applied for.

         Pursuant  to  Tribunal  Procedure  Rule   17(2),   the   respondent
         respectfully requests that this appeal be withdrawn.

         The Post Decision Team will contact you in due course with  further
         information about any next steps that you need to take.

         This letter is being copied  to  the  Tribunal."  [emphasis  as  in
         original]

37. In a decision dated 24 July 2019, a judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    caused a pro forma "Notice of Withdrawal" to be issued. In summary,  it
    refers to the appellant having  consented  to  the  withdrawal  of  his
    appeal  following  the  respondent  having  withdrawn  the   underlying
    decision. It states that the appellant's consent was freely given, with
    full knowledge of the consequences, because consent was properly  given
    in the light of the reasons provided by the respondent for  withdrawing
    the underlying decision and that, if  represented,  consent  was  given
    with the benefit of legal advice.

38. It is readily apparent that the appellant withdrew his  appeal  against
    the refusal of further leave to remain in the light of  the  respondent
    a)  withdrawing  the  underlying  decision,  and  b)  stating  that   a
    recommendation would be made, in effect, for leave to be  granted,  and
    that it would only be rarely that that leave would not be granted.  The
    FtJ referred to those circumstances at [32].

39. It follows that the appellant's decision to  withdraw  his  appeal  was
    made on the basis of a false premise, namely that he did  not  need  to
    appeal because the respondent was going to grant him the leave that  he
    had sought.

40. The FtJ rejected the  contention  that  the  letter  of  12  July  2019
    represented a promise or guarantee of a grant of leave, noting that  it
    referred to a recommendation  only.  However,  she  did  find  that  it
    created an "expectation" in the mind of the  appellant  which  had  not
    been met.

41. She was entitled to take into account that, despite having  been  given
    ample opportunity to do  so,  the  respondent  had  not  explained  her
    conduct.

42. It is worth reiterating an aspect of the terms of the 12  July  letter,
    namely that it would only be in rare circumstances that the  withdrawal
    of the decision refusing leave to remain would not result in "the issue
    of the documentation you applied for".  In  other  words,  a  grant  of
    leave.

43. The respondent failed to explain to  the  FtJ  whether  she  considered
    those "rare circumstances" existed, and if they did, what they were.

44. It is true that the FtJ did not expressly analyse the competing factors
    before her in terms  of  whether  refusal  of  leave  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences (per Agyarko), but it seems to me that
    that is the conclusion she reached. She undertook a  careful  balancing
    exercise and, as pointed out by Mr Karim, resolved a number of  matters
    against the appellant, revealing a true  balancing  exercise.  She  was
    entitled to take into account  the  delay  in  the  resolution  of  the
    application for leave made originally in 2016, that delay  having  been
    contributed to in a significant way by the respondent.

45. Although the  FtJ  did  not  express  the  matter  in  this  way,  when
    considering the public interest  in  this  case  it  is  legitimate  to
    suggest that the respondent herself does not appear  at  all  times  to
    have been convinced  of  the  public  interest  in  a  refusal  of  the
    application for leave. That is evident from her conduct in dealing with
    the application, and in particular in the letter of July 2019. It would
    appear that at that time it was not thought that  the  public  interest
    did require a refusal of the application.

46. The respondent has not, even now, explained what  "rare  circumstances"
    exist such as to mean that  what  was  not  considered  in  the  public
    interest in July 2019, is now in the public interest.

47. I am not satisfied that  there  is  any  error  of  law  in  the  FtJ's
    decision. Her judgment as to the proportionality of the decision in the
    context of an assessment of the public interest was hers  to  make.  It
    was a judgment made without legal error, based on her assessment of all
    relevant matters. She was entitled to conclude  that  the  respondent's
    decision  amounted  to  a  disproportionate   interference   with   the
    appellant's right to private  life,  when  all  the  circumstances  are
    considered.

    Decision

48. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. Its decision to allow the appeal  therefore
    stands.


A.M. Kopieczek

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            3/11/2020
