
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/16886/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 22 February 2018                   |         On 3 May 2018               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MOHAMMAD AMIR PRINCE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr S. Abbas of Imperium Immigration
Specialists


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
      before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the  Secretary  of
      State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  24  June  2016
      to refuse  a  human  rights  claim.  The  respondent  noted  that  the
      appellant had not produced any evidence to show that he had a  partner
      or children in the UK. He did not meet the private  life  requirements
      of the immigration rules because he had not lived  in  the  UK  for  a
      continuous period of 20 years. In the alternative, he failed  to  show
      that there would be 'very significant obstacles' to his integration if
      he returned to Pakistan. The respondent considered that there were  no
      exceptional circumstances to justify granting leave to remain  outside
      the rules.

3.    In preparation for the  appeal,  the  appellant  raised  a  new  issue
      relating to his relationship with an EEA national. The issue  was  not
      raised in a section 120  notice  or  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  No
      application was made through the proper channels for a residence  card
      as the extended family member (durable partner) of an EEA national.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge heard the appeal on 09 May  2017.
      There is no record to suggest that the Home Office Presenting  Officer
      objected  to  the  issue  being  considered.  He  cross-examined   the
      witnesses to  test  their  evidence  regarding  the  relationship.  He
      proceeded to  make  submissions  on  the  issue.  It  seems  that  the
      Presenting  Officer  did  not  dispute  the  genuine  nature  of   the
      relationship. The judge recorded his  submission  that  the  appellant
      only mentioned his relationship with an EEA partner in  passing  in  a
      letter dated 05 January 2016. He noted that it did not form the  basis
      of his human rights claim at the time. The judge goes on to record the
      following:

           "[The Presenting Officer]  accepts,  however,  that  he  is  now
           entitled  to  do  so,  including  arguing  that  he  meets   the
           requirements of the EEA Regulations and that this is a factor to
           potentially be taken into account in assessing proportionality."
           [29].

5.    The judge went on to assess the claim with reference to  the  relevant
      legal framework relating to Article 8 of the European  Convention.  He
      went on to find that the appellant  did  not  meet  the  private  life
      requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules.   He
      concluded that it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's
      partner to continue their family life together in Pakistan.  In  other
      words, the judge rejected the private and family life claims in so far
      as they might relate to the provisions of the immigration  rules  that
      are said to reflect where the  respondent  considers  a  fair  balance
      should be struck for the purpose of Article 8.

6.    The judge went on to consider whether the decision  was  proportionate
      under Article 8 with reference to The Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006"). He was  satisfied
      that the appellant was in a durable relationship with an EEA  national
      and therefore  met  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006. He noted "the respondent should consider  issuing  a
      residence card under Regulation 17(4)." [37].

7.    The judge concluded that this was a weighty factor that  rendered  any
      decision to remove the appellant  from  the  UK  disproportionate.  He
      concluded:

           "As [the Presenting Officer  acknowledged  in  his  submissions,
           Mustafah indicates that the extent to which an individual  meets
           the Rules is a weighty factor in the proportionality  assessment
           (and the same can be said of the EEA regulations) and it is only
           in  rare  circumstances  that  an  individual  who  meets  those
           requirements will not succeed in an Article 8 claim. In my  view
           there would need to be specific factors  in  favour  of  removal
           over and above general immigration control, and  yet  none  have
           been identified by the Respondent. Accordingly, I conclude  that
           it would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant bearing  in
           mind that he is in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national
           who is exercising treaty rights in the UK. Although  immigration
           control is a weighty factor that in itself does not outweigh the
           expectation that an individual who satisfies the requirements of
           the EEA Regulations will be allowed to remain in the UK, and the
           fact is that if the Appellant makes the appropriate  application
           he is likely to be granted a residence card." [38]

8.    The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, but was only granted permission  to  appeal  on  the  second
      ground:

           "The FtTJ seems to allow the appeal with  consideration  of  the
           EEA  regulations,  it  is  submitted  that  the  appeal   should
           therefore have been at least allowed to the limited extent  that
           the Secretary of State can exercise her discretion  under  17(4)
           of the EEA regulations."

Decision and reasons

9.    Since the First-tier Tribunal decision  the  Upper  Tribunal  reported
      the decision in Mahmud (s.85 NIAA 2002 - 'new  matters')  [2017]  UKUT
      488. The Upper Tribunal found that the First-tier Tribunal must decide
      whether it has jurisdiction to determine a 'new matter' with reference
      to section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
      ("the NIAA 2002").  The judge could not be criticised for  failing  to
      appreciate this requirement because the decision pre-dated  the  Upper
      Tribunal decision in Mahmud.

10.   The appellant did not raise the issue of his relationship with an  EEA
      national until a late stage. The respondent  did  not  object  to  the
      matter being determined by the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing. The
      judge makes no mention of the issue  in  his  decision.  In  light  of
      Mahmud it is at least arguable that the First-tier Tribunal might have
      erred in failing to consider whether it had jurisdiction  to  consider
      the matter with reference to section 85(5) NIAA 2002, despite the fact
      that the respondent acquiesced to  the  issue  being  considered.  The
      point was not taken by the Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal, nor by Mr Bramble at the hearing. In  light  of
      Mahmud, the Upper Tribunal raised the issue of its own motion. For the
      avoidance of doubt, Mr Bramble confirmed that the  respondent  has  no
      objection to the issue being considered as a 'new matter'.  For  these
      reasons I find that any potential error on the part of the  First-tier
      Tribunal is not material because the respondent  impliedly  consented,
      and now makes clear that she consents, to the issue  being  considered
      as a 'new matter'.

 11.  The respondent did not raise the issue  in  the  grounds,  but  in  my
      assessment, the First-tier Tribunal judge was  clearly  right  to  say
      that rights of residence under European law  could  be  considered  as
      part of an overall proportionality assessment under Article 8.

12.   The ground of appeal under section 84 NIAA 2002, which is relevant  to
      a human rights claim, is whether removal from the UK would be unlawful
      under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  ("the  HRA  1998").  The
      Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60  considered  the
      proper approach to Article 8 in the context of  deportation,  but  the
      general principles are equally applicable in other cases.  A  tribunal
      must decide whether removal is proportionate balancing the strength of
      the public interest in maintaining an effective system of  immigration
      control against the impact on private and family life.  In  doing  so,
      the tribunal must give appropriate  weight  to  Parliament's  and  the
      Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of the general  public
      interest, which in practice is reflected in  the  relevant  rules  and
      statutes. If the immigration rules are relevant to a proper assessment
      of where the Secretary of State considers a  fair  balance  is  struck
      with reference to the proportionality exercise under Article  8(2),  I
      cannot see any reason why rights of residence arising  under  European
      law cannot be considered as part of an overall balancing exercise.  If
      an appellant meets the requirements for residence under European  law,
      as the judge found in this case, it must be given weight.

13.   The appellant in this case could and should have made  an  application
      for an EEA residence card through the proper channels as  soon  as  he
      knew that his circumstances had  changed.  In  certain  categories  of
      cases, there is a separate right  of  appeal  arising  under  the  EEA
      Regulations. However, the fact that there is  a  separate  scheme  for
      appeals under the EEA Regulations does not mean that the issue  cannot
      be considered as part of a broad assessment of the appellant's  rights
      in a human rights claim made under Article 8.

14.   The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal do not  seek  to  challenge
      the judge's findings of fact, nor his conclusion  that  the  appellant
      met the requirements of regulation 8. Given that the issue was  raised
      for the first time at a hearing held on 09 May 2017, after the  coming
      into force of The Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2016 ("the EEA Regulations 2016"), the judge  should  have  considered
      the terms of the EEA Regulations 2016. However, it makes  no  material
      difference because the terms of regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations
      2016 are the same.

15.   Turning to the sole ground of appeal as outlined above [8]. The  judge
      was fully aware of the need for the respondent to consider whether  it
      was appropriate to issue a residence card  because  he  made  specific
      reference to regulation 17(4) at [37] of the decision. The  judge  did
      not allow the appeal with a direction  for  a  residence  card  to  be
      granted. It was left open for the respondent to  consider  whether  it
      was appropriate to issue a residence card. For this reason, the ground
      has no merit.

16.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision shall stand.

17.   The appellant raised the European law issue  in  an  appeal  on  human
      rights grounds instead of making an  application  through  the  proper
      channels.  Having  raised  the  issue  without  objection   from   the
      respondent, it was open to the judge to give weight to the  fact  that
      the appellant met the requirements of the EEA Regulations (whether the
      2006 or 2016  Regulations  is  immaterial)  as  part  of  the  overall
      balancing exercise under Article 8.  The  residence  requirements  for
      extended family members of EEA nationals, similar to  the  immigration
      rules, indicate where a fair balance is likely to be struck.

18.   Although the matter was considered as part of a human  rights  appeal,
      it seems appropriate for the Secretary of State to consider whether to
      issue a residence card rather than considering an alternative form  of
      leave to remain given the specific nature of the findings made by  the
      First-tier Tribunal. That is a matter for the Secretary of State.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Canavan
       Date 30 April 2018








