
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16413/2018

                                                       HU/21165/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 29th July 2019                |On the 09th August 2019              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               zeeshan shahzaib
                               zainab zeeshan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Dhanji, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State with permission, appeals against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Solly) (hereinafter referred to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  24th  March  2019
    allowed their appeals against the decision of the Respondent  dated  27
    July 2018 to refuse their human rights claim.

 2. Whilst the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant,  for  the  sake  of
    convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellants are national of Pakistan and are husband and  wife.  The
    second appellant is a  dependent  of  her  husband.  Their  immigration
    history is set out at paragraphs 11-14 of the FtT determination and  in
    the comprehensive decision letter issued by the Secretary of  State  on
    the 27th July 2018. The first appellant entered the  UK  on  26  August
    2006 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) student valid from  the
    7 August 2006 to 31 January 2008. There followed a number  of  in  time
    applications for leave to remain as a  student  in  2008,  and  he  was
    granted leave until 31 January 2009. In November 2008  he  applied,  in
    time, for leave to remain as a Tier 1 general  migrant  and  leave  was
    granted in this capacity from 8 December 2010 until 8 December 2012. He
    made an in-time application for further  leave  as  a  Tier  1  general
    migrant granted from February 2013 until 1 February 2016.

 4. On 13 January 2016 he applied for indefinite leave to remain as a  Tier
    1 general migrant and on 28 June 2016 the appellant made an application
    to vary the outstanding application for indefinite leave to  remain  by
    submitting an application for indefinite leave to remain on the grounds
    of his ten years lawful residence in the UK under paragraph 276B of the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. That application was refused on 27 July 2018 (following judicial review
    and a further decision). The decision letter set  out  the  immigration
    history recited above. His application was refused after  consideration
    of documentation obtained under the tax questionnaire of  16  May  2017
    under the general grounds for refusal. The decision letter set out  the
    discrepancies between the income declared in his Tier 1 application for
    leave to remain made on 14 October 2010 and  as  part  of  the  Tier  1
    application made on 12 November 2012 which were inconsistent  with  the
    documentation from the  HMRC.  The  decision  set  out  the  particular
    figures at pages 4 - 6 and took into account that the later  amendments
    made to  the  figures  and  the  revised  declarations  to  HMRC  which
    increased the level of self-employment  earnings,  cast  serious  doubt
    that the amendments that were subsequently made in 2016 were purely  to
    make the declaration to HMRC to be more in line with those claim to  UK
    V I as part of  the  Tier  1  application.  The  decision  letter  made
    reference to the explanations provided in  the  tax  questionnaire  but
    concluded that the explanations relating to the  accountant's  mistakes
    were unlikely and not credible.

 6. Because of these discrepancies the Secretary of State decided to refuse
    the claimant's application for ILR on the basis of his character as set
    out in paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules, the relevant part  of
    which provides as follows:

         "Refusal of leave to remain, variation of leave to enter or  remain
         or curtailment of leave

         322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of  extension  of  stay
         ... the following provisions apply in relation to the refusal of an
         application for leave to remain, variation of  leave  to  enter  or
         remain or, where appropriate, the curtailment of leave ...

         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused ...

         (5) the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain
         in the United Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct  (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security ..."

7.   In this case the Secretary of State in his refusal letter  of  27  July
    2018 refused the application specifically on  the  basis  of  character
    under paragraph 322(5) of the Rules and did so in the  context  of  the
    application made under paragraph 276B,  as  the  application  fell  for
    refusal under the general grounds under paragraph 322(5) in respect  of
    his character and conduct, he did not meet the long residence provision
    requirements under Pargraphs 276B(ii) and 276B(iii).

8.   The appellant issued grounds to appeal  the  decision  and  the  appeal
    came before the FtTJ on the 11th March 2019. The FtTJ  heard  the  oral
    evidence of the parties and the evidence of a witness.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 26 March 2019, the FtTJ allowed the  appeal.  The  judge
    reached the conclusion from the  evidence  in  its  totality  that  the
    appellant had made genuine errors in the  tax  documentation  and  that
    when he had realised that there had been discrepancies in the documents
    and the accounts submitted to HMRC he  took  steps  to  promptly  amend
    them, to change adviser and to pay the additional income tax  due.  The
    judge found that it was in his favour that he had done so before making
    his application for leave to remain. Consequently the  judge  concluded
    that paragraph 322(5) did not apply and  as  this  had  been  the  only
    reason for refusal of  his  application,  as  a  result  the  appellant
    satisfied paragraph 276B, on the basis  that  he  had  demonstrated  10
    years continuous lawful residence.

9.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    FtTJ Neville refused permission on 26 April 2019.  On  renewal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, UTJ pickup granted permission on 24 June 2019 stating:

         "it  is  arguable  that  the  credibility  findings   are   fatally
         undermined  by  errors  in  the   decision   and   in   consequence
         unsustainable. All grounds may be argued."

9.   The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. Ms Isherwood  on  behalf  of
    the respondent relied upon the grounds of appeal.  She  submitted  that
    the FtTJ misdirected herself  in  law.  Her  first  point  relied  upon
    paragraph 2 of the grounds where it was asserted between paragraphs  34
    and 39 of the decision, the FTT J set out  detailed  figure  work.  She
    submitted that this was irrelevant and the point at issue  was  whether
    the appellant had made different declarations of income and the reasons
    for the discrepancies.

10.  She directed the Tribunal to the decision of R (on the  application  of
    Khan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (Dishonesty,  tax
    return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 384 and the headnote  relying  on
    subparagraph (iv). She  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  had  erred  in  its
    assessment of the appellant's intentions, firstly by  disregarding  the
    appellant's own responsibility when making a tax return. She  submitted
    that the appellant was unable to blame his accountant which is what  he
    did.

11.  Ms Isherwood submitted that given the points  raised  in  the  decision
    letter and the discrepancies were for a number of years, the judge  did
    not grapple with the issues  at  paragraph  46  of  his  decision.  She
    accepted that it was recorded in the decision at paragraph 47 that  the
    appellant was not cross-examined on the details of the changes made  in
    his returns and the reasons  for  them,  but  she  submitted  that  the
    reasoning did not answer the challenges made.

12.  In the written grounds at paragraph 5, the  respondent  made  reference
    to the appellant's evidence concerning the  accuracy  of  the  relevant
    accounts for May 2015 and that he had corrected them by November  2015.
    As regards paragraph 46 of  the  decision,  the  FtTJ  found  that  the
    appellant had sought to rectify these errors well before making his ILR
    application but that was not the case as the application was only  made
    in January 2016  two  months  after  the  tax  discrepancies  had  been
    resolved. This was a clear error of approach.

13.  It is therefore submitted that the  cumulative  effect  of  the  points
    raised  in  the  grounds  undermined  the  Tribunal's  conclusions  and
    therefore the findings made were unsustainable.

14.  As to article 8, it was submitted that the reasons given that it  would
    be disproportionate to return the family to  their  home  country  were
    weak and unsustainable and did not  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control.

15.  Mr Dhanji, counsel on behalf of the appellant relied upon  in  rule  24
    response submitted by him. In that document  it  was  stated  that  the
    decision of the FtTJ contained no material errors of law  and  that  it
    was clear from the decision that the judge had properly had  regard  to
    the guidance given in the case of Khan (as cited above). In particular,
    at paragraph 51 of the decision the FtTJ applied it when  reaching  her
    decision. The FtTJ acknowledged that an explanation from the  appellant
    was required and paragraphs 40 - 50 of  the  decision,  the  FtTJ  gave
    careful consideration to  whether  the  explanation  was  credible.  He
    submitted that it was open to the judge to reach  the  conclusion  that
    the explanation provided was a credible one (see paragraphs 45 - 49) of
    the decision.

16. He therefore submitted that the challenges advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent were nothing more than a disagreement with  the  conclusions
    reached by the judge which were open to her and where an attempt to re-
    argue the merits  of  the  respondent's  case  that  he  had  practised
    deception but failed to identify how the judge had misdirected  herself
    in law.

Decision on the error of law:

17.  I remind myself that I should not interfere  with  the  decision  of  a
    FtTJ unless it has been demonstrated that the judge erred in law and as
    set out in Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  412,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    reminded the court that it is necessary to guard against the temptation
    to  characterise  errors  of  law  what  are  in  truth  no  more  than
    disagreements about the  weight  to  be  given  to  different  factors,
    particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the  advantage  of
    hearing oral evidence.

18.  I have therefore given careful consideration to  the  grounds  advanced
    on behalf of the respondent as set out in the written grounds  and  the
    oral submissions from Ms Isherwood. Having done so, I am not  satisfied
    that the grounds demonstrate any material error of law in the  decision
    of the FtTJ and I shall set out my reasons for reaching that decision.

19.  There is no merit  in  paragraph  2  of  the  grounds  which  seeks  to
    criticise the detailed figure work set out at paragraph 34 - 39 of  the
    decision. It is plain from those paragraphs that the judge  was  simply
    setting out the figures relied upon by the  respondent  to  demonstrate
    the discrepancies in the respective tax years and the documentation. It
    is a recitation of facts to provide some background  evidence  for  the
    findings of fact that the FtTJ went on to make.

20.  Ms Isherwood has relied upon the guidance given at paragraph  37  of  R
    (on the application  of  Khan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018]  UKUT  384
    which is as follows:

         "(i) Where there has been  a  significant  difference  between  the
         income claimed in a previous application for leave  to  remain  and
         the income declared to HMRC, the Secretary of State is entitled  to
         draw  an  inference  that  the  Applicant  has  been  deceitful  or
         dishonest and therefore he should be refused ILR  within  paragraph
         322(5) of the Immigration Rules. I would expect  the  Secretary  of
         State  to  draw  that  inference  where  there  is   no   plausible
         explanation for the discrepancy.

         (ii) However, where an Applicant has  presented  evidence  to  show
         that, despite the  prima  facie  inference,  he  was  not  in  fact
         dishonest but  only  careless,  then  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         presented with a fact-finding task: she  must  decide  whether  the
         explanation and evidence is sufficient, in her  view,  to  displace
         the prima facie inference of deceit/dishonesty.

         (iii)    In approaching that fact-finding task,  the  Secretary  of
         State should remind herself that, although the standard of proof is
         the "balance of probability", a finding  that  a  person  has  been
         deceitful and dishonest in relation to his  tax  affairs  with  the
         consequence that he is denied settlement in this country is a  very
         serious finding with serious consequences.

         (iv)  However,  for  an  applicant  simply  to  blame  his  or  her
         accountant for an "error" in relation to the historical tax  return
         will not be the end of the matter: far from it. Thus, the Secretary
         of State is entitled to take  into  account  that,  even  where  an
         accountant has made an error, the accountant will  or  should  have
         asked the tax payer to confirm that the return was accurate and  to
         have signed the tax return, and furthermore the Applicant will have
         known of his or her earnings and will  have  expected  to  pay  tax
         thereon. If, realising this (or wilfully shutting his eyes  to  the
         situation), the Applicant has not taken steps within  a  reasonable
         time to remedy  the  situation,  the  Secretary  of  State  may  be
         entitled to conclude either that the error was not simply the fault
         of the accountant or, alternatively,  the  Applicant's  failure  to
         remedy the situation itself justifies a conclusion that he has been
         has been deceitful or dishonest and therefore he should be  refused
         ILR within paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.

         (v)  Where an issue arises as to whether an error in relation to  a
         tax return has been dishonest or merely careless, the Secretary  of
         State  is  obliged  to  consider  the  evidence  pointing  in  each
         direction and, in her decision, justify her conclusion by reference
         to that evidence. In those circumstances, as long as the  reasoning
         is rational and the evidence  has  been  properly  considered,  the
         decision of the Secretary of State cannot be impugned.

         (vi) There will be legitimate questions for the Secretary of  State
         to consider in reaching her decision in these cases, including (but
         these are by no means exclusive):

               i. Whether the explanation for the error by the accountant is
                  plausible;

              ii. ii.     Whether the documentation which can be  assumed to
                  exist (for example, correspondence between  the  Applicant
                  and his accountant at the time of the tax return) has been
                  disclosed or there is a plausible explanation for  why  it
                  is missing;

             iii. iii.   Why the Applicant did not realise that an error had
                  been made because his liability to pay tax was  less  than
                  he should have expected;

              iv.  Whether, at any stage, the Applicant has taken  steps  to
                  remedy the situation and, if so,  when  those  steps  were
                  taken and the explanation for any significant delay.

             vii.  In relation to any of the above matters,  the  Secretary
                  of State is likely to want  to  see  evidence  which  goes
                  beyond mere assertion: for example, in a case such as  the
                  present where the explanation is that  the  Applicant  was
                  distracted by his concern  for  his  son's  health,  there
                  should be documentary evidence about the matter. If  there
                  is, then the Secretary of State would  need  to  weigh  up
                  whether such concern genuinely  excuses  or  explains  the
                  failure to account for tax,  or  at  least  displaces  the
                  inference that the Applicant has been deceitful/dishonest.
                  The Secretary of State, before making her decision, should
                  call for the evidence which she considers ought to  exist,
                  and may draw an unfavourable inference from any failure on
                  the part of the Applicant to produce it.

             viii.  In  her  decision,  the  Secretary  of   State   should
                  articulate her reasoning, setting out  the  matters  which
                  she has taken into account in reaching  her  decision  and
                  stating the reasons for the decision she has reached."

21.  It is submitted that the judge failed to have regard to  that  guidance
    in reaching his conclusions and therefore  had  erred  in  law  in  the
    assessment made of the appellant's intentions. In particular, the judge
    disregarded the appellant's own  responsibility  when  making  the  tax
    returns. It was also submitted that the appellant's  evidence  on  this
    point was not credible.

22.  It is plain from reading the  decision  that  the  judge  properly  had
    regard to the guidance given in the decision of Khan (as  cited  above)
    and as confirmed in Balajigari v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  673.   Paragraph
    37(2) of Balajigari states:

         "we would accept that as a matter of  principle  dishonest  conduct
         will not always and in every  case  reach  a  sufficient  level  of
         seriousness, but in the context of an earnings discrepancy case  it
         is very hard to see how the deliberate and dishonest submission  of
         false earning figures, whether to HMRC or to the Home Office, would
         not do so."

23.  However, a case  where  there  are  discrepant  earnings  figures  only
    engages paragraph 322 (5) where there has been dishonesty. Paragraph 42
    of the decision in Balajigari states as follows:

         "A discrepancy between the earnings declared to HMRC and  the  Home
         Office may justifiably give rise to a  suspicion  that  it  is  the
         result  of  dishonesty,  but  it  does  not  bite   self-justifying
         conclusion to  that  effect.  What  it  does  is  to  call  for  an
         explanation. If a next nation once sought is not forthcoming, or is
         unconvincing, it may at that point be legitimate for the  Secretary
         of State to infer dishonesty; but even in that case the position is
         not that there is a legal  burden  on  the  applicant  to  disprove
         dishonesty. The Secretary of State must simply decide,  considering
         discrepancy in the light  of  the  explanation  (or  lack  of  it),
         whether he is satisfied that the applicant has been dishonest."

24.  The FtTJ's approach to the appeal  was  consistent  with  guidance  and
    properly directed herself that where there is no plausible  explanation
    for a significant discrepancy between the income claimed in a  previous
    application for leave to remain and in the income declared to the HMRC,
    the respondent is entitled to draw  the  inference  that  he  has  been
    dishonest and that indefinite leave to remain should be refused  within
    paragraph 322 (5) of the Rules.

25.  The judge acknowledged that a plausible explanation was  required  from
    the principal appellant and set out that explanation at paragraphs 40 -
    50 of her decision. During the appeal, the judge  had  the  benefit  of
    hearing the oral evidence of the appellant and his witness and for that
    to be the subject of cross-examination. At [45] the FtTJ  set  out  her
    assessment of  that  evidence.  She  considered  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence  to  have  been  consistent  with  the  written  evidence  and
    described him as a "straightforward witness" and that his evidence  had
    been given "clearly with no hesitation". Furthermore, it was not simply
    the way in which he gave his evidence because the judge made  reference
    to the written evidence confirming his  credibility.  The  FtTJ  stated
    that the correspondence produced had shown  that  he  had  chased  HMRC
    regularly concerning outstanding tax issues from at  least  7  November
    2015  despite  this  resulting  in  him  paying  more  income  tax,  so
    essentially to his tax disadvantage.

26.  In reaching a conclusion as  to  whether  the  appellant  had  given  a
    plausible  explanation,  the  FtTJ  properly   addressed   the   issues
    identified in the decision of Khan.  As set out above, it was  open  to
    the judge to have regard to the way in which  the  appellant  gave  his
    evidence and she expressly found that there were no inconsistencies  in
    that evidence (see paragraph 45). I can find no error  in  the  judge's
    assessment of the circumstances in which the appellant  discovered  the
    error in his tax affairs. The appellant's explanation was that  he  had
    used a particular accountant and  followed  him  when  he  changed  his
    businesses. Difficulties started in March 2015 when he learned that his
    accounts had not been submitted  and  after  making  several  enquiries
    without success, he approached his witness for advice and was  referred
    to a different accountant. That accountant advised the appellant to ask
    for a form SA302 from HMRC  which  could  be  used  during  a  mortgage
    assessment. When this arrived in May 2015 the appellant realised  there
    were inconsistencies in the amounts declared and therefore undertook  a
    review with his new accountant. He  advised  expenses  had  been  shown
    against self-employed income which should not have been  (paragraph  28
    of the witness statement) and dividends for the year 2012 - 13 had  not
    been recorded correctly and were understated. As a result the appellant
    submitted amended returns. It had not been disputed that  he  had  paid
    the additional income tax due. The letter at page 57 demonstrated  that
    the appellant exercised his right to amend  his  tax  returns  for  the
    relevant years, having found discrepancies in his tax returns. The FtTJ
    found that the appellant had made  approaches  to  amend  his  two  tax
    returns for the two years in issue (2010 -  11  and  2012  -  13)  well
    before making his application on 13 January 2016 for leave  to  remain.
    The grounds relied upon by the respondent submit  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to accept that evidence. It is asserted that the application  for
    ILR  was  made  in  January  2016  only  two  months  after   the   tax
    discrepancies had been resolved. However,  as  the  judge  set  out  at
    paragraph 46 and is recorded  in  the  appellant's  evidence  given  at
    paragraph 44, that he discovered the incorrect figures when  he  wanted
    to apply for a mortgage in May 2015. The documents  in  the  bundle  at
    page 59 made reference to  the  correspondence  between  HMRC  and  the
    appellant that had begun in May 2015 and the letter dated  17  November
    2015 from HMRC confirming the amendments had been made (Exhibit 16). It
    was the respondent's case that  the  amendments  were  made  on  the  2
    February 2016, which was after he had made his application for ILR.  It
    was entirely open to the judge to find on the evidence that he had made
    approaches to  amend  the  two  tax  returns  well  before  making  the
    application in January 2016 by taking into account  that  evidence.  It
    was therefore open to the judge to place weight upon the timing of  his
    approaches to the HMRC to amend his tax  returns  and  his  conduct  in
    making those amendments (see paragraphs 45 and 46).

27.  The judge observed at paragraph 47 that the appellant  was  not  cross-
    examined on the detail of the changes  made  in  his  returns  and  the
    reasons for them. The judge accepted his explanation as  both  credible
    and plausible that the changes  made  were  due  to  the  treatment  of
    expenses and dividends.

28.  Ms Isherwood submits that the judge misdirected  herself  in  law  when
    considering  the  issue  of  the  accountant's  evidence   relying   on
    subparagraph (iv). She submits  that  the  appellant  was  blaming  the
    accountant. However, it was open to the judge to  accept  the  evidence
    that the person who had been involved in the production of the accounts
    initially was not in fact an accountant and had  no  qualifications  in
    this area and not  a  member  of  any  regulatory  body  therefore  the
    appellant was not in a position to make any complaint about him. It was
    also open to the judge to accept as a fact that the  appellant  himself
    had no qualifications in tax affairs. The appellant was not seeking  to
    blame the accountant but setting out the background of the events  that
    had taken place and as the decision in Khan sets out at  (iv),  if  the
    applicant does not take steps within a reasonable time  to  remedy  the
    situation, the Secretary of State may be entitled to conclude that this
    failure  justifies  a  conclusion  that  there  has  been   deceit   or
    dishonesty. On the evidence in this appeal, the appellant had submitted
    amended returns and  had  paid  the  additional  income  tax  due  (see
    paragraphs 41 - 42). The judge  properly  had  regard  to  the  factors
    additionally set out in Khan at (v).

29.  When looking at the decision as a whole,  the  FtTJ  properly  assessed
    the evidence in accordance with the issue raised in the decision letter
    as to whether the appellant had been dishonest in his  declarations  of
    income to the HMRC and the Home Office or merely  careless.  The  judge
    properly had regard to the relevant legal principles and applied  them,
    taking into account the role of the man who was said to be his previous
    adviser  and  that  he  had  remedied  the  incorrect  declaration   by
    submitting amended returns and paying the additional income tax due.

30. In my judgment, the grounds are simply a disagreement with the  findings
    of fact made by the judge. The FtTJ did not misdirect  herself  in  law
    and was plainly aware of the need to examine the appellant's claim that
    his  previous  advisers  had  been  responsible   for   the   incorrect
    declaration made in the forms submitted. The FtTJ had  the  benefit  of
    hearing the oral evidence  of  the  appellant  whom  she  found  to  be
    entirely credible and straightforward  and  who  had  given  consistent
    evidence. The FtTJ property took into  account  the  evidence  and  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion that there had been no dishonesty  and
    therefore there was no relevant conduct within paragraph 322  (5).  The
    judge found that the errors were genuine errors (see paragraph 51). The
    FtTJ conducted a careful examination of the evidence of the  appellant,
    and his supporting evidence both his witness statement evidence and his
    oral evidence together with the surrounding documentation and  that  of
    his witness. The judge was satisfied  the  appellant  had  provided  an
    innocent explanation. It is therefore not the position that  the  judge
    made any legal error in reaching his decision.

31.  Whilst the grounds submitted also challenge the article  8  assessment,
    that would only be arguable if an error of law had been  found  on  the
    principal grounds advanced in relation to paragraph  322  (5).  As  the
    judge had made a finding that the appellant  had  met  the  immigration
    rules under paragraph 276B (10 years continuous residence), that was  a
    weighty factor in the proportionality assessment and on  the  facts  of
    this case were properly determinative as it had not  been  demonstrated
    that there was any  public  interest  in  his  or  his  family  members
    removal.

Notice of Decision:

    The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed; there is no error of
    law demonstrated for the reasons set out above. The decision of the FtT
    shall stand.


     Signed:      Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds Date: 30/7/2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

