
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16738/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House in London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On   3 June 2019                     |On 17 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               MAKSUDUR RAHMAN

                           (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Elahi (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This the claimant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with  the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 14 March 2019  following
a hearing of 6 March 2019. The  tribunal  dismissed  the  claimant's  appeal
against a decision of the Secretary of State, of 28 July 2018, refusing  him
grant to him indefinite leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.    The claimant is a national of Bangladesh and he was on  born  16  June
1986. He obtained entry clearance abroad and entered the UK  on  13  January
2008 having been given  leave  to  do  so  as  a  student.  He  subsequently
obtained further periods of limited leave.  On  27  February  2017  one  day
prior to his limited leave expiring, he applied for leave to remain  on  the
grounds of family and private life (though he does not have  family  members
in the UK) under Article 8 of European Convention on  Human  Rights  (ECHR).
However, prior  to  that  application  being  decided,  he  made  a  further
application on 26 May 2017. That application, in fact, operated to vary  the
previous and as yet undecided application. Then, on  31  October  2017,  the
Secretary  of  State  refused  that  application.  The  claimant  sought  to
challenge that refusal by way of judicial review but such was  unsuccessful.
On 13 November 2017 he made a fresh application for leave to remain  outside
the immigration rules. On 5 January 2018, prior to  that  application  being
decided, he varied the terms of that  application  so  that  it  included  a
contention that he was entitled to indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis
of ten years lawful residence in the UK. It was that application  which  was
refused on 28 July 2018 and which has led to the appeal to the tribunal  and
now to this appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

3.    It was argued before the tribunal that although it might  appear  that
the claimant had fallen short of ten years lawful residence that was not  so
because of the effect of and interaction between paragraph 276A and 276B  of
the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph  39E  of   those   Rules,   and   policy
considerations. The case put to the tribunal on behalf of the  claimant  was
summarised by it in its written reasons (it is not  suggested  inaccurately)
in this way:

         "16.     In  relation  to  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the
         appellant has accrued 10  years  lawful  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom. Miss Rahman relied on her skeleton  argument.  In  essence
         she submitted that where it is appropriate to  exercise  discretion
         under paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules, this has  the  effect
         of  disregarding  any  period  of  overstaying  between  when   the
         application is lodged, and a decision is made. In other words,  had
         the respondent exercised discretion in respect  of  the  period  of
         overstaying from 31 October 2017 until 13 November  2017  when  the
         appellant submitted his application for  further  leave,  he  ought
         also to have to disregarded the further overstaying  up  until  the
         point at which he made a decision on  the  application  effectively
         treating that as lawful residence.


         17.      I suggested that the application of paragraph  39E  simply
         meant the period of overstaying between  31  October  2017  and  13
         November 2017 should be disregarded, but that  the  appellant  must
         nevertheless  still  demonstrate  ten   years   continuous   lawful
         residence. Miss Rahman relied paragraph 276B(v) of the rules  which
         states that 'where paragraph 39E of these rules apply, any  current
         period of overstaying will be disregarded' for her submission  that
         the appellant did not need  to  do  so.  She  also  relied  on  the
         respondent's guidance on long residence applications.  Miss  Rahman
         submitted I ought to find the appellant satisfied paragraph 276B of
         the Rules.


         18.      In the alternative, she submitted the appellant would face
         very significant obstacles to his  integration  in  Bangladesh  and
         that he satisfied paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules.  Although  she
         acknowledged the appellant has family members  in  Bangladesh,  she
         submitted the issue is whether or not he has sufficient ties  there
         in order to be able to re-establish life  and  noted  his  evidence
         that  his  uncle  would  not  assist  him.  She  referred  to   the
         appellant's evidence about the difficulty he believed he would have
         in finding employment on return.


         19.      In relation to the question of proportionality pursuant to
         article 8 of the ECHR outside the Rules, Miss Rahman submitted  the
         appellant speaks English and is financially independent. She relied
         on the detailed submissions and caselaw set  out  in  her  skeleton
         argument and invited me to allow the appeal."


4.    The Tribunal then analysed matters and reached findings as follows:

         "The law and burden and standard of proof


         20.       Paragraph  276A  defines  some  relevant  terms  for  the
         purposes of paragraph 276B which governs applications made  on  the
         grounds of long residence in the United  Kingdom.  It  is  for  the
         appellant to show on the balance of probabilities he satisfies  any
         relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules.


         21.      'Lawful residence' means  residence  which  is  continuous
         residence pursuant to:


             '(i)      existing leave to enter or remain; or


             (ii)      temporary admission within section 11  of  the  1971
             Act (as previously  in  force),  or  immigration  bail  within
             section 11 of the 1971 Act, where leave to enter or remain  is
             subsequently granted; or


             (iii)     an exemption  from  immigration  control,  including
             when an  exemption  ceases  to  apply  if  it  is  immediately
             followed by a grant of leave to enter or remain.'


         22.      Paragraph 276B provides where relevant:


             '276B.  The  requirements  to  be  met  by  an  applicant  for
             indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence in
             the United Kingdom are that:


             (i) (a)   he had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence
                  in the United Kingdom.


             ...


             (v) the  applicant  must  not  be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
             immigration laws, except that where  paragraph  39E  of  these
             Rules applies; any  current  period  of  overstaying  will  be
             disregarded.  Any  previous  period  of  overstaying   between
             periods of leave will also be disregarded where-


                  (a)  the previous application was made before 24  November
                  2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or


                  (b)  the further application was made on after 26 November
                  2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied.'


         23.      Paragraph 39E of the Rules provides where relevant:


             '39E. This paragraph applies where:


             ...


             (2) the application was made:


                  (a)  following the refusal of a previous  application  for
                  leave which was made in-time applied and;


                  (b)  within 14 days of:


                      (i)   the refusal of a previous application for leave
                      or


                      (ii)  the expiry of any leave extended by section  3C
                      of the Immigration Act 1971; or


                      (iii) the expiry of the time limit for making an  in-
                      time application for administrative review or  appeal
                      (where applicable); or


                      (iv)   any  administrative  review  or  appeal  being
                      concluded, withdrawn, or abandoned, or lapsing.'


         24.      The respondent's guidance on Long Residence date  3  April
         2017 which  in  force  at  the  date  of  decision  provides  where
         relevant:


             'Breaks in lawful residence


             This page tells you  about  circumstances  that  break  lawful
             residence for long residence applications and when you can use
             discretion for short breaks in lawful residence.


             Gaps in lawful residence


             You may grant the application if an applicant:


                . has short gaps in lawful residence through making previous
                  applications out of time by no more than28  calendar  days
                  where those gaps end before 24 November 2016.


                . has short gaps in lawful residence on or after 24 November
                  2016 but leave was granted in  accordance  with  paragraph
                  29E of the immigration rules.


                . meets all the other requirements for lawful residence.


             Applications made on or after 24 November 2016


             Where an out of time application  is  submitted  on  after  24
             November  2016,  you  must  consider   whether   to   exercise
             discretion in line  with  paragraph  39E  of  the  immigration
             rules. This must be  authorised  by  a  senior  caseworker  at
             executive officer (SEO) grade.'


         25.      In so far as he relies on article 8 outside the  Rules  it
         is for the appellant to show that  article  8(1)  of  the  ECHR  is
         engaged and if so it  is  for  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
         decision was in accordance with the law, made  in  pursuance  of  a
         legitimate aim and that it was proportionate to the legitimate aim.
         The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities. Section 117A
         to 117D of the 2002  Act  are  relevant  to  any  assessment  under
         article 8 of the ECHR outside the Rules.


         Finding and reasons


         26.      The appellant sought leave to remain on the basis  the  he
         had accrued ten years' lawful residence pursuant to paragraph  276B
         of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appeal  turns  on  two  of   the
         requirements under paragraph 276B; the requirement  to  demonstrate
         at least ten years continuous lawful residence; and the requirement
         that the applicant not to be in the United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
         immigration laws.


         27.      The two  requirements  are  distinct,  and  each  must  be
         satisfied in order for an applicant to succeed.


         28.      The appellant made two applications that are  relevant  to
         this appeal. The first was made on 27 February 2017 and the  second
         was made on 13 November 2017. Both applications  were  subsequently
         varied while they were outstanding.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that
         either of these variations was valid.


         29.      The appellant's application for leave to remain made on 27
         February 2017 and varied on 26 May 2017 was refused on  31  October
         2017 with an out of country right of  appeal.  He  challenged  that
         decision by way of an  application  for  judicial  review,  however
         permission was refused on 21 June 2018. It is not disputed that the
         appellant had continuing leave to remain pursuant to section 3C  of
         the Immigration Act 1971 until 31 October 2017. The application for
         judicial review did not operate to extend the appellant's leave  to
         remain beyond 31 October 2017 pursuant to section 3C.


         30.      The appellant's immigration  history  shows  that  he  had
         always had valid leave to remain and that all his applications  for
         further leave to remain were made in-time prior to 31 October 2017.
         I find on this basis that the appellant's residence in  the  United
         Kingdom from his date  of  entry  on  13  January  2008  until  the
         decision on his application on 31  October  2017  was  lawful.  The
         appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  13  January  2008  and
         therefore as at 31 October 2017, had accrued nine  years  and  nine
         and a half months lawful residence.


         31.      The question is therefore whether or not  the  appellant's
         residence after 31 October 2017 counts towards the requirements  to
         accrue  ten  years  continuous  lawful  residence  under  paragraph
         276B(i)(a) of the Immigration Rules. The  appellant's  position  is
         that it does, relying on paragraph 276B(v) and 39E  of  the  Rules.
         The respondent's position is that it does not.


         32.      "Lawful residence" is defined as set out above. It is  not
         disputed that the appellant has not had leave to enter or remain in
         the United Kingdom at any point after 31 October 2017  and  I  find
         that he has not. It was not suggested  that  he  had  been  granted
         temporary admission or immigration  bail  at  any  point  after  31
         October 2017 and I find that he was not. There was no  evidence  to
         suggest that he  was  exempt  from  immigration  control  after  31
         October 2017 and I finds that he was not. For these reasons I  find
         the appellant's residence after 31  October  2017  was  not  lawful
         residence as defined in paragraph 276A of the Rules. Accordingly, I
         find that the appellant dos not satisfy paragraph 276B(i)(a) of the
         Rules because as at the date of the decision he had not accrued ten
         years continuous lawful residence.


         33.      Miss Rahman's submission is that the  combined  effect  of
         paragraph 276B(v) and paragraph 39E of the Rules is to override the
         need for the appellant to show (on his facts) ten years  continuous
         lawful residence because the last period of residence during  which
         he has been an overstayer is disregarded.


         34.      The respondent 's guidance set  out  above  provides  that
         when as in the case of the appellant, an out of time application is
         submitted after 24 November 2016, he must consider whether  or  not
         to exercise discretion under paragraph 39E of the Rules.  There  is
         no evidence the respondent considered exercising discretion in this
         case. It  is  not  referred  to  in  the  refusal  letter  and  the
         respondent simply asserts that the appellant has  not  accrued  ten
         years continuous lawful residence. If he  did  consider  exercising
         discretion and decide not to, the respondent has failed to  provide
         reasons from that decision.


         35.      The appellant's application made on 13 November  2017  was
         made following the refusal of a previous in-time  application  that
         had been refused.  The application  was  made  within  14  days  of
         refusal of the previous application for leave and within 14 days of
         the expiry of leave extended by section 3C of the 1971 Act. I  find
         that paragraph 39E (2) is satisfied.


         36.      Paragraph 39E applies to the appellant's application  made
         on 13 November 2017. This is relevant to  paragraph  276B(v)  which
         states "where the paragraph 39E of these Rules applies, any current
         period of overstaying will be disregarded". Miss  Rahman  submitted
         that this means the period of overstaying  after  31  October  2017
         until  such  time  as  the  respondent  made  a  decision  on   the
         appellant's application should be disregarded. It follows  in  Miss
         Rahman's submission that although the appellant's  residence  after
         31 October 2017 was not lawful within the meaning of paragraph 276A
         of the Rules, it should be treated as if it were.


         37.      The purpose of paragraph 39E is to set  out  circumstances
         where an applicant is exempt from the  requirement  not  to  be  an
         overstayer and where short periods  of  overstaying  (i.e.  between
         applications)  can  be  disregarded.  Neither  paragraph  39E   nor
         paragraph 276B(v) provides that where  they  apply,  the  appellant
         need  not  satisfy  paragraph  276B(i)(a).   In   the   appellant's
         situation, paragraph 276B(v) and paragraph 39E operate to mean that
         he is exempt from the requirement not to be an  overstayer  between
         31 October2017 and 13 November 2017 when he  made  his  application
         but does not go any further.


         38.      The respondent's guidance relied upon by Miss Rahman  does
         not assist the appellant in my view, as it appears  to  contemplate
         any gaps in lawful residence in previous applications. None of  the
         examples of gaps in lawful residence are  on  all  fours  with  the
         appellant's  situation.   The  appellant's  only  gap   in   lawful
         residence is after his last period of leave extended by section  3C
         of the 1971 Act came to an end. Similarly,  the  example  given  in
         relation to out of time applications  is  not  on  all  fours  with
         appellants situation. The example given is where there is a  period
         of overstaying after the end of leave to remain, and prior  to  the
         submission of an application for further  leave  to  remain,  where
         that application is successful.  In the example, the applicant  has
         a period of lawful residence after the period of  overstaying.  The
         period of  overstaying  in  the  example  is  considered  when  the
         applicant later applies for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of long  residence  and  is  disregarded.  Nothing  in  the
         guidance suggests that an applicant  in  the  appellant's  position
         need not satisfy paragraph 276B(a)(i) or  alternatively  that  they
         are deemed to satisfy it.


         39.      I find that  the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  paragraph
         276B(i)(a) of the Rules and accordingly the respondent was  correct
         to refuse the application for indefinite leave to remain."


5.    Having dealt with all of that the tribunal then went  on  to  explain,
in some  detail,  why  it  thought  the  claimant  could  not  benefit  from
paragraph 276(ADE)(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules nor  article  8  of  ECHR
outside the Rules. I have not found it necessary to set out all  it  had  to
say about those aspects of its decision on the appeal.

6.    Permission to appeal was sought. It was granted on the basis that  the
tribunal might have erred  in  its  consideration  of  the  ten-year  lawful
residence rule requirement and with respect to the quality of its  reasoning
concerning the possible application of article 8  of  the  ECHR.  Permission
having been granted, there was a hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  (before
me) so that consideration could be given as to whether or not  the  tribunal
had erred in law, and if so, what should  flow  from  that.   Representation
was as indicated above and I am grateful to each representative.

7.    Mr Elahi (who had not drafted the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal) argued, that the tribunal had  erred  in  misconstruing  paragraph
276B of the Immigration Rules. Further, there might, he suggested, be  other
ways in which residence might be lawful in  addition  to  those  three  ways
specified at paragraph 276A. He  accepted  though,  I  think  realistically,
that in suggesting  the  tribunal  had  erred  in  relation  to  the  lawful
residence issue, he did not have an easy task. He  also  argued  the  points
made in the written grounds with respect to  article  8  of  the  ECHR.   Mr
Kotas relied upon a "Rule 24 reply" of 31 May 2019 and argued that there  is
a substantive  requirement  that  a  claimant  clock  up  ten  years  lawful
residence and that, quite simply, it was obvious the claimant had  not  done
that. The tribunal's analysis as to that  had  been  correct.   Further,  he
relied upon his trenchant criticism in the Rule 24 reply,  of  a  suggestion
in the written grounds that the ten-year period should run  from  the  grant
of entry clearance rather than from the date of actual entry into the UK.

8.    It seems to me quite clear that  the  tribunal  with  respect  to  the
question of ten-years lawful residence, got  it  right.  It  is  not  always
wholly easy to follow the written grounds but the tribunal's analysis  is  a
model of clarity and logic. I cannot find fault with that analysis  at  all.
Indeed, it does appear that the author  of  the  written  grounds  has  lost
sight of the fact that there is a basic and straightforward ten-year  lawful
residence requirement. On the facts of this case,  as  found,  the  claimant
does not meet that requirement. I agree with the  tribunal's  conclusion  at
paragraph 37 of its written reasons that the provisions in paragraph 39E  of
Rules do not serve to effectively convert a period  of  overstaying  into  a
period of lawful residence for the purposes of paragraph 276B(i)(a).  As  to
the argument, not pursued before me by Mr Elahi, that the period  of  lawful
residence begins with a grant of entry clearance  abroad  rather  than  upon
actual entry, that does not appear to make obvious sense  when  viewed  from
the perspective that time spent living  in  another  country,  even  with  a
grant of entry clearance, is not time spent living or residing in the UK.

9.    As to article 8 within the Rules  and  outside  them,  the  tribunal's
assessment was careful and holistic. Despite  a  criticism  in  the  written
grounds, the tribunal was perfectly entitled to  have  regard  to  what  had
been said in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 when considering the  meaning
of the word "integration". It mattered not, for those purposes, that  Kamara
was a deportation case. Nor is it right to  say,  as  is  suggested  in  the
grounds, that the tribunal had limited itself, when  considering  article  8
outside the rules, to an evaluation of  the  matters  specified  in  section
117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It  certainly  did
consider those matters but what it  had  to  say  at  paragraph  54  of  its
written reasons, encompassing the significance of the claimant's  length  of
residence in the UK, his studies and employment in the UK,  his  friendships
despite the lack of any evidence from any such friends, and the lack of  any
evidence of community ties,  demonstrated  it  was  undertaking  a  holistic
assessment. The suggestion that the tribunal did not  consider  stage  4  of
the "Razgar" process is simply wrong.  It did so  at  paragraph  51  of  its
written reasons and it  was  permissibly  brief  because  it  had  not  been
disputed before it that  any  interference  there  was  with  the  right  to
respect for  private  life  was  anything  other  than  in  pursuance  of  a
legitimate aim. There is a suggestion  in  the  grounds  that  the  tribunal
erred through setting too high a threshold with respect to the  question  of
proportionality at stage 5 of the Razgar process. That  was,  I  think,  the
only point Mr Elahi himself saw fit to pursue before  me  regarding  article
8. But, in any event, the tribunal found the decision to  be  proportionate,
essentially, for the sound and cogent reasons it gave  at  paragraph  54  of
its written reasons. Even  if  it  was  wrong  to  ask  itself  whether  the
Secretary of State's decision did "create unjustifiably harsh  consequences"
for the claimant, no other outcome could have rationally been reached.

10.   I have concluded in light of the above that the tribunal did  not  err
in law. Indeed, in my judgment it conducted a full and  thorough  assessment
as to all of the issues raised by the appeal. Its  conclusions  are  legally
sound and shall stand.

Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve in making of err  of
law. The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is, therefore, dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought before me. I make no such direction.


Signed

MR Hemingway

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated: 12 June 2019

