
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16360/2018
     HU/16363/2018
     HU/16364/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 14 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     jk
                                     hs
                                     ys
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Y Din, Counsel instructed by Global Legal
                    Solutions Ltd Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeals   of   the   respondents,
    hereinafter, "the claimants", against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State to refuse them leave to remain on human rights grounds relying on
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  For  the  reason
    that I have explained below I have allowed  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal and I have substituted a decision in each  case  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal has made  an  anonymity  order  in  this  case.
    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to leave members of the public to identify the claimants.
     A breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I make
    this order because the first claimant had shown that she is a victim of
    domestic  violence  and  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  possible  that
    publication of her identity could not only risk embarrassment but also,
    and much more importantly, make it difficult for  her  to  re-establish
    herself in India. Given my findings that is unlikely but  it  would  be
    undesirable if publicity created a case that does not otherwise exist.

 3. The first claimant was born in November 1975.  She is the mother of the
    second claimant who was born in August 1996 and the third claimant  who
    was born in September 1999.  It  seems  that  the  first  claimant  had
    visited the United  Kingdom  on  an  earlier  occasion  but  all  three
    claimants entered the United Kingdom in June 2010  with  visitor  visas
    valid from November 2009  until  November  2011.   They  have  not  had
    permission to be in the United Kingdom since their visas expired.  They
    applied to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  their  private
    and family lives in July  2015  but  the  application  was  refused  in
    circumstances that did not generate a right of appeal.  On 19 July 2017
    they applied for leave to remain on private  and  family  life  grounds
    when the second claimant was 20 years old and the third claimant was 17
    years old.  That application was decided on 20 July  2018  and  refused
    leading to the appeal that was allowed by the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    which the Secretary of State now appeals.

 4. Although not mentioned in the previous application the  first  claimant
    said that she had  been  the  victim  of  domestic  violence  and  that
    prompted her to leave India and not return.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge accepted that and went on to allow the appeal of each claimant.

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  comprise  seven  paragraphs
    but essentially make two points. First, it is said that the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in accepting that the first claimant had been the victim
    of domestic violence and, second, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    allowing the appeals on human rights grounds because the  circumstances
    did not  satisfy  the  Rules  and  there  were  no  circumstances  that
    justified their being given leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds
    when the Rules were not satisfied.

 6. Paragraph 7 of the grounds asserts:

         "It is submitted that the determination lacks adequate analysis and
         is  devoid  of  adequate  reasoning.   There  is  also  a  lack  of
         consideration of relevant guided case law."

 7. I deal first with the criticism  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    accepted that the first  claimant  had  been  the  victim  of  domestic
    violence.

 8. The Secretary of State's  grounds  assert,  correctly,  that  the  only
    evidence to support the claim emanated from the first claimant.   There
    were no medical reports of any kind even though the first claimant said
    that she was scarred as a result of an attack by her husband.

 9.  The  judge  is  criticised  for  appearing  to  have  regard  to   the
    observations of the translator when  considering  that  evidence.   The
    judge said at paragraph 26:

         "although, I did not see it, [the claimant] pointed to  a  scar  on
         her arm which she said was caused during  that  incident,  and  the
         interpreter (who was sitting next to her) appeared  to  acknowledge
         its existence."

10. If that was the reason the judge accepted the evidence that  the  first
    claimant was the victim of domestic violence then there may be much  to
    criticise.  I do not know why the judge made any reference to the  body
    language of the interpreter.   However  although  that  observation  is
    recorded the judge's reasons for accepting the evidence are much wider.
     The judge said at paragraph 47 of the Decision  and  Reasons  that  he
    did:

         "not find it unreasonable or significant that  the  issue  was  not
         raised until some considerable time after the abuse took place, or,
         indeed, was not mentioned when the 2015 application was made."

11. This finding arises from the judge's understanding that people  can  be
    very reluctant indeed to admit to being victims of  domestic  violence.
    The judge found the claimants to have given a coherent account.  It  is
    not clear to me if the  second  and  third  claimants  witnessed  their
    mother being stabbed or noted that was a contemporary  explanation  for
    their leaving the family home with her but they were entitled  to  say,
    as they did, that their father was showing signs of alcoholism. Further
    the chronology fitted her account of claiming to have been  the  victim
    of domestic violence and then being rejected by her own family and then
    looking for a place of refugee which she found in the United Kingdom.

12. In the Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal she said of  the  first
    claimant:

         "you have stated that you  cannot  return  to  India  as  you  have
         suffered from domestic violence  at  the  hands  of  your  husband.
         However you can return to a different part of India."

13. Whilst recognising that this  is  not  strictly  a  concession  by  the
    Secretary of State that the first claimant was the victim  of  domestic
    violence no issue is taken with that part of her evidence.  I find that
    significant.  Looked at from the first claimant's point of view she may
    well  have  been  reluctant,  for  example,  to  instruct   a   medical
    practitioner to prepare a report showing her scars, said to be  on  her
    arm and stomach, to support her claim that she was a victim of domestic
    violence when she had no reason to think that that part of her evidence
    was challenged.  I decline to criticise the Presenting Officer  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal for challenging credibility. That was a matter  for
    him. It is easy to imagine circumstances (although they do  not  appear
    to exist here) where it is apparent that  a  point  not  put  in  issue
    should have been put in issue and it may well be wrong  to  close  down
    the opportunity of taking points that had not been properly  determined
    on an earlier occasion.  However it is not impressive for the Secretary
    of State to criticise the first claimant for not  producing  additional
    evidence when she had no reason to think that additional evidence would
    be required.

14. The judge is criticised in his approach to the evidence that the  first
    claimant is the victim of domestic  violence  because  he  referred  at
    paragraph 47 of his Decision and Reasons to  a  "well-known  statistic"
    that it "takes an average of 35 incidents of abuse before a  victim  of
    abuse eventually takes action by reporting it to the police".   As  the
    judge  was  quick  to  say,  that  "well-known  statistic"  relates  to
    applicants in the  United  Kingdom  and  it  is  of  limited  value  in
    illuminating the conduct of someone from India.

15. I think it is also right to say that it is not "well-known" to me  even
    though my professional consideration of domestic violence  cases  began
    almost 40 ago. However I have no difficulty at  all  in  accepting  the
    judge's underlying point that the experience of the courts is that  the
    victims of domestic violence can be reluctant  to  say  that  they  are
    victims and I am entirely satisfied that the judge was  entitled  as  a
    matter  of  law  to  regard  late  disclosure  as  a  point  of  little
    importance.

16. The judge was entitled to accept that the distress shown by  the  first
    claimant as she gave evidence was  genuine  rather  than  a  result  of
    histrionics to bolster her claim.  The judge did not, as  is  suggested
    in the Secretary of  State's  grounds,  need  medical  expert  evidence
    before reaching that conclusion.  An incident happened in  the  hearing
    room about which he had to make a finding and there  is  no  basis  for
    criticising the finding that he made.

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has made an  odd  observation  about  the
    scarring but his finding that the first  claimant  was  the  victim  or
    domestic violence is  based  on  the  quality  of  the  oral  evidence,
    including the first claimant's clear distress and having to recount her
    experiences, and how the evidence fits with the chronology and also his
    view that victims of domestic violence can be very reluctant  to  admit
    it and rely on it in support of a remedy.

18. In all the circumstances, and particularly given the way the  case  was
    decided by the Secretary of State, I find no basis for criticising  the
    judge's finding that the first claimant  was  the  victim  of  domestic
    violence.

19. However this does not dispose of the appeal.  It was the  Secretary  of
    State's case all along that the first claimant's status as  victim  did
    not prevent her return to India.

20. The judge accepted at paragraph 49 that as well as being the victim  of
    domestic abuse the first claimant was evicted by her  husband's  family
    from their home in India, that her own family rejected her for cultural
    reasons and that prompted her decision to bring  her  children  to  the
    United Kingdom.

21. The judge noted that the first claimant had established herself in  the
    United Kingdom where she had built up a wide  network  of  support  and
    also found that she would have "little by way of support"  if  she  was
    returned to India.  The judge was also:

         "satisfied that the  first  [claimant]  still  bears  some  of  the
         emotional scars of those experiences and might be considered to  be
         relatively vulnerable as a result."

22. These findings were clearly open to him.

23. The judge further found that there were  bonds  between  the  claimants
    that "go beyond the normal emotional ties existing between parents  and
    adult children and between adult  siblings".   This  should  not  be  a
    controversial finding.  The judge had accepted that the family  removed
    from India when the first claimant was frightened for her safety and at
    least considered herself unable to find a place of safety in  India  to
    establish a new life.  The  claimants  together  had  formed  a  single
    parent  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  where  they  had  established
    themselves and the children had  done  well  in  their  education.  The
    second and third claimants are young men who have not  yet  established
    their own homes. It was clearly open to the judge to accept that  their
    emotional dependence was unusually strong and entitled to  respect.  It
    does not necessarily follow from this that any interference with  these
    relationships is disproportionate.

24. The judge went on  to  find  that  there  would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles" to the  first  claimant's  integration  into  India  if  she
    returned there (see paragraph 57).  This appears to  be  based  on  her
    vulnerability and the length of time spent in the United  Kingdom  away
    from the culture with which she was once familiar.  I  cannot  see  how
    the judge reached that conclusion on the evidence before him.

25. At paragraph 50 the judge found that "after such a long period in  this
    country and because of the reasons for her departure from  India,  that
    she would have little by the way of support if she  was  to  return  to
    India. That may be right but it does not, of itself, explain why  there
    are "insurmountable obstacles" in the way of her  establishing  herself
    in India or how she would fare with the help of her sons.

26. I have found little or nothing in  the  papers  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that illuminated this point. Mr Din referred  to  the  Country
    Policy and Information Note India: Women fearing gender based  violence
    (version 2.0) July 2018. This referred to relocation for  single  women
    and women with children being difficult "because of the need to provide
    details of their  husband's  or  father's  name  to  access  government
    services or accommodation" but it  does  not  deal  with  single  women
    living with their adult sons.

27. It is conceivable  that  there  could  be  problems  where  a  vengeful
    rejected spouse was looking to settle a score although  hard  to  think
    that there is any real risk of such a  person  finding  his  former  or
    estranged partner. There is no reason to think  that  first  claimant's
    husband has either the wherewithal or inclination to seek her out.

28. I consider now the case of the second claimant.  He  was  22  when  the
    judge made his decision.  He was 13 when he entered the United Kingdom.
     I note that at some stage the second claimant had relied  on  a  close
    personal relationship to support his case but that was  not  subsisting
    when his appeal was heard and, properly, he did not pursue  the  point.
    Although the second claimant has lived in the United Kingdom  for  some
    time he has not lived  there  for  more  than  half  of  his  life  and
    therefore  does  not  come  with  the  Rules  and  statute  that   give
    considerable weight to that fact.

29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted the (considerable) evidence that
    the second claimant had established himself in the United  Kingdom  and
    was a credit to his mother's parenting  skills.  He  clearly  wants  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and clearly can be expected to  contribute
    to society if he is allowed to remain.  That  is  very  different  from
    saying that he has a human right to remain. The judge found that in the
    case of both the first and second claimants that all the  factors  "are
    sufficiently compelling reasons in the circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in effective  immigration  control".  That  finding  is
    reasoned but I find explained inadequately.

30. The third claimant probably has the strongest case under the Rules.  He
    was 10 when he entered the United Kingdom and  19  when  his  case  was
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Again he  fails  to  meet  the
    "most of his life" requirement.  Nevertheless he has been in the United
    Kingdom for  a  long  time.   When  the  case  was  considered  by  the
    respondent the third claimant was still a minor and  entitled  to  have
    his case considered with reference to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  HC
    395.  This identifies as a requirement to be met by  a  person  seeking
    leave to remain on private life grounds that at the date of application
    the applicant "is under the age of 18 years and has lived  continuously
    in the  UK  for  at  least  seven  years  (discounting  any  period  of
    imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to
    leave the UK".  Clearly the third claimant  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least seven years and was under the age of 18  years  of
    age.  Nevertheless the respondent  took  the  view  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the third claimant to leave the UK.  There is said
    in the reasons for refusal:

         "However you have spent the majority of your life living in  India.
         You, your mother and brother are all Indian  nationals  in  the  UK
         with no valid leave to remain.   Therefore  it  is  not  considered
         unreasonable to expect you to leave the UK  with  your  mother  and
         brother as a family unit and to return to India."

31. I have difficulty with this.  It appears to be the Secretary of State's
    view that it is reasonable to expect the claimant to return because his
    mother and brother are Indian nationals and he has no  valid  leave  to
    remain.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  analysis   is   no   more
    illuminating.  He said that he found that when the third claimant  made
    his application "it would not have been reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    leave the United Kingdom because of the length  of  time  he  had  been
    here."  The judge's reason for finding removal unreasonable appears  to
    be precisely the same reason advanced by the  Secretary  of  State  for
    finding it reasonable namely that the third claimant had lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for the time that he had.  With respect if this  is  not
    circular reasoning it  is  very  close  to  it  and  is  an  inadequate
    explanation.

32. The judge's conclusion that it was not reasonable to expect the  second
    claimant to leave the United Kingdom when the application was  made  is
    unlawful because it is not explained.

33. The judge does not explain in  any  detail,  if  at  all,  why  he  was
    concerned with the requirements of the Rules relating to a minor.   The
    third claimant was not a minor at  the  time.   Clearly  an  Article  8
    balancing exercising can be illuminated by consideration of  the  Rules
    because that determines where the public  interest  lies  or  certainly
    illuminates it. However in all cases the judge was  required  to  apply
    the provisions of Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and particularly Section 117B(4)(a) which provides that little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when he is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  The judge has  given
    significant weight to private life established in  these  circumstances
    and has not explained why, notwithstanding the statutory obligation, he
    has allowed the appeals.

34. I do not agree that the judge should have applied the rules  applicable
    at the date of application. This is not an appeal under the  rules  but
    by an adult male whose case on article 8 grounds fell to be  determined
    primarily under part 5A of the 2002 Act. I do not agree that rules  and
    policies intended to protect children should be applied to adults.

35. I do appreciate that the judge had  made  some  clear  and  permissible
    findings that are favourable to the claimants.  The  second  and  third
    claimants, as is to be expected, have a good  command  of  the  English
    language.  The  first  claimant  has  some  understanding.   The  first
    claimant has taken part in community life and made friends.   The  same
    can be said of the second and third claimants who have taken  advantage
    of the educational opportunities in a  way  that  is  wholly  to  their
    credit.  In the case of the first claimant the judge  has  decided,  in
    accordance with  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  that  "there  will  be  very
    significant obstacles" to her integration  into  India.   That  is  not
    explained.  In the circumstances I find  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    erred in law and I set aside the decisions in each case.

36. I have read carefully the witness statements provided by  each  of  the
    three claimants.  They have closed their minds to return to  India  and
    that makes it difficult to analyse any difficulties they might actually
    face.  Obviously there would be an immediate disruption of their social
    networks.  Obviously none  of  the  claimants  would  have  any  recent
    experience of life in modern India and the second and  third  claimants
    no experience at all of living there as  adults.   This  is  clearly  a
    disadvantage.  Nevertheless I cannot see anything that would support  a
    finding that  there  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    claimants' integration into life in India if they were  returned  as  a
    family unit.  That is important.  There are difficulties facing  single
    women in India and particularly single women who have  been  ostracised
    after marital breakup.  They may well have existed in the case of these
    claimants and may be the reason that she  left  India  with  two  young
    boys. If the claimants had  sought  asylum  things  may  have  taken  a
    different course.

37. I am a very long way from saying that no female citizen of India  whose
    marriage has broken down can return there but I am  willing  to  accept
    that there may be some who fall into that category.  This is not such a
    case and that is why I have not spent time analysing  that  chance.   I
    see nothing in  the  third  claimant's  witness  statement  that  would
    justify a conclusion that there would be very significant obstacles  in
    this case.  It follows that I cannot see how his  claim  could  succeed
    under the Rules, or more importantly, under Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

38. The same has to be said for the second  claimant.   He  is  in  a  less
    satisfactory position because he has little more experience of life  in
    India but not very much.  Both second and third  claimants  present  as
    able young people who have had a good education in the United  Kingdom.
    However I am obliged by statute to give little weight to their  private
    life established in the  United  Kingdom  where  they  had  been  there
    unlawfully and following that obligation I can see no  basis  on  which
    their cases can succeed.  That  being  so  for  the  second  and  third
    claimants the first claimant is swept along with them.  It has been the
    Secretary of State's intention throughout to remove them  as  a  family
    unit.  The first claimant would not have  the  social  isolation  of  a
    single woman.  She would be supported by two able adult sons.

39. I think I understand why the First-tier Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal.
    He was concerned about the first claimant being the victim of  domestic
    violence.  She gave her evidence persuasively and truthfully and had  a
    sad story to tell. The judge was also impressed with the lives they had
    made for themselves in the United Kingdom but I can  see  nothing  here
    that would lead to the appeal being  allowed  without  giving  unlawful
    weight to a "private life" established  when  the  person  was  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully and where a finding that there would be "very
    significant obstacles" to integration into India  is  unsustainable  on
    the evidence produced.  No application has been made to produce further
    evidence.

40. This is an appeal that should not have been allowed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and ought not to succeed.

Notice of Decision

41. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  allow  the
    Secretary of State's appeal and I substitute a decision dismissing  the
    appeals of each of these claimants.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 7 August 2019                  |

