
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/16031/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at RCJ                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th July 2017                         |On 19th July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RSS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Raza, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
Immigration
     Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the  claimant")  is  a
    citizen of India born on 16th July 1979.  He is married  to  a  British
    citizen and they have two children together, namely a daughter born  on
    5th July 2017 and a son born on 3rd December 2009.  These children  are
    also British citizens.

2.   The claimant entered the United Kingdom  unlawfully  in  November  2000
    and a subsequent application for asylum was refused.  He absconded  and
    was later arrested on  27th  February  2002  following  an  assault  of
    wounding by the use of a knife.  He failed to  surrender  to  bail  and
    absconded yet again, this time fleeing  to  the  Netherlands  where  he
    lived for a number of years until his  arrest  on  20th  November  2009
    under a European arrest warrant and was extradited back to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He was convicted on 17th June  2010  and  an  eighteen  month
    prison sentence imposed.

3.   Subsequently, he was served with a  deportation  order  and  lodged  an
    appeal against that.  The appeal was successful and  the  claimant  was
    granted three years'  discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Such was valid until 5th March 2015.  On 24th  February  2015
    the claimant submitted an application for further leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom but on 9th November 2015 a decision was made by  the
    Secretary of State to deport the claimant.  That notice to  deport  was
    upheld and a  refusal  notice  dated  22nd  June  2016  was  submitted.
    Reliance is placed by the Secretary of State upon the guidance  as  set
    out in Chapter 13 of the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  which
    provides that a person previously granted leave on the basis of Article
    8 will only be given further leave if he qualifies under the Article  8
    provisions as set out in paragraphs 398  to  399A.   The  Secretary  of
    State contends that the claimant  does  not  fall  within  any  of  the
    exceptions in Section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

4.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt on  28th  October
    2016.  In a  very  detailed  determination  the  Judge  looked  at  the
    circumstances of the claimant, his wife and family and  concluded  that
    in, seeking to strike a fair balance between the rights of the claimant
    and the public  proper  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  best
    interests of the children, and that accordingly the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

5.   Challenge is  made  to  the  overall  framework  of  the  decision,  in
    particular to paragraph 13 of the  determination  in  which  the  Judge
    applied MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 finding as
    he did that the focus was to have been entirely upon an  evaluation  of
    the consequences and  impact  of  the  individual  concerned.   "Unduly
    harsh" involved more than  "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable,
    unwelcome or merely difficult and challenging".

6.   The Secretary of State seeks to argue and with  some  merit  that  that
    approach as set out under MAB is no longer the correct approach in  the
    light of the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda)  &  Anor
    [2016] EWCA Civ 617.   It  is  necessary  to  determine  in  particular
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in a country  to
    which the person is being deported and also whether it would be  unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the United Kingdom without the  person
    to be deported.  It was necessary in making that assessment to bear  in
    mind the public interest in removal as part  of  the  overall  context.
    The more pressing the public interest in removal the harder it would be
    to show that the effect on child or partner would be unduly  harsh  and
    that the expression "unduly harsh" in Section 117C(5) and  Rule  399(a)
    and (b) require regard to be had to all the circumstances including the
    criminal's immigration and criminal history.

7.   Thus it is said on behalf of the Secretary of State that  the  analysis
    conducted by the Judge in relation to the claimant fails to focus  upon
    the relevant issues and is therefore defective.

8.   Mr Raza, who represents the claimant accepts that there  was  an  error
    of law in paragraph 13 but submits that when viewed as a  whole  it  is
    entirely apparent that the  Judge,  in  considering  all  the  personal
    circumstances of the claimant, the claimant's wife  and  children,  had
    clearly come to the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh to  remove
    the claimant from the jurisdiction.  Thus he submits that if the  Judge
    had applied MM that the outcome would have been the same on  a  factual
    basis.

9.   One of the difficulties in this matter is that  apart  from  mentioning
    the meaning of "unduly harsh" in paragraph 13 in the  context  of  MAB,
    the Judge does not highlight that matter specifically in  the  judgment
    that is set out.

10.  The consideration of "unduly harsh" occurs at a  number  of  points  in
    the legal framework, particularly given the application of  the  policy
    applied by the Secretary of State.

11.  Under paragraph 398 deportation  is  deemed  to  be  conducive  to  the
    public good for someone who  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at
    least twelve months.  In the circumstances  it  will  be  necessary  to
    consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies so as  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.

12.  In that connection it is necessary to consider  whether  paragraph  399
    applies, bearing in mind that there is no issue  other  than  that  the
    claimant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  his
    children, both of whom are British citizens and both of whom have lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom since 31st December 2009.  The issue
    therefore would be whether it was unduly harsh for the children to live
    in a country to which the claimant is to be deported  or  unduly  harsh
    for them to remain without him.

13.  It is perhaps difficult to argue that  paragraph  399  applies  to  the
    relationship with his wife as the  relationship  was  formed  when  the
    claimant was living in the Netherlands at the material time.

14.  However, Section 117C  sets  out  additional  considerations  in  cases
    involving foreign criminals, addressing the more  serious  the  offence
    committed the greater the public interest in deportation,  setting  out
    exception (1) or exception (2).  Exception (2) is the more appropriate,
    namely whether the claimant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with  a  qualifying  partner  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and that the effect of deportation
    on either partner or child would be unduly harsh.

15.  Mr Duffy on behalf of the Secretary of State invites me  to  find  that
    this is a matter that should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a full fact-finding analysis to  be  conducted  in  the  light  of  the
    guidance provided in MM.  Mr Raza, on behalf of the  claimant,  submits
    that  on  a  proper  reading  of   the   determination   all   relevant
    considerations have been made and proper findings  on  relevant  issues
    set out.

16.  In considering that argument I bear in mind that  it  is  a  very  fact
    specific analysis and  one  conducted  in  great  detail.   Significant
    particularly that a previous decision of the Tribunal  was  taken  into
    account by way of background.  The starting point  for  the  claimant's
    partner is that she met him when he was in the Netherlands working as a
    concrete finisher.  The relationship was  formed  in  2001.   They  had
    hoped to marry, but her father had refused his consent because  of  the
    religious difference, the claimant being Sikh  and  she  being  Muslim.
    She joined the claimant in 2003.   She  was  unaware  that  he  was  an
    absconder.  He obtained employment and they were married in April 2005.
     Their first child was born in July 2007 in Amsterdam.   By  this  time
    the claimant had secured legal residence in  the  Netherlands  and  had
    purchased a property in which he, she and the child lived.

17.  On 20th November 2009 the claimant was arrested in the  Netherlands  on
    a European arrest warrant and extradited to  the  United  Kingdom.   In
    December 2009 their second son was born.  As was  recognised  by  Judge
    Holt such was a major upheaval for the family.  The claimant's wife had
    bought a flat in her name and was forced to abandon the flat  and  sell
    it at auction, losing much money in the process and still  owing  money
    to a bank in Holland.  There were financial challenges which survive to
    the current time.  Having thought that they had a  secure  family  life
    that security ended abruptly in the circumstances described.

18.  Judge Holt noted at paragraph  17  that,  following  his  release  from
    custody, the claimant and his wife managed to set up their own business
    in February 2012.  It was a  successful  business  with  two  full-time
    employees.  They are currently in the throes of a planning  application
    to acquire another business and to develop further.  It  is  recognised
    that all parties, including the claimant are working  hard  to  develop
    the business in a lawful and practical way.  As was made clear  to  the
    Judge and recorded at paragraph 19, although  there  are  other  family
    members living in the area they would not be able to assist greatly  in
    helping the business and were the  claimant  to  be  removed  from  the
    jurisdiction essentially she would be left on her own to run and manage
    the business as best she can.

19.  One of the shortcomings, if one can put it this  way,  in  relation  to
    the determination that it sets out a number  of  facts  that  sometimes
    seems to fail to draw the various strands together.  Clearly the  Judge
    had in mind, not only the difficulties that would  be  created  by  the
    removal of the claimant in terms of the business, but also historically
    that one secure life had been disrupted, both in terms  of  employment,
    family life, security and now  another  disruption  would  seem  to  be
    adding to it in a matter of a few years.

20.  It seems to me that the cumulative effect  of  the  experience  in  the
    Netherlands and the potential adverse outcome to the  business  in  the
    United Kingdom is such as to meet the threshold of unduly harsh.

21.  The previous determination also considered the difficulties  which  the
    claimant's wife would have if she accompanied the claimant to India  on
    account of their mixed race.  Such a course is relevant leading to  the
    decision by the claimant's wife that she would not in fact be  able  to
    relocate with him and would remain in the United Kingdom.

22.  So far as the children are concerned,  once  again  the  background  is
    important, although perhaps to a lesser extent.  The first  child  grew
    up for a number of years in Amsterdam and then  had  to  relocate  when
    very young, and the second child has no experience of the  Netherlands.
    That having been said, it is clearly important  for  children  to  have
    some stability.  The Judge at paragraph 22 looked at the nature of  the
    integration of the wife and children in the UK,  integration  into  the
    local community, the educational milestones of the ongoing  educational
    needs and expressed the matter in this way at paragraph 22:-

     "Remaining in the UK, Ms N and the children would then  suffer  massive
         disruption as they attempted to set up a wholly  different  pattern
         of life and lifestyle without the appellant being present".

23.  At paragraph 24 the interests of the children are considered  not  only
    in the stability of their school life, but  in  the  uncertainties  and
    stresses were they to return to India.  In some ways they would  suffer
    much as their mother would suffer in terms of a mixed  religion  family
    living in a Sikh area.  Again, it is to be noted  that  they  would  be
    returning to somewhere  where  there  was  an  absence  of  any  family
    support.  This  again  was  detailed  as  from  the  previous  Tribunal
    hearing.  The claimant indicated he had no close family left in  India.
    His mother and brother live in Canada.  He has relatives in Holland and
    the United Kingdom.  Apart from two elderly  uncles  who  live  in  the
    countryside there would be no-one to assist him or  his  family  if  he
    were to return.  He believes that there would  be  any  member  of  his
    family in a financial position to offer him support.  His wife has  not
    been to India and does not speak the language.  She  had  confirmed  to
    the Tribunal her fears that she would be forced to convert, but even if
    not, to have a lack of ability  to  openly  practise  her  faith.   The
    Tribunal who heard the matter considered the issue  of  inter-religious
    marriages and the background material and concluded at paragraph 80  of
    the determination dated 7th February 2011 that it was not reasonable to
    expect the claimant or the claimant's wife and children to go to India,
    including certain of the concerns that had been expressed.

24.  In the grounds of appeal,  as  originally  drafted,  the  Secretary  of
    State notes the conclusion of the Judge that it would be very difficult
    for a single mother with two children to  run  a  business,  indicating
    that such falls short of the requirement of  duly  harsh  and  makes  a
    similar comment in relation  to  reintegration  in  a  country  by  the
    claimant.  The point is made relying upon SP (Nigeria) that the  common
    occurrence of deportation is that there will be family separation,  but
    such does not without more make it unduly harsh.

25.  In that connection I note the wording of the Judge in paragraph  22  in
    the finding that the claimant's wife and children would suffer  massive
    disruption as they attempted to set up a wholly  different  pattern  of
    life and lifestyle without the claimant being present.

26.  It seems to me overall that were the Judge to have been invited to  ask
    the proper question as to whether  or  not  the  situation  facing  the
    children and/or spouse was unduly harsh  the  answer  would  have  been
    "yes", and reasonably so in the light  of  the  detail  that  has  been
    presented.  Thus so far as paragraph 399 is concerned it will be unduly
    harsh for the qualifying children to live in a  country  to  which  the
    claimant was to be deported and it would be unduly harsh  for  them  to
    remain without him, he having  been  deported.  It  seems  to  me  that
    exception (2) as set out in Section 117C also has application  in  this
    case.

27.   Insofar  as  balancing  the  risk,  of  course  the  matter  goes   to
    proportionality.  As was recognised the more serious  the  offence  the
    greater the public interest in  removal.   In  this  case  however  the
    claimant was convicted in 2010, was granted leave to remain and has not
    reoffended since.  It seems to me that that is something  that  was  of
    importance to be placed in the overall balance as it was.

28.   Although the Judge was in error in applying the wrong  test,  had  the
    Judge  applied MM (Uganda) & Anor, I find that the outcome of a factual
    analysis would be the same, such that there is therefore no materiality
    in the error so far as the decision is concerned.  Even if I  am  wrong
    on that matter, for the reasons that I have indicated, had I sought  to
    remake the decision the result would have been the same.

Notice of Decision

29.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal by the Secretary of State  is
    dismissed.  The decision of the Immigration Judge stands,  namely  that
    the appeal against the deportation order is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.


30.  I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed
              [pic]                 Date 18 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD



