
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16073/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 April 2019                    |On 10 April 2019                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 TIRHAS [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal of Global Migration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Anthony promulgated on 12 November 2018, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.



Background

3.    The Appellant is an Eritrean national who  was  born  on  24  December
2000. The Appellant applied for entry clearance to  join  her  brother,  who
has been granted  refugee  status  in  the  UK.   On  25  October  2017  the
respondent refused the Appellant's application.



The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Anthony  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.     Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  19  December  2018  Judge
O'Callaghan granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    The grounds assert that the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  give
    proper weight to relevant evidence, to apply the standard of proof when
    considering the evidence in the  round  and  failed  to  undertake  the
    required proportionality exercise under article 8.

    3.     I remind myself that the hurdle as to "arguable" is a  low  one.
    The matter of weight to give to evidence is one that is a matter for  a
    Judge. Though the Judge took care to consider the evidence  before  the
    Tribunal, it is arguable that inadequate consideration was given to the
    accepted facts that the appellant travel to Ethiopia with her sister-in-
    law and remains living in this country as a minor. No  express  finding
    is made as to whether she is temporarily cared for and how such care is
    arranged/paid for. Such findings may well influence any  decision  made
    upon remittances and dependency which form part of the  proportionality
    assessment.

    4.     I grant permission on all grounds."



The Hearing

6.    For the appellant, Mr Afzal moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told  me
that it is still accepted that the appellant  cannot  meet  the  immigration
rules, but it is argued the appellant  should  succeed  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds outside the rules.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  gave  inadequate
consideration to the fact that the appellant is a minor. He took me to  [15]
of the decision and told me that there the Judge ignored evidence  that  was
before the tribunal. He told me that the  Judge  did  not  take  account  of
evidence of contact between the appellant and sponsor, nor did he deal  with
the evidence provided by the sponsor's wife. He told me  that  the  decision
contains no assessment of the credibility of the witnesses. He told me  that
the Judge's proportionality assessment is inadequate and  urged  me  to  set
the decision aside and remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

7.    For the respondent, Mr Walker referred me to the respondent's rule  24
response which  says  that  the  Judge's  job  was  hampered  by  vague  and
inconsistent evidence, but Mr Walker conceded  that  Mr  Afzal  makes  valid
criticisms of the Judge's findings and the grant  of  permission  to  appeal
focuses correctly on the lack of findings  of  fact  about  the  appellant's
current circumstances. He told  me  that  the  decision  is  tainted  by  an
inadequacy of fact finding and asked to remit this case  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be heard of new.



Analysis

8.    The appellant is the sister of  the  sponsor.  The  sponsor  has  been
granted refugee status in the UK. The  appellant  accepts  that  she  cannot
meet the requirements of  paragraph  352D  of  the  immigration  rules.  The
respondent accepts that the appellant was born on  20/12/2000  and,  at  the
date of the respondent's  decision,  was  in  the  care  of  a  guardian  in
Ethiopia. In the decision notice the respondent says that  there  are  other
categories of entry clearance applications which the appellant can pursue.

9.    The appellant's bundle contains statements from the  sponsor  and  the
sponsor's wife, together with evidence of the sponsor's visits  to  Ethiopia
to spend time with the appellant in 2017 & 2018, evidence  of  post-decision
communication between the sponsor and the appellant, and evidence of  travel
between the UK & Ethiopia by the appellant & some of his friends.

10.    Between  [16]  and  [22]  the  Judge  considers   the   evidence   of
communication and financial  contribution,  but  the  Judge  does  not  make
adequate findings of fact. He summarises the evidence and then  rejects  the
evidence, but the Judge  does  not  properly  explain  why  he  rejects  the
evidence. At [23] and [24] the Judge provides  a  superficial  consideration
of the relationship between the appellant and sponsor and  does  not  factor
into his consideration the appellant's circumstances in  Ethiopia  nor  does
he weigh the impact of the loss of the appellant's mother in 2009.

11.   In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160
(IAC) the Tribunal said that a review of the  jurisprudence  discloses  that
there is no general proposition that Article 8 can  never  be  engaged  when
the family life it is sought to establish is between adult  siblings  living
together.  Rather  than  applying  a  blanket  rule  with  regard  to  adult
children, each case should be analysed on its own facts, to  decide  whether
or not family life exists, within the meaning of Article 8(1).  Whilst  some
generalisations are possible, each case is fact-sensitive.

12.   It is the sponsor's position that he is the oldest surviving  male  in
the family and that he fulfils a quasi-parental role to  the  appellant.  It
is the appellant's  position  that  she  is  in  the  temporary  care  of  a
neighbour and has no other family members in Ethiopia. The sponsor  and  the
appellant are Eritrean nationals, yet the appellant lives in  Ethiopia.  The
Judge's  decision  is   devoid   of   consideration   of   the   appellant's
circumstances in Ethiopia. The Judge says nothing of  the  security  of  the
appellant's right to reside in Ethiopia. The Judge's findings  at  [24]  and
[25] are inadequately reasoned. The accepted facts are  that  the  appellant
travelled  to  Ethiopia  with  her  sister-in-law  and,  at  the   date   of
application, is alone in Ethiopia as a minor. Those accepted  facts  do  not
feature in the Judge's proportionality assessment.

13.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

14.    Because  the  fact-finding  exercise  is  incomplete  &  because  the
decision contains no meaningful analysis of relevant evidence lead  for  the
appellant, the decision is tainted by material  errors  of  law.  I  set  it
aside.

15.   There was an inadequacy of fact finding in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
but there is sufficient material available to allow me to substitute my  own
decision.



My Findings of Fact

16.   The appellant is an Eritrean national, born on [~] 2000.  She  is  the
sister of [BB] (the sponsor) who was born on [~] 1985. The  sponsor  entered
the UK in 2015 and was granted refugee status on 14 June 2016.

17.   In January 2016 the sponsor contacted his wife in  Eritrea  and  asked
his wife to travel to Ethiopia with the  appellant  and  his  two  brothers.
The appellant and the sponsor's wife successfully crossed  from  Eritrea  to
Ethiopia, but on the journey to Ethiopia the appellant's two  brothers  were
detained by the authorities.

18.   On 14 August 2017, the appellant  and  the  sponsor's  wife  submitted
applications (from Ethiopia) for entry clearance to join the sponsor in  the
UK.  The  sponsor's  wife's  application  was  successful.  The  appellant's
application was refused in a decision dated 25 October 2017. It  is  against
that decision that the appellant appeals.

19.   The appellant is not the child  of  a  parent  who  has  been  granted
refugee status in the  UK  and  so  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules.

20.   After the grant of entry clearance  in  October  2017,  the  sponsor's
wife left Ethiopia and was reunited with the sponsor in the UK.  Before  the
sponsor's wife left Ethiopia, she persuaded a  neighbour  to  care  for  the
appellant, who at that time was only 16 years of age.  The  sponsor  started
to send funds to Ethiopia for the appellant's maintenance. The neighbour  to
whom the appellant was entrusted was waiting for  entry  clearance  to  join
her husband in Germany. In November 2017 the neighbour who  was  caring  for
the appellant contacted the sponsor to say that  she  was  leaving  Ethiopia
and could no longer care for the appellant.

21.   On 23 December 2016 the sponsor travel to Ethiopia where  he  remained
until 16 January 2017. Whilst there, he found a female adult (known  to  the
appellant) who agreed to look after the appellant. Before leaving  Ethiopia,
he placed that person in funds for the maintenance of the appellant.

22.   In March 2018 the sponsor was telephoned by the lady  who  was  caring
for the appellant and was told  that  she  would  no  longer  care  for  the
appellant because she was leaving Ethiopia. On  6  April  2018  the  sponsor
returned to Ethiopia. He stayed there  until  19  May  2018  while  he  made
arrangements for a third suitable adult female to care  for  the  appellant.
It is in that person's care that the appellant remains.

23.   The sponsor continues to send funds to Ethiopia  for  the  appellant's
maintenance. He relies on friends  and  relatives  travelling  to  and  from
Ethiopia to deliver the funds to the lady who cares for the  appellant.  The
appellant and sponsor speak daily and text  message  each  other  regularly.
The appellant has no other  family  members  in  Ethiopia.  The  appellant's
mother died in 2009. Neither the appellant nor the sponsor know where  their
remaining siblings are.

24.   After  the  loss  of  their  parents  in  2009,  the  sponsor  assumed
responsibility for the appellant and for his two other brothers. Before  the
sponsor fled to the UK he lived in the  same  house  as  his  wife  and  the
appellant. He fulfilled a parental role to the  appellant,  which  he  still
accepts.



The Immigration Rules

25.   Because of the degree of relationship between the  appellant  and  the
sponsor (they are siblings) the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of
the immigration rules.



Article 8 ECHR

26.   In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deportation case) the Rules are not a complete  code.  Lord  Reed
at paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach  to  proportionality
(to be found in Razgar) and  said  "what  has  now  become  the  established
method of analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

27.   In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, Lord Reed (when explaining how a  court  or
tribunal  should  consider  whether  a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   was
compatible with Article 8) made clear that the critical issue was  generally
whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
removal, the article 8 claim was sufficiently strong to outweigh it.   There
is no suggestion of any threshold to be overcome before proportionality  can
be fully considered.

28.   I have to determine the following separate questions:

     (i)   Does family life, private life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8

    (ii)   If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with

    (iii)  If so, was the interference in accordance with the law

    (iv)   If so, was the interference in pursuit of one of the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and

    (v)    If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

29.   Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that immigration control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

30.   To succeed, the appellant has to establish  that  family  life  within
the meaning of article 8 exists between the appellant  and  sponsor.  It  is
argued that there is more than mere emotional  ties  and  that  there  is  a
relationship of dependency between the sponsor and the appellant.

31.   In Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of Appeal said  that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to  show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective  support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a  mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In PT  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Entry  Clearance
Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA  Civ  612  it  was  held  that  some  tribunals
appeared to have read Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR  170   as  establishing  a
rebuttable presumption against any relationship between an adult  child  and
his parents or siblings being sufficient to engage Article 8. That  was  not
correct.  Kugathas  required  a  fact-sensitive  approach,  and  should   be
understood in the light of the subsequent case  law  summarised  in  Ghising
(family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  [2012]  UKUT  160  (IAC)  and  Singh
[2015] EWCA Civ 630.  There was no legal or factual presumption  as  to  the
existence or absence of family life for the purposes of Article  8  nor  was
there any requirement of exceptionality. It all depended on the  facts.  The
love and affection between an adult and his parents or  siblings  would  not
of itself justify a finding of a family life.  There  had  to  be  something
more.

32.   Is beyond dispute that the appellant and sponsor are siblings.  It  is
beyond dispute that at the date of decision the appellant was a  minor.  The
unchallenged evidence is that the appellant  lived  with  the  sponsor  from
2009 until 2015, and  during  that  period  the  sponsor  looked  after  the
appellant as  if  he  were  a  parent.   The  weight  of  reliable  evidence
indicates sponsor married his wife in  2014  and  even  after  marriage  the
appellant remained part of the sponsor's household.

33.   On the facts as I find them  to  be,  the  sponsor  has  travelled  to
Ethiopia  three  times  to  make  arrangements  for  the  appellant's  care,
accommodation and maintenance. On the facts  as  I  find  them  to  be,  the
appellant and sponsor are in daily contact. On the facts as I find  them  to
be, there are more than just emotional ties between the  appellant  and  the
sponsor. Since 2009 the appellant has been dependent upon  the  sponsor.  On
those facts, I find that article 8 family life exists between the  appellant
and sponsor.

34.    The  central  reason  for  the  respondent's  decision  is  that  the
appellant did  not  pay  a  fee  for  the  application  (because  it  is  an
application for family reunion) and the  appellant  could  apply  for  entry
clearance in other categories in which a fee is payable.

35.   The impact of  the  respondent's  decision  is  that  the  appellant's
circumstances are uncertain. At the date of decision,  she  was  a  17-year-
old, single, female, without family support, in Ethiopia. She  was  a  young
girl living outside her  country  of  nationality  and  dependent  upon  the
sponsor. The respondent's decision creates frightening uncertainty  for  the
appellant and sponsor  and  interferes  with  family  life.  I  weigh  those
considerations against the public interest in immigration  control  and  the
respondent's desire to collect an application fee.

36.   In Chengjie Miao v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 75 the  Court  of  Appeal  noted
that the onus lies upon the Respondent to  show  that  the  interference  or
lack of respect is "necessary in  a  democratic  society"  for  one  of  the
stated interests.  As the Court of  Appeal  said  at  paragraph  12  of  the
determination "To do this the State must show not  only  that  the  proposed
step is lawful but that it is sufficiently important to justify  limiting  a
basic right; that it is sensibly directed to that  objective;  and  that  it
does not impair the right  more  than  is  necessary.   The  last  of  these
criteria commonly requires an appraisal of the relative  importance  of  the
State's objective and the impact of the measure  on  the  individual.   When
you have answered such questions you have struck the balance".

37.   I find that the respondent relies solely on a  statutory  presumption.
Against that statutory presumption I weigh the quality of family life  which
the appellant enjoys,  The  facts  and  circumstances  of  this  case  raise
exceptional circumstances which indicate that preventing the appellant  from
reunification with the brother who provides her, and has  provided  for  her
for the last 10 years, would be unjustifiably harsh. On those facts, I  find
that the respondent's decision is a disproportionate interference  with  the
appellant's article 8 rights.

38.   When I weigh all of these matters, I can only come to  the  conclusion
that the public interest in immigration control is outweighed by the  impact
that the respondent's decision has on the  appellant.    I  find  that  this
appeal succeeds on article 8 ECHR grounds.

CONCLUSION

39.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  12  November
2018 is tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.

40.   I substitute my own decision.

41.   The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed      Date 8 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
