
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/16604/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2019                      |On 02 July 2019                      |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              mr tariq mehmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Mian, Counsel, instructed by NR Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bowler ("the judge"), promulgated on 28 January 2019, in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 16 November 2017, which had refused his human rights claim.



 2. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, was  in  what  has  always  been
    accepted as a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  British
    national Ms S.  It was said that Ms S was married to a  serving  police
    officer in Pakistan and had four children with him.  It was  also  said
    that the husband had treated Ms S very badly over the  course  of  time
    and had refused to divorce her. Ms S had allegedly been issued with  an
    emergency travel document by the British authorities in Pakistan due to
    her problems with her husband. As a result of these  circumstances  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim was put forward primarily on the basis that
    he and Ms S would not be able to go and live together in  Pakistan,  in
    part, because of risks emanating from Ms S's husband, but also  because
    it would be impossible for them to live together in that country out of
    wedlock.



The judge's decision

 3. The judge correctly identified the core issue in the appeal before her,
    namely whether or not there  were  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the
    couple enjoying family  life  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom.   This
    question was to be addressed both within and without the context of the
    relevant Immigration Rules.

 4. For numerous reasons set out in paras. 40-71, the judge concluded  that
    there were no such obstacles.   In  addition,  the  judge  went  on  to
    conclude  that  there  were  no  exceptional   circumstances   in   the
    Appellant's case warranting an allowance of the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds of appeal are not  entirely  clear,  but  in  essence  they
    attack various findings made by the judge  during  the  course  of  her
    decision.

 6. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
    purported to limit the  grant  to  a  single  ground.   However,  as  I
    explained at the hearing, the fact is that Judge  Ford  did  not  state
    that restriction above the horizontal line on the grant notice  and  in
    light of Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions)  [2018]  UKUT
    388 (IAC), the grant of leave should not be restricted.  I proceeded to
    hear the Appellant's challenge on the basis that  all  the  grounds  of
    appeal were before me.



The hearing

 7. Mr Mian applied for an adjournment at the outset of the hearing on  the
    basis that an expert report was being sought as to the circumstances of
    the Appellant and  perhaps  more  importantly  Ms  S.   I  refused  the
    application on the basis that my task was to decide whether or not  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had materially erred in law and obtaining  an
    expert report at this stage was irrelevant to this.  It was only  if  I
    found there to be material errors of law and then to go on  and  remake
    the decision in this case that new evidence would become relevant.

 8. Mr Mian then confirmed that he relied on all the grounds of appeal.  He
    submitted that the judge had erred in respect of the  emergency  travel
    document issued to Ms S by  unduly  speculating  as  to  why  this  had
    occurred, with reference to para. 56 of the decision.   The  judge  had
    also erred in respect of para. 65, in which she had stated  that  Ms  S
    could pronounce talaq in Pakistan and thereby divorce her husband.   It
    was only men who could use this particular procedure.

 9. The evidence of the lawyer had not been adequately  considered  by  the
    judge, with reference to paras. 58 and 61.  The  lawyer  had  confirmed
    that Ms S had been unable to pursue proceedings to divorce her husband.
     In summary, Mr Mian  submitted  that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
    conclude that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  the  Appellant
    and his partner living together in Pakistan.

10. Ms Cunha accepted that the judge had erred  in  respect  of  the  talaq
    issue, but she submitted that this  was  not  material  because  having
    considered the evidence as a whole the  judge  had  properly  concluded
    that it would have been  open  to  Ms  S  to  have  undertaken  divorce
    proceedings in any event as provision existed under Pakistani law.

11. She submitted that a number of the challenges to the  judge's  decision
    were in reality nothing more than disagreements.  It was clear that the
    judge had taken  all  relevant  evidence  into  account.   The  adverse
    credibility findings made by the judge had been open to her.



Decision on error of law

12. I conclude that there are no material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

13. As a general observation, it is clear to me that the  judge  has  given
    very careful consideration to the appeal before her and her findings of
    fact and reasons are numerous and detailed.  By way of a more  detailed
    analysis, I will take relevant aspects of  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    turn.

14. With reference to paras. 5 and 6 of the grounds, it is  the  case  that
    the Respondent had been directed to obtain evidence  from  the  British
    Consulate in Karachi as regards the issuance  of  an  emergency  travel
    document to Ms S.  The Respondent  had  in  fact  complied  with  those
    directions, although the information provided was fairly thin, it being
    said  that  there  was  no  "documentary  evidence"  from  the  British
    authorities in Karachi to confirm that the document had been issued  in
    the circumstances asserted by Ms S.

15. In my view the judge was entitled to proceed on the evidence  that  was
    before her.  No expert evidence had been adduced by the  Appellant  and
    no adjournment of the hearing before the judge had been sought for  any
    such evidence to have been obtained, or indeed for  the  Respondent  to
    have provided better particulars as to the issuance of the document  in
    question.  Although Mr Mian has submitted that the judge  impermissibly
    speculated as to why the document might have been issued by the British
    authorities in Pakistan, she  was  in  fact  doing  nothing  more  than
    considering the evidence that was before her in light of the undisputed
    fact that the burden of proof rested with the Appellant.   Put  simply,
    the judge did not believe the evidence put forward to her. There is  no
    error in respect of this issue.

16. In respect of  para.  7  of  the  grounds,  in  my  view  there  is  no
    contradiction  between  paras.  32  and  34  of  the  judge's  decision
    whatsoever.  Indeed, the judge was doing nothing more than setting  out
    accepted facts in respect of Ms S's marriage to  her  husband  and  the
    Respondent's  acceptance  that  that  relationship  had   broken   down
    permanently.  There is no error here.

17. In respect of paras. 8 and 9, this is nothing more than a  disagreement
    with the judge's assessment of the evidence as a whole and findings  of
    fact that were clearly open to her.

18. In respect of para. 11 and the flight tickets, it has not been entirely
    easy to determine either what the judge  said  about  the  evidence  or
    indeed about the nature of  the  challenge  made  in  respect  of  that
    finding.  Having reflected on this point, I would agree with what Judge
    Ford said at para. 2.b of the  grant  of  permission.   The  judge  was
    concerned with the timing of the booking, not that there was no  return
    flight at all.  In any event, even if the judge had erred in  some  way
    this is clearly immaterial when the decision is viewed as a whole.

19. Moving onto para. 13 of  the  grounds  and  para.  65  of  the  judge's
    decision, this had given me  some  cause  for  concern  because  it  is
    undoubtedly the case that the judge erred in finding  that  women  were
    able to use the talaq procedure in order  to  divorce  a  husband.   In
    fact, it is only men who are able to pursue this route.   However,  the
    error is immaterial when one reads the judge's decision as a whole.  It
    is quite clear from the full consideration given both to  the  lawyer's
    letter and the evidence from Ms S herself (see paras. 57-61)  that  the
    judge did not find much of the evidence before her to be  credible  and
    was of the view that Ms S would be able to pursue  divorce  proceedings
    of one sort or another even if (contrary to her  understanding  as  set
    out in para. 65) talaq was not one of those possibilities.  Further, it
    is uncontroversial that there is  provision  under  Pakistani  law  for
    women to divorce their husbands.  There was clearly  no  evidence  from
    the Appellant before the judge to show that Ms S would  simply  not  be
    able to divorce her husband through any legitimate route.

20. Para. 14 of the grounds criticises the judge's findings  in  paras.  58
    and 59 of her decision.  However, as I have already  mentioned,  it  is
    clear to me that the judge gave full consideration not  simply  to  the
    lawyer's letter but to the evidence as a whole, including, importantly,
    the oral evidence given at the hearing.  The attack in para. 14 of  the
    grounds ignores what the judge has said in paras.  59  and  60  of  her
    decision.

21. That deals with the specific points raised in the grounds.  I would add
    some further observations.  A number of the adverse  findings  made  by
    the judge have not been the subject of  any  challenge.   It  is  quite
    clear not only  that  the  judge  correctly  directed  herself  to  the
    relevant legal framework, but  that  she  has  addressed  the  relevant
    questions with care and has not simply restricted herself to the  issue
    of Ms S's marriage.  Paras. 66-71 of the decision show that she applied
    her mind to other potentially relevant factors such as  Ms  S's  health
    and the couple's cultural and social ties with Pakistan.

22. The judge also went on to  consider  whether  or  not  any  exceptional
    circumstances  existed  in  this  particular  case.  The  findings  and
    conclusions  are  comprehensive  and  when  the  decision   is   viewed
    holistically, the judge's consideration is entirely sound.

23. In light of the above, the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Anonymity

24. I make no anonymity direction in this case.






Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.

That decision shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 27 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



