
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16772/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
 Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 14 March 2018                                   On 16 March 2018


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 PELLUMB [M]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Alim of Stepstones Visas Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint Jones Q.C. dated 14 November 2017.  The  decision  allowed  the
    appeal, finding that paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM to the  Immigration
    Rules was met as regards the respondent's two British children.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to Mr [M] as  the  appellant
    and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  as  the
    respondent, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on [  ]  1984.  In  August
    2008 he met [AC], originally from Kosovo, but now  a  British  citizen,
    when she went to Albania on holiday with her  family.  They  stayed  in
    touch and in order to be  with  [AC],  the  appellant  entered  the  UK
    illegally on 13 November 2008. He has  remained  here  illegally  since
    then. The couple  began  to  cohabit  in  2012.  The  couple  have  two
    children, a son born on [ ] 2014 and a daughter born on [ ] 2016. It is
    undisputed that they are due to have a third child in [ ] 2018.

 4. On 22 January 2016, the appellant applied for leave to remain in  order
    to be with  his  partner  and  children.  The  respondent  refused  the
    application on 24  June  2016.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oliver  on  8  November
    2017.

 5. The core of the appellant's case before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that  the  appellant  met  paragraph  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM  to   the
    Immigration Rules as he had a genuine subsisting relationship with  his
    British children and it was not reasonable to expect  the  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

 6. It was not disputed that the appellant's relationship with his children
    (or his partner) was genuine  and  subsisting.  Much  of  the  decision
    concerns the very adverse findings that the  First-tier  Tribunal  made
    against the appellant concerning his immigration history, the appellant
    "playing the system", illegal working, failure  to  declare  income  to
    HMRC, his partner  claiming  benefits  when  he  was  working  and  the
    appellant and his partner being untruthful in their evidence about  the
    appellant's work history; see [2]-[4], [8]-[9], [13]-[17], for example.



 7.  Notwithstanding  those  adverse  findings,  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    concluded that the appeal had to be allowed under the Immigration Rules
    as case law required a finding that  it  was  not  reasonable  for  the
    British children to be expected to leave the UK. At [15]-[17] the judge
    said this:

           "15.  EX1 comes to the rescue of the appellant because the Upper
           Tribunal and the higher courts have proceeded on the basis  that
           it will almost  always  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
           citizen child to have to leave the United Kingdom to reside in a
           foreign country (almost regardless of the identity of that other
           country  and  whether  it  offers  a  way  of  life  culturally,
           materially and economically superior to that  available  in  the
           United Kingdom). It is a rather precarious position to take, but
           nonetheless,  one  that  has  been  taken.  It   might   be   an
           understandable position to take in the context of Albania.


           16.   I would find it difficult to conclude  that  it  would  be
           reasonable to expect the appellant's British citizen children to
           leave the United Kingdom for Albania. That is sufficient for the
           appellant hold himself out as a shining example  of  how  to  go
           about abusing the immigration laws of  this  country  by  coming
           here and ensuring that he parents a child, not just any child, a
           child who is a British citizen.


           17.   Unfortunately, I have to conclude that  this  utterly  un-
           meritorious appeal must succeed. That is the consequence of  the
           preciousness shown by the higher courts towards the  concept  of
           British citizenship and the concept of a British  citizen  child
           residing in some other country. It is also  the  consequence  of
           the appellant  playing  the  system  with  practised  skill  and
           ability."

Error of Law

 8. As argued by the respondent in the grounds of appeal,  I  am  satisfied
    that these paragraphs contain a material misdirection of law as to  the
    correct approach to be taken in the EX.1. assessment of whether it  was
    reasonable for the children to leave the UK.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not identify which cases are supposed to set  down  the  principle
    which prevented the adverse factors that were found from being included
    in  the  reasonableness  assessment.   I  am  not  aware  of  case  law
    expressing such a principle.

 9. In MA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the correct approach to the "reasonableness" test. At  [41]-
    [42] the Court of Appeal identifies that including adverse aspects of a
    parent's conduct does not offend the correct approach to the children's
    best interests:

           "41.  The appellants  advanced  an  additional  reason  why  the
           Secretary of State's approach to the test would be  inconsistent
           with principle. They  submit  that  if  the  misconduct  of  the
           parents is taken into account when considering the  position  of
           the child, the consequence is that the child is being blamed for
           the moral failing of the parents,  something  which  Lord  Hodge
           emphasised  in  Zoumbas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2013] 1 WLR 3690 was not permissible: see  principle
           seven of the seven principles summarized in  para.10  (discussed
           further in para.52 below) reflecting what Lady Hale had said  in
           EM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Office [2009]  AC
           198 para.49.


           42.   I do not believe that this principle  does  undermine  the
           Secretary of State's argument. As Lord Justice Laws pointed  out
           in In the matter of LC, CB (a child) and  JB  (a  child)  [2014]
           EWCA Civ 1693 para.15, it is not blaming the child to  say  that
           the conduct of the parents should weigh in the scales  when  the
           general public interest  in  effective  immigration  control  is
           under consideration. The principle that the sins of the  fathers
           should not be visited upon  the  children  is  not  intended  to
           lessen the importance of immigration control or to restrict what
           the court can consider when having regard to that matter. So  if
           the wider construction relied upon by the Secretary of State  is
           otherwise  justified,  this  principle  does  not  in  my   view
           undermine it.

10. The Court went on at [45] to confirm that "the conduct of the applicant
    and any other matters  relevant  to  the  public  interest"  should  be
    assessed "when considering the question of reasonableness under section
    117B(6)". The test in EX.1. is the same as that in section 117B(6)  and
    the same principle should have been followed by the First-tier Tribunal
    but was not.

11. Upper Tribunal case  law  also  confirms  in  the  head  note  of  Kaur
    (children's best interests  /public  interest  interface)  [2017]  UKUT
    00014 (IAC)  that  that  neither  legislation  nor  case  law  acts  to
    "preclude an outcome whereby the best interests of a child  must  yield
    to the public interest." It is  perhaps  worth  mentioning  that  I  am
    unable to identify  a  best  interests  assessment  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal so it  is  not  clear  that  their  best  interests  had  been
    identified as remaining in the UK.

12.  Had  the  First-tier  Tribunal  taken  a  correct  approach   in   the
    "reasonableness" assessment and included  the  appellant's  immigration
    history and other matters  relevant  to  the  public  interest,  it  is
    entirely possible that the  outcome  of  the  appeal  would  have  been
    different. I am satisfied that these matters amount to a material error
    on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside  to  be  re-
    made.

Re-Making

13. The direction issued with the grant of permission to  appeal  indicated
    to the parties that that there was a presumption that if  an  error  of
    law was found, the re-making would take place at the  same  hearing  on
    the basis of the evidence that had been before the First-tier Tribunal.
    No application was made under Rule 15(2A) for further  material  to  be
    adduced. Mr Alim initially confirmed that there was no further evidence
    and that the re-making could proceed on the basis of submissions.

14. During submissions Mr Alim asked for  time  to  take  instructions  on,
    raising a concern about the partner having family in the  UK.  He  took
    instructions but it was agreed that this  matter  was  covered  in  the
    partner's witness statement dated 2 November 2017 that had been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Alim nevertheless applied for oral evidence
    to be adduced but, other than the issue of the wife's family  being  in
    the UK, did not identify anything else that could  assist  in  the  re-
    making of the appeal. I therefore did not find  it  necessary  to  hear
    oral evidence

15. The first issue in considering whether paragraph EX.1.  is  met  is  to
    assess the best interests of the  children.  Mr  Clarke  conceded  that
    these lay in the children remaining in the UK with  both  parents,  the
    children having been born here, lived here  all  their  lives  and  the
    older child attending nursery. I therefore  took  that  best  interests
    assessment into consideration as a primary factor  when  assessing  the
    reasonableness of the children leaving the UK.

16. As above,  there  was  no  cross-appeal  against  the  serious  adverse
    findings made against the appellant by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    appellant deliberately entered the UK illegally in order to join  [AC],
    remained illegally, worked illegally, did not pay tax, the family still
    claiming benefits. The  appellant  fails  to  meet  the  provisions  of
    section 117B(3) concerning financial independence. The public  interest
    factor  in  section  117B(2)  is  neutral  as,  although  he  used   an
    interpreter at the hearing, the appellant appeared to speak  relatively
    good English.

17. It was also my view that  the  evidence  here  indicated  that  it  was
    reasonable for [AC] to be expected to go to Albania with the  appellant
    and the children. She came to the UK at the age of 10 and has been here
    most of her life but her  family  history  is  in  Kosovo,  she  speaks
    Albanian and, indeed, met the appellant whilst on a family  holiday  to
    Albania. Her evidence is that her family are in the UK but is also that
    they are estranged because of her relationship with the appellant.  Her
    family being in the UK cannot act as a strong factor showing  that  she
    should  not  be  expected  to  go  to  Albania,  therefore.   That   is
    additionally so where the appellant has immediate family who can  offer
    support to her and the children.

18. It is therefore my conclusion, even weighing the best interests of  the
    children as a primary factor and taking into  account  the  appellant's
    wife only having visited Kosovo and having lived most of  her  life  in
    the UK, that the particularly  adverse  factors  weighing  strongly  in
    support of the public interest here make it reasonable for the children
    to be expected to leave the UK and live in Albania with their  parents.
    Paragraph Ex.1. is not met and the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
    must fail.

19. The appeal cannot not succeed on any other basis where  the  conclusion
    is that it is reasonable for the children to go to Albania. As above, I
    have found that it is reasonable for the appellant's partner to  go  to
    Albania with him and the children. There would  not  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to her exercising family life  there.  There  were  no  other
    factors beyond those considered in  the  EX.1.  assessment  that  could
    begin to outweigh the public interest in a  proprotionality  assessment
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant's  private  life  and
    relationship with his wife  weigh  little  in  such  a  proportionality
    assessment given his illegal status at all times.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

21. The appeal is remade as  refused  under  and  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.


Signed: [pic]                                      Dated: 14 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

