
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16648/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr hassan samrANI
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Child, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal of the Secretary of State, against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the claimant (the respondent
    in this appeal) against  a  decision  to  deport  him.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

2.   The Secretary of State submitted two grounds of appeal,  the  first  of
    which was that there was a failure correctly to apply the unduly  harsh
    test as identified by the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ  450,  and  the  second  being  to  the  effect  that  a   material
    misdirection of law was made in relation to the FTT's consideration  of
    unduly harsh outcomes for the appellant's children.  Reference was made
    to BL (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 357.

3.   We will come in a moment to the permission which  was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, but at the outset of the hearing before us we were
    told that the Secretary of State had lodged amended grounds  of  appeal
    and that there had been a prior hearing before UT Judge  Dawson  on  30
    May. He dealt to some extent with a new ground, namely one of  bias  on
    the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It was said  that  the  FTT
    judge had made certain remarks at the outset of the  hearing  and,  his
    general conduct of the hearing was such, as to indicate to the informed
    observer that he had effectively made up his mind.  The  whole  hearing
    was unfair or at least appeared to be so. That ground now falls  to  be
    disposed of by us

4.   We were provided with what was said to be an aide-memoire, which  is  a
    minute of the hearing before the FTT prepared by the Presenting Officer
    As well as that, we have a  brief  statement  by  her,  which  she  has
    signed.  On the other hand, we have been provided with a  statement  by
    Counsel, who represented the appellant at the first hearing as well  as
    comments made by the Judge himself.

5.   Mr Jarvis very helpfully drew  our  attention  to  the  case  of  Singh
    [2016] EWCA Civ 492 and we have also been provided by Miss  Child  with
    the case of PA (Protection claim, Respondent's enquiries, Bias)  [2018]
    UKUT 337 (IAC)  and  the  case  of  Ortega  (Remittal;  Bias;  Parental
    relationship) [2018] UKUT 298 (IAC).  We find the case of Singh of more
    assistance to us.  In that case what was provided was  a  statement  by
    Counsel who conducted the hearing on behalf of the  appellant  who  was
    alleging bias.  For some reason there was no statement on the  part  of
    the Home Office Presenting Officer.  The Upper Tribunal considered  the
    issue of bias and had the benefit of a note from the  presiding  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge which somehow or other  disappeared,  so  what  was
    said verbatim by that judge in the note is in the ether.  The Court  of
    Appeal made a number of comments about  the  process  which  should  be
    followed in cases of this nature and made a number of criticisms of the
    actual approach  which  was  adopted  in  that  case.   They  were  not
    persuaded that the statement of Counsel was sufficient to overcome  the
    burden on the person  alleging  bias  to  prove  there  was  actual  or
    apparent bias.  We find ourselves in the same position here.  We have a
    statement by the Presenting Officer, which is in our  opinion  somewhat
    vague and is based on her impression.  While we have the benefit of her
    minute it does not take us much further.  While  it  is  said  that  it
    could be regarded as an aide-memoire we  do  not  really  have  a  full
    statement containing a memoire to which it could be an  aide,  and  the
    position as far as we can see it is somewhat ambiguous. The  presenting
    officer could have been presented as a witness and her vague  statement
    will not do. The burden is on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish
    apparent bias and we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  burden  has  been
    discharged, so we refuse that ground of appeal.

6.    The  second  primary  issue  which  arose  relates  to  the  grant  of
    permission.  In this case, as we have indicated, there are two  grounds
    over and above the third one to which reference has just been made.  In
    granting permission to appeal the usual form was filled in by the Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal who granted permission on 22 January of this
    year.  At the top of it the unambiguous words "permission to appeal  is
    granted" appear.  There then appear four  paragraphs  setting  out  the
    "Reasons for Decision" in the following terms:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cohen)  promulgated  on
             08 January 2018 whereby  it  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
             against the decision to refuse his  human  rights  claim  made
             following a deportation order.


         2.   It is argued that the Tribunal erred in its  consideration  of
             the 'unduly harsh' test in that it considered only the  impact
             on the Appellant's children  and  his  rehabilitation  without
             factoring in the Appellant's adverse criminal and  immigration
             history.  This ground is arguable.


         3.   It is further argued that contrary to the evidence, that (sic)
             the  Tribunal  had  speculated  that  Social  services   (sic)
             involvement would be required to support the family should the
             Appellant be removed and that any such  involvement  would  be
             contrary to the children's best interests  and  unduly  harsh.
             This ground is not arguable.


         4.   There is an arguable material error of law."

7.   Mr Jarvis has submitted that given what was said  in  the  top  of  the
    form, namely that permission to appeal was granted, it meant  that  all
    grounds of appeal might be argued.  He referred to the case of Safi and
    others (permission to appeal decisions)  [2018]  UKUT  00388  (IAC),  a
    decision which resulted from a hearing on  12  October  of  this  year.
    Miss Child on the other hand submitted that permission  had  only  been
    granted in relation to the first ground and that there was no ambiguity
    in the grant of permission.  The Judge has made it perfectly plain that
    ground 2 was not arguable, therefore this Tribunal should not entertain
    it.  We have considered the case of Safi presided by the President  and
    Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson and in our reading of it we cannot see  any
    material distinction between  what  was  said  in  that  case  and  the
    position  we  find  ourselves  in  today.    The   facts   are   almost
    indistinguishable.  We consider particularly the fact that in the grant
    of permission the unambiguous  words  that  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted appeared in that case as in the case before us.  Paragraph 6 of
    the Reasons for Decision were in the following terms:-

         "While I am not persuaded that there is an arguable error of law in
         the First-tier Tribunal decision  in  relation  to  duress  or  its
         finding that the 'crime' was not a political crime, I  do  consider
         it arguable that the Tribunal may have erred in  its  consideration
         of whether Article 1F(b) was  applicable  at  all  given  that  the
         Appellants had all been acquitted after trial."

8.   In our opinion there is no material difference between  that  and  what
    was said in paragraph 3 of the Reasons  for  Decision  in  the  instant
    case. It is made plain we  think  from  paragraphs  30  to  35  of  the
    decision in Safi that the mere fact that the reasons  indicate  that  a
    ground is not arguable is not in themselves  enough  to  indicate  that
    permission is not granted. If that is to be the case  of  the  granting
    section of the form should say so in terms.  We are satisfied therefore
    that it is open to the Secretary of State in the instant case to  argue
    ground 2.

9.   We turn now to the merits of the appeal. The appellant was the  subject
    of a deportation order of 18 May 2016.  He  sought  to  challenge  that
    order raising the issue of his human  rights  and  contending  that  to
    remove him from the jurisdiction would breach those rights  and  indeed
    the rights of his family.  He was married to a British citizen in  2012
    and has six children, four  arising  from  that  relationship  and  two
    stepchildren.

10.  The matter came by way  of  appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cohen on 12 December 2017 and, in a decision promulgated on  8  January
    2018, the appeal was allowed applying the test set out in paragraph 399
    of the Rules, and particularly having regard to the requirement  as  to
    whether or not it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the
    UK without the person who is to be deported.  It was on that basis that
    the judge found that it would be unduly harsh for all or  some  of  the
    children to remain in the United Kingdom without the particular support
    of the appellant.

11.  The Secretary of State has sought to challenge that decision.  We  have
    already dealt with a number of preliminary points.  The first ground of
    appeal is that the FTT is said to have made a material misdirection  of
    law, a failure to correctly apply the "unduly harsh" test as defined in
    the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ  450,  that  is  not
    placing it correctly within the criminal and immigration history of the
    appellant. Of course matters have moved somewhat in the  light  of  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in KO [2018]  UKSC  53.   The  court  has
    raised the question as to whether or not it is right to visit the  sins
    of the fathers upon the children in relation to  assessment  of  unduly
    harsh.  Clearly, in applying the test of unduly harsh it is  important,
    as indeed Mr Jarvis rightly submits, to consider it within the  context
    of the public interest  of  removing  a  foreign  criminal  and  it  is
    apparent from the decision that that criminality was recognised by  the
    judge.  It is said that there is no express articulation by  the  judge
    as to how the test should be  applied.   Nevertheless,  the  judge  has
    recognised the appropriate test in paragraph 399.  It cannot be said in
    our view that, looking at the  decision  as  a  whole,  the  Judge  was
    unaware of the statutory structure and context in which  these  matters
    fall to be considered.

12.  The second challenge was in relation to the BL approach, if we can  put
    it that way; namely that there had been inadequate consideration of the
    evidence and report in the light of what assistance may be available to
    the family through social services.  We remind ourselves of course that
    a consideration of what is unduly harsh is by its very nature  a  fact-
    sensitive exercise.  The Judge has placed great weight upon the  social
    services report of a Mr John Power of 16 March 2016.  We note that  the
    appellant had been in custody for  some  eighteen  months,  both  as  a
    result of serving the sentence and also under administrative detention,
    but he was released at the beginning of  March  of  2016.   This  is  a
    report which has been  prepared,  albeit  of  some  antiquity,  in  the
    context of the family having been recently reunited.  It is a  detailed
    report.  One criticism potentially that can be made  of  the  Judge  is
    that there was a somewhat uncritical acceptance of it, but nevertheless
    it is quite  a  strongly  worded  report.   It  can  be  summarised  as
    reporting that the mother was unable to cope adequately  with  all  her
    children in the absence  of  the  appellant;  that  she  was  on  anti-
    depressants and she needed counselling.  The children were  very  needy
    and attention-seeking and demanding.

13.  Though it may be a criticism of the mother  that  she  did  not  always
    take the help that was provided, it was clear that the absence  of  the
    appellant from the family caused particular problems to the son D.   He
    was bedwetting.  He was referred to CAMHS.  There  were  problems  with
    behaviour and the strong conclusion by the social worker, who  prepared
    the report, was that the family was entirely focused upon the appellant
    as being the fulcrum of stability.  It was said  that  it  would  be  a
    disastrous outcome for the mother and would  impact  on  care  for  the
    children were the appellant not to be back as part of their lives.   As
    was made clear in KO, there are some consequences of a  father  leaving
    the family, which are a natural consequence of separation  which  would
    not fall within the definition of unduly harsh.  The conclusion of  the
    writer of the report was that they would be exposed  to  a  significant
    risk of psychological harm in the situation  where  the  appellant  was
    removed.

14.  This is not an appeal against the merits of the decision.   It  may  be
    considered that perhaps the Judge was somewhat uncritical of the report
    and  that  more  enquiry  could  perhaps  sensibly  have   been   made,
    particularly  as  the  hearing  was  some  eighteen  months  from   the
    preparation of that report.  It would have been helpful to have had  an
    up-to-date report as to how the children were or were not  coping,  now
    that the appellant was with them. There was  no  indication  that  they
    were not coping.

15.  The real question for us in looking at the comments made at  paragraphs
    25 to 27 of the determination was whether or not those  factors,  which
    were identified by Mr Power in  his  report,  were  factors  that  were
    capable of meeting the test of unduly harsh.  They have gone beyond, as
    we said, mere upset and the pain of separation.  This is a family  that
    simply could not function, it is said, properly without the appellant's
    presence.

Notice of Decision

16.  It seems to us that it would not be open to us to  conclude  that  this
    was a perverse decision, albeit a very generous  decision  and  perhaps
    one that we would not have come to ourselves, but that is not the test.
       looking at what the test is, those findings were properly open to be
    made, so in those circumstances we do not interfere with the  decision.
    The appeal before this Tribunal by the Secretary of State  is dismissed
    and the decision made by the First  tier  Tribunal  stands  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.


For [pic]
                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                                Date: 7 Dec
                                    2018





