
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16876/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 12 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FREEDMAN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues.  We  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. We make clear that the order is not made to protect  the
appellant's reputation following his conviction for  criminal  offences  but
to protect the interests of his children. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Jafferi, Counsel instructed by Burton & Burton
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of continuity, we shall refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, although technically the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Swaney ("the judge") which was promulgated  on  9  January  2019.
    The judge allowed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 27 November 2017 to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him from the United Kingdom by virtue of Section 32(5)  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.

 3. The background is set out in paragraphs 1 to  10  of  the  decision  as
    follows:-

         "1.  The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  9  September
             1969.  He appeals the decision made on  27  November  2017  to
             refuse his human rights claim and to maintain the decision  to
             deport him from the United Kingdom.

         2.   The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  June
             2000 and was granted leave to enter as a visitor until 9  July
             2000.  On 18 February 2002 he applied  for  further  leave  to
             remain as a student.  His  application  was  refused,  and  he
             became an overstayer.

         3.   On 22 December 2004 the  appellant  made  an  application  for
             leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  settled  person.   That
             application was refused on 19 January 2005.  On 25 April  2008
             the  appellant  was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to  supply   a
             controlled drug (class  A).   He  was  sentenced  to  4  years
             imprisonment.  On 21 November 2008 he was served with a notice
             of his liability to deportation.

         4.   On 27 March 2009 deportation  order  was  signed.   An  appeal
             lodged against deportation was dismissed on 23 June 2009.  His
             appeal rights are recorded as having been exhausted on 21 July
             2009 and he was deported to Jamaica on 8 September 2009.

         5.   The appellant attempted to  re-enter  the  United  Kingdom  in
             breach of the deportation  order  on  5  September  2011.   He
             travelled on a British  passport  of  which  he  was  not  the
             rightful holder and was refused entry.  He claimed asylum.  On
             4 May 2012 he was convicted of entering the United Kingdom  in
             breach of a  deportation  order  and  possession  of  identity
             documents  with  intent.   He  was  sentenced   to   2   years
             imprisonment.  He lodged an appeal against conviction, however
             the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) dismissed  his  appeal
             on 23 January 2013.

         6.   The appellant's asylum claim was refused on 15 December  2015.
             His claim was certified as  clearly  unfounded  under  section
             94(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the
             2002 Act).  He had also made further submissions  pursuant  to
             article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  (ECHR),
             which were rejected as not amounting to a  fresh  claim.   The
             appellant was afforded an  out  of  country  right  of  appeal
             against the asylum claim.

         7.   On 24 December 2015 the appellant issued a claim for  judicial
             review challenging the refusal of his human rights claim.  His
             judicial review was refused and  certified  as  being  totally
             without merit on 10 February 2016.

         8.   Since February 2016 the appellant has made further submissions
             on several occasions.  They were considered and rejected on 16
             August 2016.  The respondent did not accept they amounted to a
             fresh claim  within  the  meaning  of  paragraph  353  of  the
             Immigration  Rules.   Removal  directions  were  set   for   6
             September  2016.   Further  representations  were  made  on  5
             September 2016.  They were  refused  the  same  day;  however,
             removal directions were cancelled as the appellant had  lodged
             a claim for judicial review and obtained an injunction against
             removal.  Permission  to  proceed  with  the  application  for
             judicial  review  was  refused  on  15  September  2016.   The
             appellant renewed the application and at an oral hearing which
             took place on 8 December 2016, permission was granted.

         9.   The substantive hearing of the claim for judicial  review  was
             listed on 23 August  2016.   At  the  hearing  the  claim  for
             judicial review was withdrawn by consent upon  the  respondent
             agreeing to reconsider the  appellant's  further  submissions,
             and that if refused, the appellant would have  an  in  country
             right of appeal, the further submissions amounting to a  fresh
             claim within the meaning of paragraph 353 of the Rules.

         10.  It is the outcome of  the  reconsideration  of  those  further
             submissions that is the subject of this appeal."

 4. The nature of the appellant's case is summarised at paragraphs 11 to 12
    and that reads:-

         "11. The appellant seeks to resist his  deportation  on  the  basis
             that he has a family and private life in the  United  Kingdom.
             Although this has previously been considered and refused,  the
             appellant claims that the nature and  strength  of  his  claim
             changed in February 2016 due to a breakdown  suffered  by  his
             wife.  This led to her being sectioned under the Mental Health
             Act 1983.

         12.  The appellant claims that in the light of  his  wife's  mental
             health problems the effect of his deportation on her and  upon
             their children is disproportionate."

 5. The family members comprise the  following:  the  appellant  who  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 June 2000 and the circumstances  in
    relation  to  him  are  summarised  in   the   background;   his   four
    stepchildren, AE,  GE,  SaE  and  ShE;  his  son  FE  from  a  previous
    relationship.  His son and all the stepchildren are  British  citizens.
    Two of the stepchildren are over 18.

 6. The decision at paragraph 72 refers  to  his  wife  who  is  a  British
    citizen.  It is accepted that he and his wife  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  The relationship was formed at  a  time  when
    his status in the United Kingdom was precarious.  The judge said in the
    same paragraph: "he did not have leave to remain and what is more, they
    married when he was excluded from the United Kingdom and a  deportation
    order was in force."  The judge pointed out that the effect of this was
    that the appellant did not satisfy the first limb of  paragraph  399(b)
    of the Rules, but that it was nevertheless important  to  consider  the
    other limbs of paragraph 399(b).

 7. The nature of the relationship is  considered  at  paragraph  73.   The
    matter has been considered in two previous appeals.  On both  occasions
    the judge found that his circumstances were not sufficiently compelling
    as to outweigh the public interest in his deportation.  Those decisions
    were the starting point for the judge.

 8. At paragraph 71, as Mr Tarlow has drawn to  our  attention,  the  judge
    said as follows:-

         "Had the appellant's circumstances remained the same or similar  as
         they were when the deportation order was made or  indeed  when  his
         asylum claim was refused in December 2015,  I  would  have  had  no
         hesitation in finding  that  they  were  not  exceptional  or  very
         compelling.  That is not the situation however; as  I  have  found,
         the appellant's circumstances changed materially in  February  2016
         when his wife became ill."

 9. At paragraph 74 of the decision it was stated that  the  appellant  had
    been detained under the immigration powers on two occasions in 2015 and
    2016.  While he was detained his wife was sectioned under Section 2  of
    the Mental Health Act 1983 on 10 February 2016.  She was  admitted  for
    assessment and treatment of suspected  psychosis.   She  was  diagnosed
    with a psychotic disorder.

10. The impact of the deterioration of her mental health on the family, and
    in particular  on  the  children,  is  referred  to  at  paragraph  75.
    Consistent with the medical evidence was that  their  mother  neglected
    not only herself but them as  well,  and  that  they  were  in  a  very
    difficult position and had to try  and  cope  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant.  They were not able to do so  and  after  their  mother  was
    sectioned social services stepped in.  At least three of  the  children
    have required treatment and/or support for mental health  issues  as  a
    result of what they experienced.

11. The origin of the appellant's wife's diagnosis is unclear.  There  have
    been a  number  of  stressors,  but  one  is  the  uncertainty  of  the
    appellant's status in the UK.  The finding in that regard is  that  the
    judge  was  satisfied  on  the  balance  of  probabilities   that   the
    appellant's immigration matter and the uncertainty of whether or not he
    would be permitted to remain in the  United  Kingdom  was  one  of  the
    factors that contributed to his wife's breakdown.  It does  not  matter
    that this was not the only or even the main cause (paragraph 76).

12. Evidence was given below from the appellant's children, the independent
    social worker, his  wife's  GP  and  her  care  co-ordinator  that  the
    appellant played an important role in the  wife's  recovery.   He  gets
    through to her and makes sure that she  takes  medication  and  attends
    appointments and takes her to church and does shopping and cooks  meals
    for the family.  He meets the children's needs  and  ensures  that  the
    rent is paid on time.  The view of the care co-ordinator is that if the
    appellant were removed from the UK, it is likely that this will lead to
    his wife being readmitted to hospital (paragraph 79 of  the  decision).
    There was evidence to like effect from the GP.

13. The appellant's wife was reported in a bad way in late 2017  and  early
    2018, rarely leaving the house  and  hallucinating.   She  was  hearing
    voices and having intrusive dreams  at  night.   A  GP's  letter  of  4
    December 2018  confirmed  that  she  was  still  taking  anti-psychotic
    medication (paragraph 82 of the  decision).   Although  there  is  some
    improvement, she still requires considerable support from mental health
    services, her GP and the appellant.  One of the adult children lives at
    home but he is only 19.  The finding of  the  judge  was  that  it  was
    unrealistic to suggest that he could assume responsibility for not only
    caring for his mother, but also maintaining the household and the  care
    of two minor siblings in the event that the appellant was not permitted
    to remain in the United Kingdom (see paragraph 84 of the decision).

14. The judge found that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's
    wife to remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant.  She  could
    not be expected to go to live in Jamaica.  There was no evidence before
    the Tribunal that she would  have  access  to  the  support  which  she
    required.  At the moment she has support  from  her  GP,  local  mental
    health service including  medical  and  social  support  and  it  would
    involve separation from some of her children and her church  community.



15. The judge went on at paragraph 88 to refer  to  the  difficulties  that
    would occur in the event that his wife were to go to Jamaica and  found
    at paragraph 89 that in all the circumstances it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect her to go and live with the appellant in Jamaica.

16. In respect of the children there were findings at paragraphs 91  to  92
    and the first four lines of 93 as follows:-

         "91. Only two of the appellant's other children are  minors  -  ShE
             and SaE.  Both live at home with him.  I find that  it  is  in
             their best interests to remain in the United Kingdom  as  part
             of their family  unit  that  includes  their  mother  and  the
             appellant.  They were born in  the  United  Kingdom  and  have
             lived here all  their  lives  and  have  undergone  all  their
             education here.  Although they have visited Jamaica,  ShE  and
             SaE must have been very young at the time and are  not  likely
             to retain many, if any, memories of this.

         92.  The evidence from the appellant, his wife,  the  children  and
             the independent social worker is all consistent  and  confirms
             that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with ShE and SaE.  They are his stepchildren, but
             he has been involved in their  upbringing  for  a  significant
             period of their lives and it is clear they regard him as their
             father.

         93.  It is apparent from the evidence of the  appellant's  children
             who were living at home when their mother became ill that they
             were significantly negatively impacted by her  illness.   This
             impact was exacerbated by the appellant's  absence.   ShE  and
             SaE both highlight the emotional  impact  of  being  separated
             from their father.  ...".

    The minor children were at a vital stage of  their  education,  in  the
    final stage of secondary education undertaking major public  exams  and
    it would be very disruptive for them if they were expected  to  go  and
    live with the appellant in Jamaica.

17. The  essential  question  in  this  case  is  whether  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances, such that the  deportation  should  not  take
    effect.  This arose in the following circumstances.  The appellant is a
    'foreign criminal' as defined in section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.
     He is not a British citizen and he was convicted  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12  months.   Section
    32(4) conclusively treats the deportation order of a  foreign  criminal
    as conducive to the public good and section  32(5)  provides  that  the
    respondent must make a  deportation  order  in  respect  of  a  foreign
    criminal subject to section 33.  An exception to deportation  is  where
    removal will be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
    Refugee Convention, the ECHR or under EU treaties.

18. The question arose because under  section  32  of  the  2007  Act,  the
    original deportation decision was made under the automatic  deportation
    provisions because the sentence with the index offence was four  years.
    The  appellant  appealed  the  deportation  decision  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The appeal was directly against the deportation at  the  time
    in 2009, but the appeal was dismissed and he was deported to Jamaica in
    2009.  The effect of the deportation order was that the  appellant  was
    excluded from re-entering the UK for ten years.

19. The judge rightly recognised the weight given to the public interest in
    the appellant's deportation.  She recognised that the  public  interest
    included not only protection of the public, but also the need to  deter
    others from committing offences and the social revulsion at the  nature
    of the crime: see paragraph 68-70 of the decision as follows:

         "68. I must give weight to the public interest in  the  appellant's
             deportation. I have taken account of all the  evidence  before
             me in carrying out an evaluative  exercise  in  which  I  have
             balanced the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals together with  the  need  to  make  a  proportionate
             assessment of any interference with article 8 rights.  I  have
             had regard to the fact that the public interest  includes  not
             only protection of the public, but  also  the  need  to  deter
             others from committing offences and the  social  revulsion  at
             the nature of the crime.


         69.  In this case, the appellant has two convictions that  mean  he
             is liable to deportation. The first, which led to  the  making
             of a deportation order, is for conspiracy to  supply  class  A
             drugs. He received a sentence of four years'  imprisonment  in
             respect of that  offence.  The  second  is  a  conviction  for
             possessing identity documents with intent. This was a  British
             passport to which he  was  not  entitled,  which  he  used  to
             attempt to re-enter the United Kingdom unlawfully in 2011.  He
             received a  sentence  of  two  years'  imprisonment  for  that
             conviction. The appellant also has a conviction  for  entering
             the United Kingdom in  breach  of  a  deportation  order.  The
             appellant pleaded guilty to entering  the  United  Kingdom  in
             breach of the deportation order  but  pleaded  not  guilty  to
             other offences of which he was convicted.


         70.  Both the drugs offence and the document offence  are  serious.
             Drugs cause serious harm within the community  and  are  often
             linked to other criminal activity.  The  document  offence  is
             serious because it undermines  the  integrity  of  the  United
             Kingdom's borders."


20. The judge rightly referred to  paragraph  398,  399  and  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

         "Deportation and Article 8


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and


             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


             ...


         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


21. At paragraph 61, the judge identified the  correct  test  contained  in
    section 117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (NIAA 2002) and paragraph 398  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge
    identified the correct test of  whether  there  were  'very  compelling
    circumstances'  to  outweigh   the   undoubted   public   interest   in
    deportation.  At paragraph 97, the Judge quoted  NA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWC Civ 662 at [30] where the Court of Appeal said:

         "In the case of a serious offender who could point to circumstances
         in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said  to  correspond  to  the
         circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, but where  he  could
         only just succeed in such an argument, it would not be possible  to
         describe his situation as involving very compelling  circumstances,
         over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2.  One  might
         describe that as a bare case of the kind described in Exceptions  1
         or 2. On the other hand, if he could point to factors identified in
         the descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially  compelling
         kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond what would
         be necessary to make out a bare  case  of  the  kind  described  in
         Exceptions 1 and  2,  they  could  in  principle  constitute  "very
         compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
         Exceptions 1 and 2", whether taken by themselves or in  conjunction
         with other factors relevant to application of Article  8  (emphasis
         added)."

22. She came to her conclusion at paragraphs 98 and 99:-

         "98. I have had regard to what the Court of Appeal said in  respect
             of 'very compelling circumstances' in  SSHD  v  Garzon  [2018]
             EWCA  Civ  1225.   I  consider  the   circumstances   of   the
             appellant's wife and two minor children and the  support  they
             require very compelling over and above what  is  described  in
             the exceptions to  deportation  and  that  they  can  also  be
             properly termed 'exceptional' with reference to paragraph 390A
             of the Immigration Rules.  I have once again turned my mind to
             the nature of the  appellant's  conviction  that  led  to  his
             deportation, his conduct since he was deported and his further
             convictions.  These matters are undoubtedly very serious,  and
             the starting point is  that  deportation  is  appropriate  and
             necessary in the public interest.   However,  I  consider  the
             mental health of the appellant's wife and the impact that  her
             difficulties have had and continue to  have  on  her  and  the
             children are  especially  compelling  and  that  the  family's
             circumstances go well beyond what would be necessary  to  make
             out a case under the exceptions.

         99.  I am satisfied that the effect of the respondent's decision on
             the  appellant,  his  wife  and  his  two  minor  children  is
             unjustifiably harsh  and  accordingly  that  the  decision  is
             disproportionate.  I  find  the  decision  is  unlawful  under
             section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as  being  contrary  to
             the United Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR."

23. We now refer to the grounds of appeal.  It was asserted that there  was
    an error of law because the judge was wrong to  find  that  there  were
    very compelling  circumstances.   It  was  submitted  that  the  wife's
    condition does not  satisfy  the  high  threshold  of  very  compelling
    circumstances and that great weight  should  be  given  to  the  public
    interest and required more than identifying factors over and above  the
    exceptions 1 and 2 in order to satisfy very compelling circumstances.

24. In our judgment this was a thorough  and  well-reasoned  decision  that
    went through  the  relevant  provisions  in  a  logical  way  and  with
    reference to the relevant legal framework and the evidence.   As  noted
    above, the Judge made clear at paragraph 71 referred to above that  the
    appeal would have been dismissed if the circumstances had  remained  as
    they were at the end of 2015.  The only  issue  that  could  justify  a
    finding of very compelling circumstances was the wife's  mental  health
    following the breakdown in February 2016 and the  effect  on  both  the
    wife and the children.  The only question in our judgment  was  whether
    the judge's findings were outside a range of  reasonable  responses  to
    the evidence.

25. The judge appeared to take into account all the relevant  evidence  and
    was entitled to consider the interests of the wife and was  obliged  to
    consider the interests of the minor children.  The judge gave  detailed
    reasons for the findings with reference to the evidence. In taking into
    account any relevant exceptions as part of the overall  assessment  the
    judge followed the approach recommended by the Court of  Appeal  in  NA
    (Pakistan). As part of the overall balancing exercise  conducted  under
    section 117C(6) NIAA 2002 and paragraph 398 of  the  Immigration  Rules
    the judge made clear that she  had  given  significant  weight  to  the
    public interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal who  had  been
    sentenced to a period of at least four years'  imprisonment.  She  took
    into account the serious nature of the offences  and  directed  herself
    properly to the relevant aspects of the public interest.  Although  the
    test of 'very  compelling  circumstances'  is  stringent  in  order  to
    reflect the significant weight  that  must  be  placed  on  the  public
    interest in deportation, it would not comply with Article 8 if it  were
    wholly insurmountable. The  evidence  in  this  case  showed  that  the
    appellant's absence from the family when he was detained in 2016 had  a
    significant impact on his wife and a corresponding and  lasting  impact
    on his children when she was sectioned. The compelling nature of  their
    circumstances was supported by  evidence  from  relevant  professionals
    working with the family. The children had already suffered as a  result
    of past events. The evidence indicated that events were  likely  to  be
    repeated if the appellant were to be deported. The  serious  nature  of
    his wife's mental health problems and the likely effect of  deportation
    on  her  and  the  children  could  reasonably  be  described  as  very
    compelling. We conclude that the judge's findings were open to her  and
    were well within a range of reasonable responses to  the  evidence.  In
    our judgment paragraph 2 of the grounds does therefore not  assist  the
    respondent and we reject it.

26. Paragraph 3 of the grounds is that the  wife's  condition  was  not  as
    serious as at the time  when  the  appellant  was  imprisoned  and  was
    released from detention on 4 November  2016.   There  is  very  limited
    information to support this.  However earlier in this judgment we  have
    referred to how the condition of the appellant's wife was not  good  as
    at the end of December 2017 and the beginning of 2018 as referred to in
    paragraph 82 of the judgment and to the GP's confirmation  in  December
    2018 that the appellant's wife  was  taking  additional  anti-psychotic
    medication (see paragraph 83 of the judgment).

27. In our judgment the evidence is that based upon the findings which were
    made and which were available to the  Tribunal.  On  the  evidence  the
    following was established.  First, there is evidence  at  paragraph  76
    that the appellant's immigration matter and uncertainty of  whether  or
    not he will be permitted to remain in the UK was  one  of  the  factors
    contributing to the breakdown of the wife of the  appellant.    Second,
    at paragraph 77, the Judge said that only the appellant was able to get
    through to his wife  to  encourage  her  to  be  treated  and  to  take
    medication.  Third, at paragraph 79, the Judge said that  the  view  of
    the care co-ordinator is that his removal would be likely  to  lead  to
    his wife being readmitted to hospital.  That is an important  paragraph
    in the context of the suggestion that her condition, that the effect of
    some improvement of her condition, is such that  her  reliance  on  the
    appellant is less great.  Fourth, at paragraph 83, the Judge said  that
    despite the improvement, the  effect  of  the  appeal  has  caused  her
    increased anxiety and she is concerned about relapsing.   All  of  that
    was clearly accepted because as a result of all of that the judge found
    that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's wife to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without the appellant: see paragraph 85.  It  was
    also unduly harsh for her to go and live in Jamaica for the reasons set
    out in paragraphs 86-89.

28. There were also findings about the impact on the children, ShE and SaE,
    to which we referred above. In that regard the judge said at  paragraph
    94 of the judgment:-

         "ShE and SaE are of course older than they were when  their  mother
         first became ill.  They are approaching adulthood given  that  they
         are nearly 18, however I note that there is no bright line  between
         childhood and adulthood marked merely by the fact  of  turning  18.
         Both children are still  in  education  and  are  not  yet  leading
         independent lives.  I note the evidence  of  the  care  coordinator
         about their ongoing  need  for  counselling.   SaE  provides  clear
         evidence in his more recent statement as to the ongoing impact  the
         appellant has on his  education  and  his  ability  to  manage  his
         emotions.  In her more recent statement ShE  gives  clear  evidence
         about the  impact  her  mother's  mental  health,  the  appellant's
         absence and the ongoing uncertainty about his status has had on her
         education.  She found it difficult to concentrate and  is  retaking
         maths for the third time.  She wishes to go to  university  but  is
         unsure if it will be possible for her given her difficulties."

29. We have already referred to paragraphs 98 and 99.   The  suggestion  in
    the light of that in the grounds that the appellant's wife's  condition
    was not as serious as in 2016 is not an answer to this  matter  because
    there was ample  evidence  to  the  effect  that  her  condition  still
    remained serious and to the effect that she was very dependent upon the
    assistance of her husband.  It was also suggested in paragraph 3 of the
    grounds that the Tribunal did not give sufficient weight to  the  adult
    son aged 19.  We have referred above to paragraph 84 of the judgment in
    relation to the son.  The suggestion that the  Tribunal  was  wrong  to
    form the view that it was unrealistic to suggest that a 19 year old boy
    could assume responsibility for not only caring for his mother but also
    maintaining the household and looking after the two minor  children  is
    one with which we disagree.  The Tribunal was entitled to come  to  the
    conclusion that it did.

30. It was suggested also in the  grounds  that  the  role  of  the  social
    services was such that in the event that the appellant was deported  to
    Jamaica they could be relied upon to provide support.  That  submission
    in our judgment the Tribunal was entitled  to  find  that  whilst  some
    support from social services could be envisaged, it had a  plethora  of
    evidence of dependency on the applicant including evidence from  people
    within or connected with social services.  We refer to the  independent
    social worker, to the wife's GP and to the care co-ordinator. This  was
    all consistent with the role of the appellant and with  the  dependency
    of the wife in relation to her  health  and  wellbeing.  The  care  co-
    ordinator was of the view that the appellant's deportation  was  likely
    to lead to a  deterioration  in  his  wife's  mental  health  condition
    leading to a further readmission to  hospital.  This  would  result  in
    social services needing to find 24 hour supported accommodation because
    in the past she was not able to care for herself or the  children.  The
    evidence showed that, even  with  the  support  of  health  and  social
    services, the appellant's deportation was  likely  to  have  a  further
    significant negative impact on the appellant's wife and  children.  The
    provision of such services would and  could  not  act  as  an  adequate
    replacement for the care and stability  that  the  appellant  currently
    provides to the family. As such, we conclude that the Tribunal did  not
    err in assessing the potential role of health and social services.

31. It was suggested that as a matter of  case  law,  by  reference  to  BL
    (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 357 and OP (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 316 that
    the Tribunal erred in finding very  compelling  circumstances  in  this
    case.  The facts in both of those cases were very  different  from  the
    instant case.  In this case we are talking about the  mental  wellbeing
    and ability to cope  of  the  wife  and  the  impact  of  that  on  the
    household.  In our judgment all  the  points  in  paragraph  3  of  the
    grounds are met by the fact that there was here  a  very  well-reasoned
    judgment  which  correctly  identified  the  high  threshold  and   the
    supporting evidence and  came  to  a  conclusion  that  was  reasonably
    available to  the  Tribunal.  In  our  judgment,  the  very  compelling
    circumstances were evident by the evidence relating  to  the  breakdown
    suffered by the appellant's wife in February  2016  and  her  condition
    thereafter, coupled with the conviction of not only the family but also
    people within or connected with  social  services  that  the  appellant
    played an important role in the wife's recovery and that  without  him,
    it is likely that that a removal of the appellant  would  lead  to  his
    wife being  readmitted  to  hospital.  It  was  also  proven  that  the
    deterioration of the wife's condition would  impact  on  the  household
    generally and especially on two minor children within the house  at  an
    important  stage  of  their  teenage  years.   There   were   therefore
    established very compelling circumstances. Paragraph 4 is in  effect  a
    repetition of this, that the very compelling circumstances test has not
    been met, and the same conclusion applies as in respect of paragraph  3
    of the grounds. Those grounds amount at highest disagreements with  the
    judge's findings, but we conclude that the judge's findings were within
    a range of reasonable responses to the evidence.

32. Finally, in the fifth ground it is suggested that there is a  reference
    to the fact that there is a drain on the public  purse  and  that  that
    should attract little or no weight in deportation cases.  It  is  right
    to say that the judgment did say that treatment would  be  required  at
    public expense.  There is no reason to say that that is a matter of  no
    weight at all. There is nothing to suggest that the judge placed  undue
    weight on the issue. In any event, in our judgment the  other  findings
    were to the effect that the role of the appellant was pivotal  (without
    him, the wife would be likely to be admitted to hospital) and could not
    be replaced by public bodies.

33. For the same reasons as given above we are of the view  that  the  test
    has been defined and for all the reasons given in a full and very well-
    reasoned judgment, the Tribunal was entitled to come  to  the  judgment
    there were very compelling circumstances  that  outweighed  the  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation order.

Notice of Decision

34. Each of the grounds of appeal are rejected and should be dismissed.

35. The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an error
    on a point of law.


Signed: MR JUSTICE FREEDMAN                      Date: 09 July 2019
